 

ARTIFICIAL,
INTELLIGENCE

INTRODUCTION

 

In which we try to explain why we consider artificial intelligence to be a subjectmost
worthy of study, and in which we try to decide what exactly it is, this being a good
thing to decide before embarking.

Humankind has given itself the scientific name homo sapiens—man the wise—because our
mental capacities are so important to our everyday lives and our sense of self. The field of
artificial intelligence, or AI, attempts to understand intelligent entities. Thus, one reason to
study it is to leam more about ourselves. But unlike philosophy and psychology, which are
also concemed with intelligence, AI strives to build intelligent entities as well as understand
them. Another reason to study AI is that these constructed intelligent entities are interesting and
useful in their own right. AI has produced many significant and impressive products even at this
early stage in its development. Although no one can predict the future in detail, it is clear that
computers with human-level intelligence (or better) would have a huge impact on our everyday
lives and on the future course of civilization.

AI addresses one of the ultimate puzzles. How is it possible for a slow, tiny brain, whether
biological or electronic, to perceive, understand, predict, and manipulate a world far larger and
more complicated than itself? How do we go about making something with those properties?
These are hard questions, but unlike the search for faster-than-lighttravel or an antigravity device,
the researcher in AI has solid evidence that the quest is possible. All the researcher has to do is
look in the mirror to see an example of an intelligent system.

Al is one of the newest disciplines. It was formally initiated in 1956, when the name
was coined, although at that point work had been under way for about five years. Along with
modem genetics, it is regularly cited as the "field I would most like to be in" by scientists in other
disciplines. A student in physics might reasonably feel that all the good ideas have already been
taken by Galileo, Newton, Einstein, and the rest, and that it takes many years of study before one
can contribute new ideas. AL, on the other hand, still has openings fora full-time Einstein.

The study of intelligence is also one of the oldest disciplines. For over 2000 years, philoso-
phers have tried to understand how seeing, learning, remembering, and reasoning could, or should,

3
