set selected bits

complement selected
bits

SECTION 86 Data Transfer and Manipulation 271

TABLE 8-8 Typical Logical and Bit
Manipulation Instructions

‘Name ‘Mnemonic
Clear CLR
‘Complement COM
AND AND
OR OR
Exclusive-OR XOR
Clear carry CLRC
Set carry SETC
‘Complement carry coMc
Enable interrupt EL

Disable interrupt DI

does not change in value when ANDed with a 1 Therefore, the AND instruc-
tion can be used to clear bits of an operand selectively by ANDing the operand
with another operand that has(’s in the bit positions that must be cleared. The
ANDinstruction is also called a mask because it masks orinserts 0's in a selected
portion of an operand.

The OR instruction is used to set a bit or a selected group of bits of an
operand. Forany Boolean variable x, the relationships x + 1 = 1andx + 0
dictate that a binary variable ORed witha 1 produces a 1; but the variable does
not change when ORed with a 0. Therefore, the OR instruction can be used
to selectively set bits of an operand by ORing it with another operand with 1's
in the bit positions that must be set to 1.

Similarly, the XOR instruction is used to selectively complement bits of
an operand. This is because of the Boolean relationships x@1 = x and
x@0= x Thusa binary variable is complemented when XORed with a 1 but
does not change in value when XORed witha 0. Numerical examples showing
the three logic operations are given in Sec. 4-5.

‘A few other bit manipulation instructions are included in Table 8-8.
Individual bits such as a carry can be cleared, set, or complemented with
appropriate instructions. Another example is a flip-flop that controls the inter-
rupt facility and is either enabled or disabled by means of bit manipulation
instructions.

   

Shift Instructions

Instructions to shift the content of an operand are quite useful and are often
provided in several variations. Shiftsare operations in which the bits of a word
are moved to the left or right. The bit shifted in at the end of the word
determines the type of shift used. Shift instructions may specify either logical
