280 cuarter HoHT Central Processing Unit

program status word

supervisor mode

necessary to define the state of the CPU rather than storing only the program
counter. These three procedural concepts are clarified further below.

After a program has been interrupted and the service routine been exe-
cuted, the CPU must return to exactly the same state that it was when the
interrupt occurred. Only if this happens will the interrupted program be able
to resume exactly as if nothing had happened. The state of the CPU at the end
of the execute cycle (when the interrupt is recognized) is determined from:

1. The content of the program counter
2. The content of all processor registers
3. The content of certain status conditions

The collection of all status bit conditions in the CPU is sometimes called
aprogramstatus word or PSW. The PSW is stored ina separate hardware register
and contains the status information that characterizes the state of the CPU.
Typically, it includes the status bits from thelast ALU operation and it specifies
the interrupts that are allowed to occur and whether the CPU is operating in
a supervisor or user mode. Many computers have a resident operating system
that controls and supervises all other programs in the computer. When the
CPU is executing a program that is part of the operating system, it is said to
be in the supervisor or system mode. Certain instructions are privileged and
canbe executedin this mode only. The CPU isnormally in the user mode when
executing user programs. The mode that the CPU is operating at any given time
is determined from special status bits in the PSW.

Some computers store only the program counter when responding to an
interrupt. The service program must then include instructions to store status
and register content before these resources are used. Only afew computers
store both program counter and all status and register content in response to
an interrupt. Most computers just store the program counter and the PSW. In
some cases, there exist two sets of processor registers within the computer, one
for each CPU mode. In this way, when the program switches from the user to
the supervisor mode (or vice versa) in response to an interrupt, it is not
necessary to store the contents of processor registers as each mode uses its own
set of registers.

‘The hardware procedure for processing an interrupt is very similar to the
execution of a subroutine call instruction. The state of the CPU is pushed into
amemory stack and the beginning address of the service routine is transferred
to the program counter. The beginning address of the service routine is deter-
mined by the hardware rather than the address field of an instruction. Some
computers assign one memory location where interrupts are always trans-
ferred. Theserviceroutine must then determine what caused the interrupt and
proceed to service it. Some computers assign a memory location for each
possible interrupt. Sometimes, the hardware interrupt provides its own ad-
dress that directs the CPU to the desired service routine. In any case, the CPU

 

 
