144 Chapter5 Threads

The register set, stacks, and private storage area are known as the context of
the thread and are architecture-specific to the hardware on which the operating
system is running. The primary data structures of a thread include:

« ETHREAD (executive thread block).
e KTHREAD (kernel thread block).
e TEB (thread environment block).

The key components of the ETHREAD include a pointer to the process to
which the thread belongs and the address of the routine in which the thread
starts control. The ETHREAD also contains a pointer to the corresponding
KTHREAD.

The KTHREAD includes scheduling and synchronization information for
the thread. In addition, the KTHREAD includes the kernel stack (used when
the thread is running in kernel mode) and a pointer to the TEB.

The ETHREAD and the KTHREAD exist entirely in kernel space; this means
only the kernel can access them. The TEB is a user-space data structure that is
accessed when the thread is running in user mode. Among other fields, the
TEB contains a user mode stack and an array for thread-specific data (which
Windows terms thread-local storage).

5.7 @ Linux Threads

The Linux kernel introduced threads in version 2.2. Linux provides a fork
system call with the traditional functionality of duplicating a process. Linux
also provides the clone system call that is analogous to creating a thread.
clone behaves much like fork, except that instead of creating a copy of the
calling process, it creates a separate process that shares the address space of the
calling process. It is through this sharing of the address space of the parent
process that a cloned task behaves much like a separate thread.

The sharing of the address space is allowed because of the representation
of a process in the Linux kernel. A unique kernel data structure exists for each
process in the system. However, rather than storing the data for each process in
this data structure, it contains pointers to other data structures where this data
is stored. For example, this per-process data structure contains pointers to other
data structures that represent the list of open files, signal-handling information,
and virtual memory. When fork is invoked, a new process is created along
with a copy of all the associated data structures of the parent process. When
the clone system call is made, a new process is created. However, rather than
copying all data structures, the new process points to the data structures of the
parent process, thereby allowing the child process to share the memory and
other process resources of the parent. A set of flags is passed as a parameter
to the clone system call. This set of flags is used to indicate how much of
