 

Section 7.4 Logical Agents for the Wumpus World 201
sentences to a knowledge base KB, we would call

TELL(KB, (Wm, c Mother(c) =m <> Female(m) A Parent(m, c)))
and so on. Now if we tell it

TELL(KB,(Female(Maxi)A Parent(Maxi, Spot) A Parent(Spot, Boots)))
then we can ,

ASK(KB, Grandparent(Maxi,Boots))

ASSERTIONS. and receive an affirmative answer. The sentences added using TELL are often called assertions,
QUERIES and the questions asked using ASK are called queries or goal (not to be confused with goals as
GOAL used to describe an agent's desired states)

Certain people think it is funny to answer questions such as "Can you tell me the time?"
with "Yes." A knowledge base should be more cooperative. When we ask a question that is
existentially quantified, such as

Ask(KB, Ix Child(x, Spot))
we should receive an answer indicating that Boots is a child of Spot. Thus, a query with existential
variables is asking "Is there an x such that ....” and we solve it by providing such an x. The

SUBSTITUTION standard form for an answer of this sort is a substitution or binding list, which is a set of
BINDING LIST variable/term pairs. In this particular case, the answer would be {x/Boots}.(Ifthere is more than

one possible answer, a list of substitutions can be returned. Different implementations of ASK do
different things.)

14 LOGICAL AGENTS FOR THE WUMPUS WORLD

MODEL-BASED
AGENTS.
GOAL-BASED
AGENTS

In Chapter 6 we showed the outline of a knowledge-based agent, repeated here in slightly modified
form as Figure 7.2. We also hinted at how a knowledge-based agent could be constructed for
the wumpus world, but the limitations of propositional logic kept us from completing the agent
With first-order logic, we have all the representational power we need, and we can turn to the
more interesting question of how an agent should organize what it knows in order to take the
right actions. We will consider three agent architectures: reflex agents® that merely classify their
percepts and act accordingly; model-based agents? that construct an internal representation of
the world and use it to act; and goal-based agents that form goals and try to achieve them.
(Goal-based agents are usually also model-based agents.)

The first step in constructing an agent for the wumpus world (or for any world) is to define
the interface between the environment and the agent. The percept sentence must include both
the percept and the time at which it occurred; otherwise the agent will get confused about when
it saw what. We will use integers for time steps. A typical percept sentence would be

Percept([Stench,Breeze, Glitter, None, None], 5)

* Reflex agents are also known as tropistic agents. The biological term sropism means having a tendency to react in a
definite manner to stimuli. A heliotropic plant, for example, is one that tums toward the sun.

Note that this usage of "model” is related but not identical to its meaning as a world referred to by a sentence

 
