226 © cHAFTERSEVEN Microprogrammed Control

address field

ORG

fetch and decode

3. The CD field has one of the letters U, I, S, or Z.

4. The BR field contains one of the four symbols defined in Table 7-1.

5. The AD field specifies a value for the address field of the microinstruc-
tion in one of three possible ways:
a. With a symbolic address, which must also appear as a label.
. With the symbol NEXT to designate the next address in sequence.
c. When the BR field contains a RET or MAP symbol, the AD field is

left empty and is converted to seven zeros by the assembler.

‘We will use also the pseudoinstruction ORG to define the origin, or first
address, of a microprogram routine. Thus the symbol ORG 64 informs the
assembler to place the next microinstruction in control memory at decimal
address 64, which is equivalent to the binary address 1000000.

 

The Fetch Routine

The control memory has 128 words, and each word contains 20 bits. To
microprogram the control memory, it is necessary to determine the bit values
of each of the 128 words. The first 64 words (addresses 0 to 63) are to be
occupied by theroutines for the 16 instructions. The last 64 words may be used
for any other purpose. A convenient starting location for the fetch routine is
address 64. The microinstructions needed for the fetch routine are

AR<PC
DR<—M[AR], PC—PC +1
AR<DR(0-10), CAR(2-5)<—DR(1-14), CAR(0,1,6)-0

‘The address of the instruction is transferred from PC to AR and the instruction
is then read from memory into DR. Since no instruction register is available,
the instruction code remains in DR . The address part is transferred to AR and
thencontrol is transferred to one of 16routines by mapping the operation code
part of the instruction from DR into CAR.

The fetch routine needs three microinstructions, which are placed in
control memory at addresses 64, 65, and 66. Using the assembly language
conventions defined previously, we can write the symbolic microprogram for
the fetch routine as follows:

 

 

ORG &4

FETCH: PCTAR Uo JMP NEXT
READ, INCPC U  JMP NEXT
DRTAR Uo MAP

The translation of the symbolic microprogram to binary produces the
following binary microprogram. The bit values are obtained from Table 7-1.
