8  Chapter1 Introduction

 

Figure 1.2 Memory layout for a simple batch system.

leave their programs with the operator. The operator would sort programs
into batches with similar requirements and, as the computer became available,
would run each batch. The output from each job would be sent back to the
appropriate programmer.

In this execution environment, the CPU is often idle, because the speeds of
the mechanical I/O devices are intrinsically slower than are those of electronic
devices. Even a slow CPU works in the microsecond range, with thousands of
instructions executed per second. A fast card reader, on the other hand, might
read 1200 cards per minute (or 20 cards per second). Thus, the difference in
speed between the CPU and its I/O devices may be three orders of magnitude or
more. Over time, of course, improvements in technology and the introduction
of disks resulted in faster I/O devices. However, CPU speeds increased to an
even greater extent, so the problem was not only unresolved, but exacerbated.

The introduction of disk technology allowed the operating system to keep
all jobs ona disk, rather than ina serial card reader. With direct access to several
jobs, the operating system could perform job scheduling, to use resources and
perform tasks efficiently. We discuss a few important aspects of job and CPU
scheduling here; we discuss them in detail in Chapter 6.

1.2.2 Multiprogrammed Systems

The most important aspect of job scheduling is the ability to multiprogram. A
single user cannot, in general, keep either the CPU or the 1/O devices busy at all
times. Multiprogramming increases CPU utilization by organizing jobs so that
the CPU always has one to execute.

The idea is as follows: The operating system keeps several jobs in memory
simultaneously (Figure 1.3). This set of jobs is a subset of the jobs kept in the
job pool—since the number of jobs that can be kept simultaneously in memory
is usually much smaller than the number of jobs that can be in the job pool. The
