SECTION 8-8 Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) 283

this section we introduce the major characteristics of CISC and RISC architec
tures and then present the instruction set and instruction format of a RISC
processor.

CISC Characteristics

The design of an instruction set for a computer must take into consideration
not only machine language constructs, but also the requirements imposed on
the use of high-level programminglanguages. The translation from high-level
to machine language programs is done by means of a compiler program. One
reason for the trend to providea complexinstructionset is the desire to simplify
the compilation and improve the overall computer performance. The task of
acompiler isto generate a sequence of machine instructions foreach high-level
language statement. The task is simplified if there are machine instructions that,
implement the statements directly. The essential goal of a CISC architecture
is to attempt to provide a single machine instruction for each statement that
is written in a high-level language. Examples of CISC architectures are the
Digital Equipment Corporation VAX computer and the IBM 370 computer.

‘Another characteristic of CISC architecture is the incorporation of vari-
able-length instruction formats. Instructions that require register operands
may be only two bytes in length, but instructions that need two memory
addresses may need five bytes to include the entire instruction code. If the
computer has 32-bit words (four bytes), the first instruction occupies half a
word, while the second instruction needs one word in addition to one byte in
the next word. Packing variable instruction formats in a fixed-length memory
word requires special decoding circuits that count bytes within words and
frame the instructions according to their byte length.

The instructions in a typical CISC processor provide direct manipulation
of operands residing in memory. For example, an ADDinstruction may specify
one operand in memory through index addressing and a second operand in
memory through a direct addressing. Another memory location may be i
cluded in the instruction to store the sum. This requires three memory refer-
ences during execution of the instruction. Although CISC processors have
instructions that use only processor registers, the availability of other modes
of operations tend to simplify high-level language compilation. However, as
moreinstructions and addressing modesare incorporated into.a computer, the
more hardware logic is needed to implement and support them, and this may
cause the computations to slow down. In summary, the major characteristics
of CISC architecture are:

 

1. A large number of instructions—ty pically from 100 to 250 instructions
2. Some instructions that perform specialized tasks and are used infre-
quently

 
