Section 7.7

‘SYNCHRONIC

‘CAUSALRULES

MODEL-BASED
REASONNG

DIAGNOSTIC RULES

Deducing Hidden Properties of the World 209

It is useful to know if aplace is breezy or smelly because we know that the wumpus and the pits
cannot move about. Notice that neither Breezy nor Smelly needs a situation argument.

Having discovered which places are breezy or smelly (and, very importantly, not smelly or
not breezy), the agent can deduce where the pits are, and where the wumpus is. Furthermore, it
can deduce which squares are safe to move to (we use the predicate OK to represent this), and
can use this information to hunt for the gold.

The axioms we will write to capture the necessary information for these deductions are
called synchronic ("same time") rules, because they relate properties of a world state to other
properties of the same world state. There are two main kinds of synchronic rules:

< Causal rules:
Causal rules reflect the assumed direction of causality in the world: some hidden property
of the world causes certain percepts to be generated. For example, we might have rules
stating that squares adjacent to wumpuses are smelly and squares adjacent to pits are
breezy:

Vii.b,s At(Wumpus,l),s) A Adjacent(,,h)=  Smelly(12)
Vusb,s At(Pit,l,s) A Adjacent(h,b) > Breezy(2)
Systems that reason with causal rules are called model-based reasoning systems.
< Diagnostic rules:
Diagnostic rules infer the presence of hidden properties directly from the percept-derived
information. We have already seen two diagnostic rules:
V/,s At(Agent, I, s) A Breeze(s) => Breezy(I)
Vis At(Agent,1,s) A Stench(s) > Smelly(I)
For deducing the presence of wumpuses, a diagnostic rule can only draw a weak conclusion,
namely, that if a location is smelly, then the wumpus must either be in that location or in an
adjacent location:
Vij.s Smelly) >
(Aly At(Wumpus,.h, s) A (b= 1\ V Adjacent(I\J2))
Although diagnostic rules seem to provide the desired information more directly, it is very tricky

to ensure that they derive the strongest possible conclusions from the available information. For
example, the absence of stench or breeze implies that adjacent squares are OK:

 

Vx.y. 8 u, ¢,8 Percept([None, None, g,u,c]t)\
At(Agent,x, 5) A Adjacent(xy) => OK(y)

But sometimes a square can be OK even when smells and breezes abound. The model-based rule
Wax,t (SAt(Wumpus,x,1) \ >Pit(x))e  OK(x)

is probably the best way to represent safety.

The distinction between model-based and diagnostic reasoning is important in many areas
of AI. Medical diagnosis in particular has been an active area ofresearch, where approaches based
on direct associations between symptoms and diseases (a diagnostic approach) have gradually
been replaced by approaches using an explicit model of the disease process and how it manifests
itself in symptoms. The issues come up again in Chapter 14.
