Section 8.6.

Summary 257

 

representation in this sense, and knowledge representation in AI, is closer than it may seem;
twentieth century AI research draws widely upon the formalisms of other fields, especially logic
and philosophy. Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) developed a comprehensive system of what we would
now call ontology and knowledge representation in connection with his work in logic, natural
science, and philosophical metaphysics.

Besides the logicist tradition started by McCarthy, which we discussed in Chapter 6, there
have been many other threads in the history of representation in AI. Early discussions in the
field tended to focus on “problemrepresentation" rather than “knowledgerepresentation.” The
emphasis was on formulating the problem to be solved, rather than formulating the resources
available to the program. A conscious focus on knowledge representation had to await the dis-
covery that high performance in AI problem solving required the accumulation and use of large
amounts of problem-specific knowledge. The realization that AI systems needed such knowl-
edge was largely driven by two types of research. The first was the attempt to match human
performance in the everyday world, particularly in understanding natural human languages and
in rapid, content-based retrieval from a general-purpose memory. The second was the design of
“expert systems”—also, significantly, called "knowledge-based systems"—that could match (or,
in some cases, exceed) the performance of human experts on narrowly defined tasks. The need
for problem-specific knowledge was stressed forcefully by the designers of DENDRAL, the first
expert system, which interpreted the output ofa mass spectrometer, a type of instrument used for
analysis of the structure of organic chemical compounds. An early statement of the DENDRAL
philosophical perspective can be foundin Feigenbaum, Buchanan, and Lederberg( 1971); Lindsay
et al. (1980) provide a book-length description of the DENDRAL project, along with a complete
bibliography from 1964 to 1979, Although the success of DENDRAL was instrumental in bringing
the AI research community as a whole to realize the importance of knowledge representation,
the representational formalisms used in DENDRAL are highly specific to the domain of chemistry.
As expert systems continued to succeed and proliferate, expert system researchers became inter-
ested in standardized knowledge representation formalisms and ontologies that could reduce the
difficulty of creating a new expert system in yet another previously unexplored field. In so doing,
they ventured into territory previously explored by philosophers of science and of language. The
discipline imposed in AI by the need for one's theories to "work" has led to more rapid and
deeper progress than was the case when these problems were the exclusive domain ofphilosophy
(although it has at times also led to the repeated reinvention of the wheel).

Research in memory and natural language processing (NLP) also had to deal with the
need for general-purpose knowledge representation languages from the very start. Indeed, Ross
Quillian's (1961) work on "semantic networks" predates DENDRAL. Because of the need to
get heterogeneous bodies of knowledge to interact fruitfully, memory and NLP research was
the original spark for semantic networks, frames, and other very general formalisms. Such
"knowledge representation languages" are covered in greater detail in Chapter 10. The present
chapter focuses instead on the content of the knowledge itselfand on the representational concepts
that are common to a number of distinct formalisms

The creation of comprehensive taxonomies or classifications dates back to ancient times.
Aristotle strongly emphasized classification and categorization schemes. His Organon, a col-
lection of works on logic assembled by his students after his death, included a treatise called
Categories in which he attempted a comprehensive high-level classification and also introduced

 
