162. Chapter6 CPU Scheduling

Process Burst Time Priority

Py 10 3
Pz 1 1
P3 2 4
Py 1 5
Ps 5 2

Using priority scheduling, we would schedule these processes according to the
following Gantt chart:

 

Po Ps Py | Py [Ps
o 1 6 16 18 19

 

 

 

 

The average waiting time is 8.2 milliseconds.

Priorities can be defined either internally or externally. Internally defined
priorities use some measurable quantity or quantities to compute the priority of
a process. For example, time limits, memory requirements, the number of open
files, and the ratio of average 1/O burst to average CPU burst have been used
in computing priorities. External priorities are set by criteria that are external
to the operating system, such as the importance of the process, the type and
amount of funds being paid for computer use, the department sponsoring the
work, and other, often political, factors.

Priority scheduling can be either preemptive or nonpreemptive. When a
process arrives at the ready queue, its priority is compared with the priority of
the currently running process. A preemptive priority-scheduling algorithm will
preempt the CPU if the priority of the newly arrived process is higher than the
priority of the currently running process. A nonpreemptive priority-scheduling
algorithm will simply put the new process at the head of the ready queue.

A major problem with priority-scheduling algorithms is indefinite block-
ing (or starvation). A process that is ready to run but lacking the CPU can
be considered blocked—waiting for the CPU. A priority-scheduling algorithm
can leave some low-priority processes waiting indefinitely for the CPU. Ina
heavily loaded computer system, a steady stream of higher-priority processes
can prevent a low-priority process from ever getting the CPU. Generally, one of
two things will happen. Either the process will eventually be run (at 2 AM.
Sunday, when the system is finally lightly loaded), or the computer system
will eventually crash and lose all unfinished low-priority processes. (Rumor
has it that, when they shut down the IBM 7094 at MIT in 1973, they found a
low-priority process that had been submitted in 1967 and had not yet been run.)

A solution to the problem of indefinite blockage of low-priority processes
is aging. Aging is a technique of gradually increasing the priority of processes
that wait in the system for a long time. For example, if priorities range from

 
