196

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

The uniqueness quantifier 4!

We have seen how to use 3 to say that some objects exist, but there is no concise way to say that
aunique object satisfying some predicate exists. Some authors use the notation

Bix King(x)
to mean "there exists a unique object x satisfying King(x)” or more informally, "there's exactly
one King." You should think of this not as adding a new quantifier, 3!, but rather as being a
convenient abbreviation for the longer sentence

dx KingQ)A Vy Kingiy) > x=y
Of course, if we knew from the start there was only one King, we probably would have used the
constant King rather than the predicate King(x). A more complex example is "Every country has
exactly one ruler":

Ve Country(c)=> 3tr Ruler(r, od)

 

The uniqueness operator «

It is convenient to use J! to state uniqueness, but sometimes it is even more convenient to have
a term representing the unique object directly. The notation / x P(x) is commonly used for this.
(The symbol z is the Greek letter iota.) To say that "the unique ruler of Freedonia is dead" or
equivalently "the r that is the ruler of Freedonia is dead," we would write:

Dead(« r Ruler(r, Freedonia))
This is just an abbreviation for the following sentence:

St r Ruler(r, Freedonia) A Dead(r)

Notational variations

The first-order logic notation used in this book is the defacto standard for artificial intelligence;
one can safely use the notation in a journal article without defining it, because it is recognizable
to most readers. Several other notations have been developed, both within AI and especially in
other fields that use logic, including mathematics, computer science, and philosophy. Here are
some of the variations:

 

 

Syntax item This book | Others

Negation (not) aP ~P P

Conjunction (and) | PAQ P&O PQ PQ P,Q
Disjunction (or) PVQ P|Q P:Q P+Q

Implication (if) P=0 P—Q PDO
Equivalence (iff) |PaeOQ |P=Q P—@

Universal (all) Vx P@) | x)PQ@) AxPX) PCD
Existential (exists) | 3x P(x) GBx)P() x P(x) P(Skolem,)
Relation Rx, y) (Rxy) Rey xRy

 

 

 

 

 
