28 cowrren one Digital Logic Circuits

input equation

and let the designer choose either 0 or 1 for the K input, whichever is more
convenient.

1-7 Sequential Circuits

A sequential circuitis an interconnection of flip-flops and gates. The gates by
themselves constitute a combinational circuit, but when included with the
flip-flops, the overall circuit is classified as a sequential circuit. The block
diagram of a clocked sequential circuit is shown in Fig. 1-24. It consists of a
combinational circuit and a number of clocked flip-flops. In general, any
number or type of flip-flops may be included. As shown in the diagram, the
combinational circuit block receives binary signals from external inputs and
from the outputs of flip-flops. The outputs of the combinational circuit go to
external outputs and to inputs of flip-flops. The gates in the combinational
rcuit determine the binary value to be stored in the flip-flops after each clock.
transition. The outputs of flip-flops, in turn, are applied to the combinational
Gircuit inputs and determine the circuit's behavior. This process demonstrates
that the external outputs of a sequential circuit are functions of both external
inputs and the present state of the flip-flops. Moreover, the next state of
flip-flops is also a function of their present state and external inputs. Thus a
sequential circuit is specified by a time sequence of external inputs, external
outputs, and internal flip-flop binary states.

Flip-Flop Input Equations

‘An example of a sequential circuit is shown in Fig. 1-25. It has one input
variable x, one outputvariabley, and two clocked D flip-flops. The AND gates,
OR gates, and inverter form the combinational logic part of the circuit The
interconnections among the gates in the combinational circuit can be specified
by a set of Boolean expressions. The part of the combinational circuit that
generates the inputs to flip-flops are described by a set of Boolean expressions
called flip-flop input equations. We adopt the convention of using the flip-flop
input symbol to denote the input equation variable name and a subscript to

Figure 1-24 Block diagram of a clocked synchronous sequential circuit.

 

Inputs ——* Combinational. _————__—,

| ciruit ~ Outputs
= Frip-flops

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Clock —

 
