Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

 

Ae

——

 

 

 

Figure 4.17

 

A scene with polygonal obstacles.

 

+ The action retumed by the agent will be the vector describing the straight-line path
it wishes to follow (thus, the relative coordinates of the place it wishes to go). Ifthe
move does not bump into anything, the environment should "move" the agent and
give it the percept appropriate to the next place; otherwise it stays put. If the agent
wants to move (0,0) and is at the goal, then the environment should move the agent
to a random vertex in the scene. (First pick a random polygon, and then a random
vertex on that polygon.)

b. Implement an agent function that operates in this environment as follows:

+ Ifit does not know where it is, it will need to calculate that from the percept

+ Ifit knows where it is and does not have a plan, it must calculate a plan to get home
to the goal, using a search algorithm.

* Once it knows where it is and has a plan, it should output the appropriate action from
the plan. It should say (0,0) once it gets to the goal.

c. Show the environment and agent operating together. The environment should print out
some useful messages for the user showing what is going on.

d. Modify the environment so that 30% of the time the agent ends up at an unintended
destination (chosen randomly from the other visible vertices if any, otherwise no move at
all). This is a crude model of the actual motion errors from which both humans and robots
suffer. Modify the agent so that it always tries to get back on track when this happens.
What it should do is this: if such an error is detected, first find out where it is and then
modify its plan to first go back to where it was and resume the old plan. Remember that
sometimes getting back to where it was may fail also! Show an example of the agent
successfully overcoming two successive motion errors and still reaching the goal.

e. Now try two different recovery schemes after an error: head for the closest vertex on
the original route; and replan a route to the goal from the new location. Compare the
