 

Section 1.5.

Summary 29

 

STRONG AT
‘WEAK Al

 

still cary some weight? Are his refutations valid? Can you think of new objections arising from
developments since he wrote the paper? In the paper, he predicts that by the year 2000, a computer
will have a 30% chance of passing a five-minute Turing Test with an unskilled interrogator. Do
you think this is reasonable?

12 We characterized the definitions of AI along two dimensions, human vs. ideal and thought
vs. action. But there are other dimensions that are worth considering. One dimension is whether
we are interested in theoretical results or in practical applications. Another is whether we intend
our intelligent computers to be conscious or not. Philosophers have had a lot to say about this
issue, and although most AI researchers are happy to leave the questions to the philosophers,
there has been heated debate. The claim that machines can be conscious is called the strong AI
claim; the weak AI position makes no such claim. Characterize the eight definitions on page
5 and the seven following definitions according to the four dimensions we have mentioned and
whatever other ones you feel are helpful
Attificial intelligence is

a. "a collection of algorithms that are computationally tractable, adequate approximations of
intractably specified problems" (Partridge, 1991)

b. "the enterprise of constructing a physical symbol system that can reliably pass the Turing
Test" (Ginsberg, 1993)

c. “the field of computer science that studies how machines can be made to act intelli-
gently" (Jackson, 1986)

d. "a field of study that encompasses computational techniques for performing tasks that
apparently require intelligence when performed by humans" (Tanimoto, 1990)

e. "avery general investigation ofthe nature of intelligence and the principles and mechanisms
required for understanding or replicating it" (Sharpies et al., 1989)

f "the getting of computers to do things that seem to be intelligent" (Rowe, 1988).

13 There are well-known classes of problems that are intractably difficult for computers,
and other classes that are provably undecidable by any computer. Does this mean that AI is
impossible?

14 Suppose we extend Evans's ANALOGY program so that it can score 200 on a standard IQ
test. Would we then have a program more intelligent than a human? Explain.

15 Examine the AI literature to discover whether or not the following tasks can currently be
solved by computers:

Playing a decent game of table tennis (ping-pong)

Driving in the center of Cairo

Playing a decent game of bridge at a competitive level.

Discovering and proving new mathematical theorems

e. Writing an intentionally funny story.

f. Giving competent legal advice in a specialized area of law.

Be Sp

g. Translating spoken English into spoken Swedish in real time.
