96 Chapter4 Processes

Even if the user can execute only one program at a time, the operating system
may need to support its own internal programmed activities, such as memory
management. In many respects, all these activities are similar, so we call all of
them processes.

The terms job and process are used almost interchangeably in this text.
Although we personally prefer the term process, much of operating-system
theory and terminology was developed during a time when the major activity
of operating systems was job processing. It would be misleading to avoid the use
of commonly accepted terms that include the word job (such as job scheduling)
simply because process has superseded job.

4.1.1 The Process

Informally, a process is a program in execution. A process is more than the
program code, which is sometimes known as the text section. It also includes
the current activity, as represented by the value of the program counter and the
contents of the processor’s registers. In addition, a process generally includes
the process stack, which contains temporary data (such as method parameters,
return addresses, and local variables), and a data section, which contains global
variables.

We emphasize that a program by itself is not a process; a program is a
passive entity, such as the contents of a file stored on disk, whereas a process
is an active entity, with a program counter specifying the next instruction to
execute and a set of associated resources.

Although two processes may be associated with the same program, they
are nevertheless considered two separate execution sequences. For instance,
several users may be running different copies of the mail program, or the same
user may invoke many copies of the editor program. Each of these is a separate
process, and, although the text sections are equivalent, the data sections vary.
It is also common to have a process that spawns many processes as it runs. We
discuss such matters in Section 4.4.

4.1.2 Process State
As a process executes, it changes state. The state of a process is defined in
part by the current activity of that process. Each process may be in one of the
following states:

« New: The process is being created.

« Running; Instructions are being executed.

© Waiting: The process is waiting for some event to occur (such as an I/O
completion or reception of a signal).

« Ready: The process is waiting to be assigned to a processor.
