11.3. Directory Structure 385.

 

directory cat bo a test data mail cont hex | records

Prrdd

00000

Figure 11.6 Single-level directory.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

files

 

in one programming class, 23 students called the program for their second
assignment prog2; another 11 called it assign2. Although file names are generally
selected to reflect the content of the file, they are often limited in length. The
MS-DOS operating system allows only 11-character file names; UNIX allows 255
characters.

Even a single user on a single-level directory may find it difficult to remem-
ber the names of all the files, as the number of files increases. It is not uncom-
mon for a user to have hundreds of files on one computer system and an equal
number of additional files on another system. In such an environment, keeping
track of so many files is a daunting task.

11.3.2 Two-Level Directory

A single-level directory often leads to confusion of file names between different
users. The standard solution is to create a separate directory for each user.

In the two-level directory structure, each user has her own user file direc-
tory (UFD). Each UFD has a similar structure, but lists only the files of a single
user. When a user job starts or a user logs in, the system’s master file directory
(MED) is searched. The MFD is indexed by user name or account number, and
each entry points to the UFD for that user (Figure 11.7).

When a user refers to a particular file, only his own UFD is searched. Thus,
different users may have files with the same name, as long as all the file names
within each UFD are unique.

To create a file for a user, the operating system searches only that user’s
UED to ascertain whether another file of that name exists. To delete a file, the
operating system confines its search to the local UFD; thus, it cannot accidentally
delete another user’s file that has the same name.

The user directories themselves must be created and deleted as necessary.
A special system program is run with the appropriate user name and account
information. The program creates a new UFD and adds an entry for it to the
MED. The execution of this program might be restricted to system administra-
tors. The allocation of disk space for user directories can be handled with the
techniques discussed in Chapter 12 for files themselves.

Although the two-level directory structure solves the name-collision prob-
lem, it still has disadvantages. This structure effectively isolates one user from
another. This isolation is an advantage when the users are completely indepen-
