408

114

15

11.6

17
11.8

11.9

11.10

11.11

11.12

Chapter 11 File-System Interface

systems keep all files unless the user explicitly deletes them. Discuss the
relative merits of each approach.

Why do some systems keep track of the type of a file, while others leave
it to the user or simply do not implement multiple file types? Which
system is “better”?

Similarly, some systems support many types of structures for a file’s data,
while others simply support a stream of bytes. What are the advantages
and disadvantages?

What are the advantages and disadvantages of recording the name of the
creating program with the file’s attributes (as is done in the Macintosh
operating system)?

Could you simulate a multilevel directory structure with a single-level
directory structure in which arbitrarily long names can be used? If your
answer is yes, explain how you can do so, and contrast this scheme
with the multilevel directory scheme. If your answer is no, explain what
prevents your simulation’s success. How would your answer change if
file names were limited to seven characters?

Explain the purpose of the open and close operations.

Some systems automatically open a file when it is referenced for the first
time, and close the file when the job terminates. Discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of this scheme as compared to the more traditional
one, where the user has to open and close the file explicitly.

Give an example of an application in which data in a file should be
accessed in the following order:

a. Sequentially
b. Randomly

Some systems provide file sharing by maintaining a single copy of a file;
other systems maintain several copies, one for each of the users sharing
the file. Discuss the relative merits of each approach.

In some systems, a subdirectory can be read and written by an authorized
user, just as ordinary files can be.

a. Describe the protection problems that could arise.

b. Suggest a scheme for dealing with each of the protection problems
you named in part a.

Consider a system that supports 5000 users. Suppose that you want to
allow 4990 of these users to be able to access one file.
