394  Chapter11 File-System Interface

sue jane
yp N
py N
prog

doc

 

(a) (b)
Figure 11.11 File system. (a) Existing. (6) Unmounted partition.

the file system (or mount point). Typically, a mount point is an empty directory
at which the mounted file system will be attached. For instance, on a UNIX
system, a file system containing user’s home directories might be mounted as
/nome; then, to access the directory structure within that file system, one could
precede the directory names with /home, as in /home/jane. Mounting that file
system under /users would result in the path name /users/jane to reach the same
directory.

Next, the operating system verifies that the device contains a valid file
system. It does so by asking the device driver to read the device directory
and verifying that the directory has the expected format. Finally, the operating
system notes in its directory structure that a file system is mounted at the
specified mount point. This scheme enables the operating system to traverse
its directory structure, switching among file systems as appropriate.

To illustrate file mounting, consider the file system depicted in Figure 11.11,
where the triangles represent subtrees of directories that are of interest. In
Figure 11.11(a), an existing file system is shown, while in Figure 11.11(b), an
unmounted partition residing on /device/dsk is shown. At this point, only the
files on the existing file system can be accessed. In Figure 11.12, the effects of
the mounting of the partition residing on /device/dsk over /users are shown. If
the partition is unmounted, the file system is restored to the situation depicted
in Figure 11.11.

Systems impose semantics to clarify functionality. For example, a system
may disallow a mount over a directory that contains files, or make the mounted
file system available at that directory and obscure the directory’s existing files
until the file system is unmounted, terminating the use of the file system and
allowing access to the original files in that directory. As another example, a
