 

256

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

8.6 SUMMARY

This has been the most detailed chapter of the book so far. As we said earlier in the chapter, one
cannot understand knowledge representation without doing it, or at least seeing it. The following
are some of the major points of the chapter:

The process of representing knowledge of a domain goes through several stages. The first,
informal stage involves deciding what kinds of objects and relations need to be represented
(the ontology). Then a vocabulary is selected, and used to encode general knowledge of
the domain. After encoding specific problem instances, automated inference procedures
can be used to solve them.

Good representations eliminate irrelevant detail, capture relevant distinctions, and express
knowledge at the most general level possible.

Constructing knowledge-based systems has advantages over programming: the knowledge
engineer has to concentrate only on what's true about the domain, rather than on solving
the problems and encoding the solution process; the same knowledge can often be used in
several ways; debugging knowledge is often simpler than debugging programs.
Special-purpose ontologies, such as the one constructed for the circuits domain, can be
effective within the domain but often need to be generalized to broaden their coverage. |
A general-purpose ontology needs to cover a wide variety of knowledge, and should be
capable in principle of handling any domain.

We presented a general ontology based around categories and the event calculus. We
covered structured objects, time and space, change, processes, substances, and beliefs.

We presented a detailed analysis of the shopping domain, exercising the general ontology
and showing how the domain knowledge can be used by a shopping agent.

Finally, it is worth recalling that the nature ofan appropriate representation depends on the world
being represented and the intended range ofuses of the representation. The representation choices
in this chapter are specific to the world of human experience, but this is unavoidable.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

There are plausible claims (Briggs, 1985) that formal knowledge representation research began
with classical Indian theorizing about the grammar of Shastric Sanskrit, which dates back to the
first millenniumB.C. Shastric Sanskrit grammatical theory proposed not only a formal syntax and
vocabulary for a general-purpose language, but also provided an analysis ofits semantics. Shastic
Sanskrit grammatical theory therefore can be regarded as the earliest instance of systematic
representation of knowledge in a specific area in order to facilitate inference. In the West, the
use of definitions of terms in ancient Greek mathematics can be regarded as the earliest instance.
Indeed, the development of technical terminology or artificial languages in any field can be
regarded as a form of knowledge representation research. The connection between knowledge

 
