206

CHAPTER Six Programming the Basic Computer

the flags. The interrupt facility is useful in a multiprogram environment when
two or more programs reside in memory at the same time

Only one program can be executed at any given time even though two
or more programs may reside in memory. The program currently being exe-
cuted is referred to as the running program. The other programs are usually
waiting forinput or output data. The function of the interrupt facility is to take
care of the data transfer of one (or more) program while another program is
currently being executed. The running program must include an ION instruc-
tion to turn the interrupt on. If the interrupt facility is not used, the program
must include an IOF instruction to tum it off. (The start switch of the computer
should also turn the interrupt off.)

The interrupt facility allows the running program to proceed until the
input or output device sets its ready flag. Whenever a flag is set to 1, the
computer completes the execution of the instruction in progress and then
acknowledges the interrupt. The result of this action is that the return address
is stored in location 0. The instruction in location 1 is then performed; this
initiates a service routine for the input or output transfer. The service routine
can be stored anywhere in memory provided a branch to the start of the routine
is stored in location 1 The service routine must have instructions to perform
the following tasks:

1 Save contents of processor registers.

2. Check which flag is set.

3. Service the device whose flag is set.

4. Restore contents of processor registers.
5. Tum the interrupt facility on.

6. Retum to the running program.

The contents of processor registers before the interrupt and after the
return to the running program must be the same; otherwise, the running
program may be in error. Since the service routine may use these registers, it
is necessary to save their contents at the beginning of the routine and restore
them at the end. The sequence by which the flags are checked dictates the
priority assigned to each device. Even though two or more flags may be set at
the same time, the devices nevertheless are serviced one at a time. The device
with higher priority is serviced first followed by the one with lower priority.

The occurrence of an interrupt disables the facility from further inter-
rupts. The service routine must tum the interrupt on before the return to the
running program. This will enable further interrupts while the computer is
executing the running program. The interrupt facility should not be tumed on
until after the retum address is inserted into the program counter.

Anexample of a program that servicesan interruptis listed in Table 6-23.
