260 cuarrer excHT Central Processing Unit

to the use of load and store instructions when communicating between mem-
ory and CPU. All other instructions are executed within the registers of the
CPU without referring to memory. A program for a RISC-type CPU consists
of LOAD and STORE instructions that have one memory and one register
address, and computational-type instructions that have three addresses with
all three specifying processor registers. The following is a program to evaluate
X= (A+B)*(C + D).

LOAD = RL, A RL MA]
LOAD = Re, B R2—M(B]
LOAD = R3, C RI M[C]
LOAD = R4, D RG M[D]
ADD RL, R1,R2 RL-RL+R2
ADD R3,R3,R2  RICRI+RS
MOL RL, RL,R3 RV R1+ RF
STORE xX, Rh M[X] —RL

The load instructions transfer the operands from memory to CPU registers.
The add and multiply operations are executed with data in the registers
without accessing memory. The result of the computations is then stored in
memory with a store instruction.

  

8-5 Addressing Modes

The operation field of an instruction specifies the operation to be performed.
This operation must be executed on some data stored in computer registers or
memory words. The way the operands are chosen during program execution
isdependent on the addressing mode of the instruction. The addressing mode
specifies arule for interpreting or modifying the address field of the instruction
before the operand is actually referenced. Computers use addressing mode
techniques for the purpose of accommodating one or both of the following
provisions:

 

 

1. Togive programming versatility to the user by providing such facilities
as pointers to memory, counters for loop control, indexing of data, and
program relocation.

2. To reduce the number of bits in the addressing field of the instruction.

The availability of the addressing modes gives the experienced assembly
language programmer flexibility for writing programs that are more efficient
with respect to the number of instructions and execution time.

To understand the various addressing modes to be presented in this
section, it is imperative that we understand the basic operation cycle of the
