340 Chapter 10 Virtual Memory

10.13). Because entries must be removed from the middle of the stack, it
is best implemented by a doubly linked list, with a head and tail pointer.
Removing a page and putting it on the top of the stack then requires
changing six pointers at worst. Each update is a little more expensive, but
there is no search for a replacement; the tail pointer points to the bottom of
the stack, which is the LRU page. This approach is particularly appropriate
for software or microcode implementations of LRU replacement.

Neither optimal replacement nor LRU replacement suffers from Belady’s
anomaly. There is a class of page-replacement algorithms, called stack algo-
rithms, that can never exhibit Belady’s anomaly. A stack algorithm is an algo-
rithm for which it can be shown that the set of pages in memory for n frames is
always a subset of the set of pages that would be in memory with n + 1 frames.
For LRU replacement, the set of pages in memory would be the n most recently
referenced pages. If the number of frames is increased, these 1 pages will still
be the most recently referenced and so will still be in memory.

Note that neither implementation of LRU would be conceivable without
hardware assistance beyond the standard TLB registers. The updating of the
clock fields or stack must be done for every memory reference. If we were to
use an interrupt for every reference, to allow software to update such data
structures, it would slow every memory reference by a factor of at least ten,
hence slowing every user process by a factor of ten. Few systems could tolerate
that level of overhead for memory management.

10.4.5 LRU Approximation Page Replacement

Few computer systems provide sufficient hardware support for true LRU page
replacement. Some systems provide no hardware support, and other page-

reference string
4° 7°07 1 0 14 2 4 2-7 4 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 7 b
1 2
0 1
7 oO
4 4
stack before a stack after b

Figure 10.13 Use of a stack to record the most recent page references.
