158 Chapter 6 CPU Scheduling

not minimal, and may vary substantially if the process CPU-burst times vary
greatly.

In addition, consider the performance of FCFS scheduling in a dynamic
situation. Assume we have one CPU-bound process and many 1/O-bound
processes. As the processes flow around the system, the following scenario may
result. The CPU-bound process will get the CPU and hold it. During this time, all
the other processes will finish their I/O and move into the ready queue, waiting
for the CPU. While the processes wait in the ready queue, the 1/0 devices are
idle. Eventually, the CPU-bound process finishes its CPU burst and moves to
an I/O device. All the 1/O-bound processes, which have very short CPU bursts,
execute quickly and move back to the I/O queues. At this point, the CPU sits
idle. The CPU-bound process will then move back to the ready queue and be
allocated the CPU. Again, all the 1/O processes end up waiting in the ready
queue until the CPU-bound process is done. There is a convoy effect, as all
the other processes wait for the one big process to get off the CPU. This effect
results in lower CPU and device utilization than might be possible if the shorter
processes were allowed to go first.

The FCFS scheduling algorithm is nonpreemptive. Once the CPU has been
allocated to a process, that process keeps the CPU until it releases the CPU,
either by terminating or by requesting I/O. The FCFS algorithm is particularly
troublesome for time-sharing systems, where each user needs to get a share of
the CPU at regular intervals. It would be disastrous to allow one process to keep
the CPU for an extended period.

6.3.2 Shortest-Job-First Scheduling

A different approach to CPU scheduling is the shortest-job-first (SJF) schedul-
ing algorithm. This algorithm associates with each process the length of the
latter’s next CPU burst. When the CPU is available, it is assigned to the process
that has the smallest next CPU burst. If two processes have the same length
next CPU burst, FCFS scheduling is used to break the tie. Note that a more
appropriate term would be the shortest next CPU burst, because the scheduling
is done by examining the length of the next CPU burst of a process, rather than
its total length. We use the term SJF because most people and textbooks refer to
this type of scheduling discipline as SJF.

As an example, consider the following set of processes, with the length of
the CPU-burst time given in milliseconds:

Process Burst Time

Py 6
Po 8
P3 7
Py 3
