11.6 Protection 403

Other operations, such as renaming, copying, or editing the file, may also
be controlled. For many systems, however, these higher-level functions may
be implemented by a system program that makes lower-level system calls.
Protection is provided at only the lower level. For instance, copying a file may
be implemented simply by a sequence of read requests. In this case, a user with
read access can also cause the file to be copied, printed, and so on.

Many protection mechanisms have been proposed. Each scheme has
advantages and disadvantages and must be appropriate for its intended appli-
cation. A small computer system that is used by only a few members of a
research group may not need the same types of protection as will a large cor-
porate computer that is used for research, finance, and personnel operations. A
complete treatment of the protection problem is deferred to Chapter 18.

11.6.2 Access Control

The most common approach to the protection problem is to make access depen-
dent on the identity of the user. Various users may need different types of access
toa file or directory. The most general scheme to implement identity-dependent
access is to associate with each file and directory an access-control list (ACL)
specifying the user name and the types of access allowed for each user. When a
user requests access to a particular file, the operating system checks the access
list associated with that file. If that user is listed for the requested access, the
access is allowed. Otherwise, a protection violation occurs, and the user job is
denied access to the file.

This approach has the advantage of enabling complex access methodolo-
gies. The main problem with access lists is their length. If we want to allow
everyone to read a file, we must list all users with read access. This technique
has two undesirable consequences:

¢ Constructing such a list may be a tedious and unrewarding task, especially
if we do not know in advance the list of users in the system.

* The directory entry, previously of fixed size, now needs to be of variable
size, resulting in more complicated space management.

These problems can be resolved by use of a condensed version of the access list.
To condense the length of the access control list, many systems recognize
three classifications of users in connection with each file:
© Owner: The user who created the file is the owner.

¢ Group: A set of users who are sharing the file and need similar access is a
group, or work group.

¢ Universe: All other users in the system constitute the universe.
