114

Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

HEURISTIC REPAIR

MIN-CONFLICTS

temperature. The schedule determines the rate at which the temperature is lowered. Individual
moves in the state space correspond to random fluctuations due to thermal noise. One can prove
that if the temperature is lowered sufficiently slowly, the material will attain a lowest-energy
(perfectly ordered) configuration. This corresponds to the statement that if schedule lowers T
slowly enough, the algorithm will find a global optimum.

Simulated annealing was first used extensively to solve VLSI layout problems in the
early 1980s. Since then, it has been applied widely to factory scheduling and other large-scale
optimization tasks. In Exercise 4.12, you are asked to compare its performance to that of
random-restart hill-climbing on the n-queens puzzle.

Applications in constraint satisfaction problems

Constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) can be solved by iterative improvement methods by
first assigning values to all the variables, and then applying modification operators to move the
configuration toward a solution. Modification operators simply assign a different value to a
variable. For example, in the 8-queens problem, an initial state has all eight queens on the board,
and an operator moves a queen from one square to another.

Algorithms that solve CSPs in this fashion are often called heuristic repair methods,
because they repair inconsistencies in the current configuration. In choosing a new value for a
variable, the most obvious heuristic is to select the value that results in the minimum number of
conflicts with other variables—the min-conflicts heuristic. This is illustrated in Figure 4.16 for
an 8-queens problem, which it solves in two steps.

Min-conflicts is surprisingly effective for many CSPs, and is able to solve the million-
queens problem in an average of less than 50 steps. Ithas also been used to schedule observations
for the Hubble space telescope, reducing the time taken to schedule a week of observations from
three weeks (!) to around ten minutes. Min-conflicts is closely related to the GSAT algorithm
described on page 182, which solves problems in propositional logic.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4.16 A two-step solution for an 8-queens problem using min-conflicts. Ateach stage, a
queen is chosen for reassignment in its column. The number of conflicts (in this case, the number
of attacking queens) is shown in each square. The algorithm moves the queen to the min-conflict
square, breaking ties randomly.

 

 

 

 
