22. Chapter1 Introduction

based computing. Handheld computers can synchronize with PCs to allow
very portable use of company information. They can also connect to wireless
networks to use the company’s web portal (as well as the myriad other web
resources).

At home, most users had a single computer with a slow modem connection
to the office, the Internet, or both. Network connection speeds once attainable
only at great cost are now available at low cost, allowing more access to more
data at a company or from the Web. Those fast data connections are allowing
home computers to serve up web pages and to contain their own networks
with printers, client PCs, and servers. Some homes even have firewalls to
protect these home environments from security breaches. Those firewalls cost
thousands of dollars a few years ago, and did not even exist a decade ago.

1.10.2 Web-Based Computing

The Web has become ubiquitous, leading to more access by a wider variety of
devices than was dreamt about a few years ago. PCs are still the most prevalent
access devices, with workstations (high-end graphics-oriented PCs), handheld
PDAs, and even cell phones also providing access.

Web computing has increased the emphasis on networking. Devices that
were not previously networked now have wired or wireless access. Devices
that were networked now have faster network connectivity, either by improved
networking technology, optimized network implementation code, or both.

The implementation of web-based computing has given rise to new cate-
gories of devices, such as load balancers which distribute network connections
among a pool of similar servers. Operating systems like Windows 95, which
acted as web clients, have evolved into Windows ME and Windows 2000, which
can act as web servers as well as clients. Generally, the Web has increased the
complexity of devices as their users require them to be web-enabled.

1.10.3 Embedded Computing

Embedded computers are the most prevalent form of computers in exis-
tence. They run embedded real-time operating systems. These devices are
found everywhere, from car engines and manufacturing robots to VCRs and
microwave ovens. They tend to have very specific tasks. The systems they run
on are usually primitive, lacking advanced features, such as virtual memory,
and even disks. Thus, the operating systems provide limited features. They
usually have little or no user interface, preferring to spend their time monitor-
ing and managing hardware devices, such as automobile engines and robotic
arms.

As an example, consider the aforementioned firewalls and load balancers.
Some are general-purpose computers, running standard operating systems—
such as UNIX—with special-purpose applications loaded to implement the
