198

AXIOMS
THEOREMS

INDEPENDENT
AXIOM

DEFINITION

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

One's husband is one's male spouse:
Yw,h Husband(h,w) = Male(h)A Spouse(h,w)
Male and female are disjoint categories:
Vx Male(x) < —Female(x)
Parent and child are inverse relations:
Vp.c Parent(p,c) = Childic,p)
A grandparent is a parent of one's parent:
Vg,« Grandparent(g.c)< Ap Parent(g,p)A Parent(p,c)
A sibling is another child of one's parents:
Vx,y  Sibling(,y) << x#y A Ip Parent(p.x) A Parent(p,y)

We could go on for several more pages like this, and in Exercise 7.6 we ask you to do just that

Axioms, definitions, and theorems

Mathematicians write axioms to capture the basic facts about a domain, define other concepts
in terms of those basic facts, and then use the axioms and definitions to prove theorems. In
AI, we rarely use the term "theorem," but the sentences that are in the knowledge base initially
are sometimes called "axioms," and it is common to talk of "definitions." This brings up an
important question: how do we know when we have written down enough axioms to fully specify
a domain? One way to approach this is to decide on a set of basic predicates in terms of which |
all the other predicates can be defined. In the kinship domain, for example, Child, Spouse, Male,
and Female would be reasonable candidates for basic predicates. In other domains, as we will
see, there is no clearly identifiable basic set.”

The converse problem also arises: do we have too many sentences? For example, do we
need the following sentence, specifying that siblinghood is a symmetric relation?

Vax.y Sibling(x,y) = Sibling(y,x)
In this case, we do not. From Sibling(John,Richard), we can infer that
Sp Parent(p,John) A Parent(p, Richard),

and from that we can infer Sibling(Richard,Joln). In mathematics, an independent axiom is one
that cannot be derived from all the other axioms. Mathematicians strive to produce a minimal set
of axioms that are all independent. In AI it is common to include redundant axioms, not because
they can have any effect on what can be proved, but because they can make the process of finding
a proof more efficient.

An axiom of the form Yx,yv P(x) = ... is often called a definition of P, because it
s to define exactly for what objects P does and does not hold. It is possible to have several
ions for the same predicate; for example, a triangle could be defined both as a polygon

  

7 In alt cases, the set of sentences will have models other than the intended model; this follows from a theorem of
‘Lowenheim’s stating that all consistent axiom sets have a model whose domain is the integers.
