282 carrer scuT Central Processing Unit

software interrupt

csc

RISC

the program while external interrupts are asynchronous. If the program is
rerun, the internal interrupts will occur in the same place each time. External
interrupts depend on external conditions that are independent of the program
being executed at the time.

‘External and internal interrupts are initiated from signals that occur in the
hardware of the CPU. A software interrupt is initiated by executing an instruc-
tion. Software interrupt is a special call instruction that behaves like an inter-
rupt rather than a subroutine call. It can be used by the programmer to initiate
an interrupt procedure at any desired point in the program. The most common
use of software interrupt is associated with a supervisor call instruction. This
instruction provides means for switching froma CPU user mode to the super-
visor mode. Certain operations in the computer may be assigned to the super-
visor mode only, as for example, a complex input or output transfer procedure.
A program written by a user must run in the user mode. When an input or
output transfer is required, the supervisor mode is requested by means of a
supervisor call instruction. This instruction causes a software interrupt that
stores the old CPU state andbrings ina new PSW that belongsto the supervisor
mode. The calling program must pass information to the operating system in
order to specify the particular task requested.

8-8 Reduced Instruction Set
Computer (RISC)

‘An important aspect of computer architecture is the design of the instruction
set for the processor. The instruction set chosen for a particular computer
determines the way that machine language programs are constructed. Early
computers had small and simple instruction sets, forced mainly by the need
to minimize the hardware used to implement them. As digital hardware
became cheaper with the advent of integrated circuits, computer instructions
tended to increase both in number and complexity. Many computers have
instruction sets that include more than 100 and sometimes even more than 200
instructions. These computers also employ a variety of data types and a large
number of addressing modes. The trend into computer hardware complexity
‘was influenced by various factors, such as upgrading existing models to
provide more customer applications, adding instructions that facilitate the
translation from high-level language into machine language programs, and
striving to develop machines that move functions from software implement
tion into hardware implementation. A computer with a large number of i
structions is classified as a complex instruction set computer, abbreviated CISC.

In the early 1980s, a number of computer designers recommended that
computers use fewer instructions with simple constructs so they can be exe-
cuted much faster within the CPU without having to use memory as often. This,
type of computer is classified as a reduced instruction set computer or RISC. In

 

 
