Section 7.10.

Summary 215

 

George == Mum

a

Spencer —= Kydd Elizabeth Margaret

Diana = Charles Anne == Mark Andrew == Sarah Edward

 

Wiliam Hany Peter Zara’ Beatrice. Eugenie

 

 

 

 

Figure 74 A typical family tree.

 

 

7.7 Explain what is wrong with the following proposed definition of the set membership
predicate € :

Va,s x€ {xs}

Vas xes => Vy x€ {yls}

78 Using the set axioms as examples, write axioms for the list domain, including all the
constants, functions, and predicates mentioned in the chapter.

79 This exercise can be done without the computer, although you may find it useful to use a
backward chainer to check your proof for the last part. The idea is to formalize the blocks world

domain using the situation calculus. The objects in this domain are blocks, tables, and situations.
The predicates are

On(x, y, 8) ClearTop(x,s) Block(x) Table(x)

The only action is PutOn(x, y), where x must be a block whose top is clear of any other blocks,
and y can be either the table or a different block with a clear top. The initial situation Sp has A
on B on C on the table.

a. Write an axiom or axioms describing PurOn.

b. Describe the initial state, So, in which there is a stack of three blocks, A on B on C, where
Cis on the table, 7.

c. Give the appropriate query that a theorem prover can solve to generate a plan to build a
stack where C is on top of B and B is on top ofA. Write down the solution that the theorem
prover should return. (Hint: The solution will be a situation described as the result of
doing some actions to SO.)

d. Show formally that the solution fact follows from your description of the situation and the
axioms for PutOn.

710 Write sentences to define the effects of the Shoot action in the wumpus world. As well as
describing its effects on the wumpus, remember that shooting uses the agent's arrow.

711 In this exercise, we will consider the problem of planning a route from one city to another.
The basic action taken by the robot is Go(x, y), which takes it from city x to city y provided there
