10.4 Page Replacement 341

replacement algorithms (such as a FIFO algorithm) must be used. Many systems
provide some help, however, in the form of a reference bit. The reference bit
for a page is set, by the hardware, whenever that page is referenced (either a
read or a write to any byte in the page). Reference bits are associated with each
entry in the page table.

Initially, all bits are cleared (to 0) by the operating system. As a user
process executes, the bit associated with each page referenced is set (to 1) by
the hardware. After some time, we can determine which pages have been used
and which have not been used by examining the reference bits. We do not know
the order of use, but we know which pages were used and which were not used.
This partial ordering information leads to many page-replacement algorithms
that approximate LRU replacement.

10.4.5.1 Additional-Reference-Bits Algorithm

We can gain additional ordering information by recording the reference bits at
regular intervals. We can keep an 8-bit byte for each page in a table in memory.
At regular intervals (say, every 100 milliseconds), a timer interrupt transfers
control to the operating system. The operating system shifts the reference bit
for each page into the high-order bit of its 8-bit byte, shifting the other bits right
1 bit, discarding the low-order bit. These 8-bit shift registers contain the history
of page use for the last eight time periods. If the shift register contains 00000000,
then the page has not been used for eight time periods; a page that is used at
least once each period would have a shift register value of 11111111.

A page with a history register value of 11000100 has been used more
recently than has one with 01110111. If we interpret these 8-bit bytes as unsigned
integers, the page with the lowest number is the LRU page, and it can be
replaced. Notice that the numbers are not guaranteed to be unique, however.
We can either replace (swap out) all pages with the smallest value, or use a FIFO
selection among them.

The number of bits of history can be varied, of course, and would be
selected (depending on the hardware available) to make the updating as fast
as possible. In the extreme case, the number can be reduced to zero, leaving
only the reference bit itself. This algorithm is called the second-chance page-
replacement algorithm.

10.4.5.2 Second-Chance Algorithm

The basic algorithm of second-chance replacement is a FIFO replacement algo-
rithm. When a page has been selected, however, we inspect its reference bit.
If the value is 0, we proceed to replace this page. If the reference bit is set to
1, however, we give that page a second chance and move on to select the next
FIFO page. When a page gets a second chance, its reference bit is cleared and
its arrival time is reset to the current time. Thus, a page that is given a second
