Section 7.6.

Representing Change in the World 203

 

In a more complex environment, the percept might be an entire array of gray-scale or color
values (a camera image), and the perceptual rules would have to infer such things as "There's a
large truck right behind me flashing its lights." Chapter 24 covers the topic of perception in more
detail. Of course, computer vision is a very difficult task, whereas these rules are trivial, but the
idea is the same

Limitations of simple reflex agents

Simple reflex agents will have a hard time in the wumpus world. The easiest way to see this
is to consider the Climb action. The optimal agent should either retrieve the gold or determine
that it is too dangerous to get the gold, and then return to the start square and climb out of the
cave. A pure reflex agent cannot know for sure when to Climb, because neither having the gold
nor being in the start square is part of the percept; they are things the agent knows by forming a
representation of the world.

Reflex agents are also unable to avoid infinite loops. Suppose that such an agent has picked
up the gold and is headed for home. It is likely that the agent will enter one ofthe squares it was
in before, and receive the same percept. In that case, it must, by definition, do exactly what it did
before. Like the dung beetle of Chapter 2, it does not know whether it is carrying the gold, and
thus cannot make its actions conditional on that. Randomization provides some relief, but only
at the expense of risking many fruitless actions.

1.6__REPRESENTING CHANGE IN THE WORLD.

 

INTERNAL MODEL

 

DICHRONIC

In our agent design, all percepts are added into the knowledge base, and in principle the percept
history is all there is to know about the world. If we allow rules that refer to past percepts as well
as the current percept, then we can, in principle, extend the capabilities of an agent to the point
where the agent is acting optimally.

Writing such rules, however, is remarkably tedious unless we adopt certain patterns of
reasoning that correspond to maintaining an internal model of the world, or at least of the
relevant aspects thereof. Consider an example from everyday life: finding one's keys. An agent
that has taken the time to build a representation of the fact "my keys are in my pocket" need only
recall that fact to find the keys. In contrast, an agent thatjust stored the complete percept sequence
would have to do a lot of reasoning to discover where the keys are. It would be theoretically
possible for the agent to in effect rewind the video tape of its life and replay it in fast-forward,
using inference rules to keep track of where the keys are, but it certainly would not be convenient.

Tt can be shown that any system that makes decisions on the basis ofpast percepts can
be rewritten to use instead a set of sentences about the current world state, provided that these
sentences are updated as each new percept arrives and as each action is done.

Rules describing the way in which the world changes (or does not change) are called
diachronic rules, from the Greek for "across time." Representing change is one of the most
important areas in knowledge representation. The real world, as well as the wumpus world, is

 
