11.2 Access Methods 381

identified by the flight number. Thus, the number of available seats for flight
713 is stored in block 713 of the reservation file. To store information about a
larger set, such as people, we might compute a hash function on the people’s
names, or search a small in-memory index to determine a block to read and
search.

For the direct-access method, the file operations must be modified to
include the block number as a parameter. Thus, we have read n, where n is
the block number, rather than read next, and write n rather than write next. An
alternative approach is to retain read next and write next, as with sequential
access, and to add an operation position file ton, where n is the block number.
Then, to effect a read n, we would position to n and then read next.

The block number provided by the user to the operating system is normally
a relative block number. A relative block number is an index relative to the
beginning of the file. Thus, the first relative block of the file is 0, the next is
1, and so on, even though the actual absolute disk address of the block may
be 14703 for the first block and 3192 for the second. The use of relative block
numbers allows the operating system to decide where the file should be placed
(called the allocation problem, as discussed in Chapter 12), and helps to prevent
the user from accessing portions of the file system that may not be part of his
file. Some systems start their relative block numbers at 0; others start at 1.

Given a logical record length L, a request for record N is turned into an 1/O
request for L bytes starting at location L * (N -1) within the file (assuming first
record is N = 1). Since logical records are of a fixed size, it is also easy to read,
write, or delete a record.

Not all operating systems support both sequential and direct access for
files. Some systems allow only sequential file access; others allow only direct
access. Some systems require that a file be defined as sequential or direct when
it is created; such a file can be accessed only in a manner consistent with its
declaration. However, it is easy to simulate sequential access on a direct-access
file. If we simply keep a variable cp that defines our current position, then we
can simulate sequential file operations, as shown in Figure 11.3. On the other
hand, it is extremely inefficient and clumsy to simulate a direct-access file on a
sequential-access file.

 

 

 

 

 

sequential access implementation for direct access
reset cp = 0;
read next read cp;
cp = cp+1;
write next write cp;
cp = cp+;

 

 

 

 

Figure 11.3 Simulation of sequential access on a direct-access file..
