266

Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

UNIVERSAL
ELIMINATION.

EXISTENTIAL
ELIMINATION.

EXISTENTIAL

INTRODUCTION

The three new inference rules are as follows:

O Universal Elimination: For any sentence a, variable v, and ground term! g:
Vva
Supst({v/g}.a) >
For example, from Vx Likes(x,IceCream), we can use the substitution {x/Ben} and infer
Likes(Ben, IceCream).
O Existential Elimination: For any sentence a, variable v, and constant symbol k that does
not appear elsewhere in the knowledge base:
dva
Sust({v/k}, a)
For example, from 4x Kill(x, Victim), we can infer Kill(Murderer, Victim), as long as
Murderer does not appear elsewhere in the knowledge base.
~ Existential Introduction: For any sentence «, variable v that does not occur in a, and
ground term g that does occur in «:
a
dv Susst({g/}.a)
For example, from Likes(Jerry.IceCream) we can infer 3x Likes(x, IceCream).

You can check these rules using the definition of a universal sentence as the conjunction of all its
possible instantiations (so Universal Elimination is like And-Elimination) and the definition of
an existential sentence as the disjunction of all its possible instantiations.

It is very important that the constant used to replace the variable in the Existential Elimi-
nation rule is new. If we disregard this requirement, it is easy to produce consequences that do
not follow logically. For example, suppose we have the sentence 3.x Father(x,John) ("John has
a father"). If we replace the variable x by the constant John, we get Father(John,John), which is
certainly not a logical consequence of the original sentence. Basically, the existential sentence
says there is some object satisfying a condition, and the elimination process is just giving a name
to that object. Naturally, that name must not already belong to another object. Mathematics
provides a nice example: suppose we discover that there is a number that is a little bigger than
2.71828 and that satisfies the equation d(x")/dy =.xfor x. We can give this number a name, such
as e, but it would be a mistake to give it the name of an existing object, like 7.

9.2__ AN EXAMPLE PROOF

Having defined some inference rules, we now illustrate how to use them to do a proof. From here,
it is only a short step to an actual proof procedure, because the application of inference rules is
simply a question of matching their premise patterns to the sentences in the KB and then adding

4 Recall from Chapter 7 that a ground term is a term that contains no variables—that is, either a constant symbol or a
function symbol applied to some ground terms.
