9.4 Paging 287

9.3.3 Fragmentation

Memory fragmentation can be internal as well as external. Consider a multiple-
partition allocation scheme with a hole of 18,464 bytes. Suppose that the next
process requests 18,462 bytes. If we allocate exactly the requested block, we
are left with a hole of 2 bytes. The overhead to keep track of this hole will be
substantially larger than the hole itself. The general approach is to break the
physical memory into fixed-sized blocks, and allocate memory in unit of block
sizes. With this approach, the memory allocated to a process may be slightly
larger than the requested memory. The difference between these two numbers
is internal fragmentation—memory that is internal to a partition but is not
being used.

One solution to the problem of external fragmentation is compaction. The
goal is to shuffle the memory contents to place all free memory together in one
Jarge block. Compaction is not always possible. If relocation is static and is done
at assembly or load time, compaction cannot be done; compaction is possible
only if relocation is dynamic, and is done at execution time. If addresses are
relocated dynamically, relocation requires only moving the program and data,
and then changing the base register to reflect the new base address. When
compaction is possible, we must determine its cost. The simplest compaction
algorithm is simply to move all processes toward one end of memory; all holes
move in the other direction, producing one large hole of available memory. This
scheme can be expensive.

Another possible solution to the external-fragmentation problem is to per-
mit the logical-address space of a process to be noncontiguous, thus allowing
a process to be allocated physical memory wherever the latter is available.
Two complementary techniques achieve this solution: paging (Section 9.4) and
segmentation (Section 9.5). These techniques can also be combined (Section 9.6).

94 m Paging

Paging is a memory-management scheme that permits the physical-address
space of a process to be noncontiguous. Paging avoids the considerable prob-
lem of fitting the varying-sized memory chunks onto the backing store, from
which most of the previous memory-management schemes suffered. When
some code fragments or data residing in main memory need to be swapped
out, space must be found on the backing store. The fragmentation problems
discussed in connection with main memory are also prevalent with backing
store, except that access is much slower, so compaction is impossible. Because
of its advantages over the previous methods, paging in its various forms is
commonly used in most operating systems.

Traditionally, support for paging has been handled by hardware. However,
recent designs have implemented paging by closely integrating the hardware
and operating system, especially on 64-bit microprocessors.

 
