314

9.7

9.8

9.9

9.10

9.11

9.12
9.13

9.14

9.15

9.16

Chapter 9 Memory Management

be shared among different users. Discuss the advantages and disadvan-
tages of this scheme.

Why are page sizes always powers of 2?

Consider a logical-address space of eight pages of 1,024 words each,
mapped onto a physical memory of 32 frames.

a. How many bits are in the logical address?
b. How many bits are in the physical address?

On a system with paging, a process cannot access memory that it does
not own; why? How could the operating system allow access to other
memory? Why should it or should it not?

Consider a paging system with the page table stored in memory.

a. Ifamemory reference takes 200 nanoseconds, how long does a paged
memory reference take?

b. If we add TLBs, and 75 percent of all page-table references are found
in the TLBs, what is the effective memory reference time? (Assume
that finding a page-table entry in the TLBs takes zero time, if the
entry is there.)

What is the effect of allowing two entries in a page table to point to the
same page frame in memory? Explain how you could use this effect to
decrease the amount of time needed to copy a large amount of memory
from one place to another. What would the effect of updating some byte
in the one page be on the other page?

Why are segmentation and paging sometimes combined into one scheme?

Describe a mechanism by which one segment could belong to the address
space of two different processes.

Explain why it is easier to share a reentrant module using segmentation
than it is to do so when pure paging is used.

Sharing segments among processes without requiring the same segment
number is possible in a dynamically linked segmentation system.

a. Define a system that allows static linking and sharing of segments
without requiring that the segment numbers be the same.

b. Describe a paging scheme that allows pages to be shared without
requiring that the page numbers be the same.

Consider the following segment table:
