62  Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

¢ I/O operations: A running program may require I/O. This I/O may involve
a file or anI/O device. For specific devices, special functions may be desired
(such as to rewind a tape drive, or to blank a CRT screen). For efficiency and
protection, users usually cannot control 1/O devices directly. Therefore, the
operating system must provide a means to do I/O.

¢ File-system manipulation: The file system is of particular interest. Obvi-
ously, programs need to read and write files. Programs also need to create
and delete files by name.

¢ Communications: In many circumstances, one process needs to exchange
information with another process. Such communication can occur in two
major ways. The first takes place between processes that are executing
on the same computer; the second takes place between processes that
are executing on different computer systems that are tied together by a
computer network. Communications may be implemented via shared
memory, or by the technique of message passing, in which packets of
information are moved between processes by the operating system.

Error detection: The operating system constantly needs to be aware of
possible errors. Errors may occur in the CPU and memory hardware (such
as a memory error or a power failure), in I/O devices (such as a parity error
on tape, a connection failure on a network, or lack of paper in the printer),
and in the user program (such as an arithmetic overflow, an attempt to
access an illegal memory location, or a too-great use of CPU time). For each
type of error, the operating system should take the appropriate action to
ensure correct and consistent computing.

In addition, another set of operating-system functions exists not for helping
the user, but for ensuring the efficient operation of the system itself. Systems
with multiple users can gain efficiency by sharing the computer resources
among the users.

Resource allocation: When multiple users are logged on the system or
multiple jobs are running at the same time, resources must be allocated
to each of them. Many different types of resources are managed by the
operating system. Some (such as CPU cycles, main memory, and file
storage) may have special allocation code, whereas others (such as I/O
devices) may have much more general request and release code. For
instance, in determining how best to use the CPU, operating systems have
cPU-scheduling routines that take into account the speed of the CPU, the
jobs that must be executed, the number of registers available, and other
factors. There might also be routines to allocate a tape drive for use by ajob.
One such routine locates an unused tape drive and marks an internal table
to record the drive’s new user. Another routine is used to clear that table.
