282 Chapter9 Memory Management

MB and the backing store is a standard hard disk with a transfer rate of 5 MB
per second. The actual transfer of the 1 MB process to or from memory takes

1000 KB/5000 KB per second = 1/5 second
= 200 milliseconds.

Assuming that no head seeks are necessary and an average latency of 8
milliseconds, the swap time takes 208 milliseconds. Since we must both swap
out and swap in, the total swap time is then about 416 milliseconds.

For efficient CPU utilization, we want our execution time for each process
to be long relative to the swap time. Thus, in a round-robin cPU-scheduling
algorithm, for example, the time quantum should be substantially larger than
0.416 seconds.

Notice that the major part of the swap time is transfer time. The total
transfer time is directly proportional to the amount of memory swapped. If we
have a computer system with 128 MB of main memory and a resident operating
system taking 5 MB, the maximum size of the user process is 123 MB. However,
many user processes may be much smaller than this size—say, 1 MB. Al
MB process could be swapped out in 208 milliseconds, compared to the 24.6
seconds for swapping 123 MB. Therefore, it would be useful to know exactly
how much memory a user process is using, not simply how much it might be
using. Then, we would need to swap only what is actually used, reducing swap
time. For this method to be effective, the user must keep the system informed of
any changes in memory requirements. Thus, a process with dynamic memory
requirements will need to issue system calls (request memory and release
memory) to inform the operating system of its changing memory needs.

Swapping is constrained by other factors as well. If we want to swap a
process, we must be sure that it is completely idle. Of particular concern is any
pending I/O. A process may be waiting for an I/O operation when we want to
swap that process to free up its memory. However, if the 1/0 is asynchronously
accessing the user memory for I/O buffers, then the process cannot be swapped.
Assume that the I/O operation was queued because the device was busy. Then,
if we were to swap out process P; and swap in process P2, the 1/O operation
might then attempt to use memory that now belongs to process P2. The two
main solutions to this problem are never to swap a process with pending I/O,
or to execute I/O operations only into operating-system buffers. Transfers
between operating-system buffers and process memory then occur only when
the process is swapped in.

The assumption that swapping requires few, if any, head seeks needs
further explanation. We postpone discussing this issue until Chapter 14, where
secondary-storage structure is covered. Generally, swap space is allocated as a
chunk of disk, separate from the file system, so that its use is as fast as possible.

Currently, standard swapping is used in few systems. It requires too
much swapping time and provides too little execution time to be a reasonable
