11.3. Directory Structure 389

two approaches can be taken. Some systems, such as MS-DOS, will not delete a
directory unless it is empty. Thus, to delete a directory, the user must first delete
all the files in that directory. If any subdirectories exist, this procedure must be
applied recursively to them, so that they can be deleted also. This approach
may result in a substantial amount of work.

An alternative approach, such as that taken by the UNIX rm command, is
to provide the option that, when a request is made to delete a directory, all that
directory’s files and subdirectories are also to be deleted. Either approach is
fairly easy to implement; the choice is one of policy. The latter policy is more
convenient, but more dangerous, because an entire directory structure may be
removed with one command. If that command were issued in error, a large
number of files and directories would need to be restored from backup tapes.

With a tree-structured directory system, users can access, in addition to
their files, the files of other users. For example, user B can access files of user
A by specifying their path names. User B can specify either an absolute or a
relative path name. Alternatively, user B could change her current directory to
be user A’s directory, and access the files by their file names. Some systems also
allow users to define their own search paths. In this case, user B could define
her search path to be (1) her local directory, (2) the system file directory, and (3)
user A’s directory, in that order. As long as the name of a file of user A did not
conflict with the name of a local file or system file, it could be referred to simply
by its name.

A path to a file in a tree-structured directory can be longer than that in
a two-level directory. To allow users to access programs without having to
remember these long paths, the Macintosh operating system automates the
search for executable programs. It maintains a file, called the Desktop File,
containing the name and location of all executable programs it has seen. When
a new hard disk or floppy disk is added to the system, or the network is
accessed, the operating system traverses the directory structure, searching for
executable programs on the device and recording the pertinent information.
This mechanism supports the double-click execution functionality described
previously. A double-click on a file causes its creator attribute to be read,
and the Desktop File to be searched for a match. Once the match is found, the
appropriate executable program is started with the clicked-on file as its input.
The Microsoft Windows family of operating systems (95, 95, NT, 2000) maintains
an extended two-level directory structure, with devices and partitions assigned
a drive letter (Section 11.4).

11.3.4 Acyclic-Graph Directories

Consider two programmers who are working on a joint project. The files asso-
ciated with that project can be stored in a subdirectory, separating them from
other projects and files of the two programmers. But since both programmers
are equally responsible for the project, both want the subdirectory to be in
