Chapter 1. Introduction

 

Similar gentle revolutions have occurred in robotics, computer vision, machine learning
(including neural networks), and knowledge representation. A better understanding of the prob-
lems and their complexity properties, combined with increased mathematical sophistication, has
led to workable research agendas and robust methods. Perhaps encouraged by the progress in
solving the subproblems of AI, researchers have also started to lookat the "whole agent" problem
again. The work of Alien Newell, John Laird, and Paul Rosenbloom on SOAR (Newell, 1990;
Laird et al., 1987)is the best-known example ofa complete agent architecture in AI. The so-called
"situated" movement aims to understand the workings of agents embedded in real environments
with continuous sensory inputs. Many interesting results are coming out of such work, including
the realization that the previously isolated subfields of AI may need to be reorganized somewhat
when their results are to be tied together into a single agent design.

1.4 __THE STATE OF THE ART

International grandmaster Amold Denker studies the pieces on the board in front of him. He
realizes there is no hope; he must resign the game. His opponent, HITECH, becomes the first
computer program to defeat a grandmaster in a game of chess (Berliner, 1989).

"I want to go from Boston to San Francisco," the traveller says into the microphone. "What
date will you be travelling on?" is the reply. The traveller explains she wants to go October 20th,
nonstop, on the cheapest available fare, returning on Sunday. A speech understanding program
named PEGASUS handles the whole transaction, which results in a confirmed reservation that
saves the traveller $894 over the regular coach fare. Even though the speech recognizer gets one
out of ten words wrong,'® it is able to recover from these errors because of its understanding of
how dialogs are put together (Zue ef al., 1994).

An analyst in the Mission Operations room of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory suddenly
starts paying attention. A red message has flashed onto the screen indicating an "anomaly" with
the Voyager spacecraft, which is somewhere in the vicinity of Neptune. Fortunately, the analyst
is able to correct the problem from the ground. Operations personnel believe the problem might
have been overlooked had it not been for MARVEL, a real-time expert system that monitors the
massive stream of data transmitted by the spacecraft, handling routine tasks and alerting the
analysts to more serious problems (Schwuttke, 1992).

Cmising the highway outside of Pittsburgh at a comfortable 55 mph, the man in the driver's
seat seems relaxed. He shouldbe—forthe past 90 miles, he has not had to touch the steering wheel,
brake, or accelerator. The real driver is a robotic system that gathers input from video cameras,
sonar, and laser range finders attached to the van. It combines these inputs with experience
learned from training runs and succesfully computes how to steer the vehicle Pomerleau, 1993).

A leading expert on lymph-node pathology describes a fiendishly difficult case to the
expert system, and examines the system's diagnosis. He scoffs at the system's response. Only
slightly worried, the creators of the system suggest he ask the computer for an explanation of

18 Some other existing systems err only half as often on this task.
