220 carrer sevEN Microprogrammed Control

subroutine register

The mapping function is sometimes implemented by means of an inte-
grated circuit called programmable logic device or PLD. A PLD is similar to
ROM inconcept except thatit uses AND and OR gates with internal electronic
fuses. The interconnection between inputs, AND gates, OR gates, and outputs
can be programmed as in ROM. A mapping function that can be expressed in
terms of Boolean expressions can be implemented conveniently with a PLD.

Subroutines

Subroutines are programs that are used by other routines to accomplish a
particular task. A subroutine can be called from any point within the main body
of the microprogram. Frequently, many microprograms contain identical sec-
tions of code. Microinstructions can be saved by employing subroutines that
use common sections of microcode. For example, the sequence of microoper-
ations needed to generate the effective address of the operand for an instruc-
tion is common to all memory reference instructions. This sequence could be
a subroutine that is called from within many other routines to execute the
effective address computation.

Microprogramsthat use subroutinesmust havea provision for storing the
return address during a subroutine call and restoring the address during a
subroutine return. This may be accomplished by placing the incremented
output from the control address register into a subroutine register and branch-
ing to the beginning of the subroutine. The subroutine register can then
become the source for transferring the address for the return to the main
routine The best way to structure a register file that stores addresses for
subroutines is to organize the registers in a last-in, first-out (LIFO) stack. The
use of a stack in subroutine calls and returns is explained in more detail in
Sec. 8-7.

73 roprogram Example

(Once the configuration of a computer and its microprogrammed control unit
isestablished, the designer's task is to generate the microcode for the control
memory. This code generation is called microprogramming and is a process
similar to conventional machine language programming. To appreciate this
process, we present here a simple digital computer and show how it is mi-
croprogrammed. The computer used here is similar but not identical to the
basic computer introduced in Chap. 5.

Computer Configuration

The block diagram of the computer is shown in Fig. 7-4. It consists of two
memory units: a main memory for storing instructions and data, and a control
memory for storing the microprogram. Four registers are associated with the
Processor unit and two with the control unit. The processor registers are
