2.5 Hardware Protection 47

 

base + {limit

 

 

 

 

 

 

CPU

 

 

 

   

trap to operating system
monitor—addressing error memory

Figure 2.10 Hardware address protection with base and limit registers.

fixed (for example, 1/60 second) or variable (for example, from 1 millisecond to
1 second). A variable timer is generally implemented by a fixed-rate clock and
a counter. The operating system sets the counter. Every time the clock ticks,
the counter is decremented. When the counter reaches 0, an interrupt occurs.
For instance, a 10-bit counter with a 1-millisecond clock allows interrupts at
intervals from 1 millisecond to 1,024 milliseconds, in steps of 1 millisecond.

Before turning over control to the user, the operating system ensures that
the timer is set to interrupt. If the timer interrupts, control transfers automat-
ically to the operating system, which may treat the interrupt as a fatal error
or may give the program more time. Clearly, instructions that modify the
operation of the timer are privileged.

Thus, we can use the timer to prevent a user program from running too
long. A simple technique is to initialize a counter with the amount of time that a
program is allowed to run. A program with a 7-minute time limit, for example,
would have its counter initialized to 420. Every second, the timer interrupts
and the counter is decremented by 1. As long as the counter is positive, control
is returned to the user program. When the counter becomes negative, the
operating system terminates the program for exceeding the assigned time limit.

A more common use of a timer is to implement time sharing. In the most
straightforward case, the timer could be set to interrupt every N milliseconds,
where N is the time slice that each user is allowed to execute before the next
user gets control of the CPU. The operating system is invoked at the end of each
time slice to perform various housekeeping tasks, such as adding the value N
to the record that specifies (for accounting purposes) the amount of time the
user program has executed thus far. The operating system also saves registers,
internal variables, and buffers, and changes several other parameters to prepare
for the next program to run. This procedure is known as a context switch; it is
explored in Chapter 4. Following a context switch, the next program continues
