‘microoperations

condition field

SECTION 73 Microprogram Example 223

333k 7

 

FI, F2,F3: Mierooperation fields
CD: Condition for branching
BR: Branch field

AD: Address eld

Figure 7-6 Microinstruction code format (20 bits)

selects status bit conditions. The BR field specifies the type of branch to be
used. The AD field contains a branch address. The address field is seven bits
wide, since the control memory has 128 = 2” words.

‘The microoperations are subdivided into three fields of three bits each.
The three bits in each field are encoded to specify seven distinct microopera-
tions as listed in Table 7-1. This gives a total of 21 microoperations. No more
than three microoperationscan be chosen for a microinstruction, one from each
field. If fewer than three microoperations are used, one or mare of the fields
willuse the binary code 000for no operation As an illustration, amicroinstruc-
tion can specify two simultaneous microoperations from F2 and F3 and none
from Fl.

DR<M[AR] _ with F2 = 100
and PC<PC+1 — with F3 = 101

The nine bits of the microoperation fields will then be 000 100 101. It is
important to realize that two or more conflicting microoperations cannot be
specified simultaneously. For example, amicrooperation field 010 001 000has
nomeaning because it specifies the operations to clear AC to Oand subtract DR
from AC at the same tim

Each microoperation in Table7-1 is defined with a register transfer state-
ment and is assigned a symbol for use in a symbolic microprogram. All
transfer-type microoperations symbols use five letters. The first two letters
designate the source register, the third letter is always aT, and the last two
letters designate the destination register. For example, the microoperation that
specifies the transfer AC<-DR (Fl = 100) has the symbol DRTAC, which
stands for a transfer from DR to AC.

The CD (condition) field consists of two bits which are encoded to specify
four status bit conditions as listed in Table 7-1. The first condition is always a
1, so that a reference to CD = 00 (or the symbol U) will always find the
condition to be true. When this condition is used in conjunction with the BR
(branch) field, it provides an unconditional branch operation. The indirect bit

 
