242

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

INDIVIDUATION
‘STUFF

TEMPORAL
‘SUBSTANCES

SPATIAL
‘SUBSTANCES

‘COUNT NOUNS:
MASS NOUNS

 

      
 

1800

1796
2 time
1789

Figure 8.7 A schematic view of the object President(USA) for the first fifteen years of its
existence.

 

 

 

 

 

individually. There is, however, a significant portion of reality that seems to defy any obvious
individuation—division into distinct objects. We give this portion the generic name stuff. For
example, suppose I have some butter and an aardvark in front of me. I can say there is one
aardvark, but there is no obvious number of "butter-objects," because any part of a butter-object |
is also a butter-object, at least until we get to very small parts indeed. This is the major distinction
between stuffand things. Ifwe cut an aardvark in half, we do not get two aardvarks, unfortunately.
The distinction is exactly analogous to the difference between liquid and nonliquid events. In
fact, some have called liquid event types temporal substances, whereas things like butter are
spatial substances (Lenat and Guha, 1990).

Notice that English enforces the distinction between stuff and things. We say "an aardvark,"
but, except in pretentious Californiarestaurants, one cannot say "a butter." Linguists distinguish
between count nouns, such as aardvarks, holes, and theorems, and mass nouns, such as butter,
water, and energy. Should we also enforce this distinction in our representation by treating butter
and aardvarks differently, or can we treat them using a uniform mechanism?

To represent stuff properly, we begin with the obvious. We will need to have as objects
in our ontology at least the gross "lumps" of stuff that we interact with. For example, we might ]
recognize the butter as the same butter that was left on the table the night before; we might pick j
itup, weigh it, sell it, or whatever. In these senses, it is an objectjust like the aardvark. Let us
call it Butters. We will also define the category Butter. Informally, its elements will be all those
things of which one might say "It's butter," including Butters.

 

 

 
