204 = caurrersix Programming the Basic Computer

Character Manipulation

A computer is not just a calculator but also a symbol manipulator. The binary-
coded characters that represent symbols can be manipulated by computer
instructions to achieve various data-processing tasks. One such task may be
to pack two characters in one word. This is convenient because each character
‘occupies 8 bits and amemory word contains 16 bits. The program in Table 6-20
lists a subroutine named IN2 that inputs two characters and packs them into
one 16-bit word. The packed word remains in the accumulator. Note that
subroutine SH4 (Table 6-16) is called twice to shift the accumulator left eight
times.

In the discussion of the assembler it was assumed that the symbolic
program is stored in a section of memory which is sometimes called a buffer.
‘The symbolic program being typed enters through the input device and is
stored in consecutive memory locations in the buffer. The program listed in
Table 6-21 can be used to input a symbolic program from the keyboard, pack
two characters in one word, and store them in the buffer. The first address of
the buffer is 500. The first double character is stored in location 500 and all
characters are stored in sequential locations. The program uses a pointer for
keeping track of the current empty location in the buffer. No counter is used
in the program, so characters will be read as long as they are available or until
the buffer reaches location 0 (after location FFFF), In a practical situation it may
be necessary to limit the size of the buffer and a counter may be used for this
purpose. Note that subroutine IN2 of Table 6-20 is called to input and pack the
two characters.

In discussing the second pass of the assembler in Sec. 6-4 it was men-
tioned that one of the most common operations of an assembler is table lookup.
This is an operation that searches a table to find out if it contains a given
symbol. The search may be done by comparing the given symbol with each of
the symbols stored in the table. The search terminates when a match occurs

TABLE 6.20 Subroutine to Input and Pack Two Characters

In = ‘/Subroutine entry
FST, SKI
BUN FST
INP ‘MInput first character
OUT

BSASH4 Shift left four times

BSASH4 Shift left four more times
SCD, SKI

BUN SCD

INP ‘Input second character

our

BUNIN2I /Return

 
