442 Chapter 12 File-System Implementation

Si: $2:

usr

  
 

shared dir2

 

Figure 12.14 Three independent file systems.

operation is completed, the mounted directory looks like an integral subtree
of the local file system, replacing the subtree descending from the local direc-
tory. The local directory becomes the name of the root of the newly mounted
directory. Specification of the remote directory as an argument for the mount
operation is done in a non-transparent manner; the location (or host name) of
the remote directory has to be provided. However, from then on, users on
machine M1 can access files in the remote directory in a totally transparent
manner. i

To illustrate file mounting, consider the file system depicted in Figure 12.14,
where the triangles represent subtrees of directories that are of interest. The
figure shows three independent file systems of machines named U, S1, and $2.
At this point, at each machine, only the local files can be accessed. In Figure
12.15(a), the effects of the mounting of $1:/usr/shared over U:/usr/local are shown.
This figure depicts the view users on U have of their file system. Observe that
they can access any file within the dir] directory, for instance, using the prefix
/usr/local/dirl on U after the mount is complete. The original directory /usrflocal
on that machine is no longer visible.

Subject to access-rights accreditation, potentially any file system, or any
directory within a file system, can be mounted remotely on top of any local
directory. Diskless workstations can even mount their own roots from servers.

Cascading mounts are also permitted in some NFS implementations. That
is, a file system can be mounted over another file system that is remotely
mounted, not local. A machine is affected by only those mounts that it has
itself invoked.

By mounting a remote file system, the client does not gain access to other
file systems that were, by chance, mounted over the former file system. Thus,
the mount mechanism does not exhibit a transitivity property. In Figure
12.15(b), we illustrate cascading mounts by continuing our previous example.
