1.8 Handheld Systems 19

In Chapter 6, we consider the scheduling facility needed to implement soft
real-time functionality in an operating system. In Chapter 10, we describe the
design of memory management for real-time computing. Finally, in Chapter 21,
we describe the real-time components of the Windows 2000 operating system.

1.8 = Handheld Systems

Handheld systems include personal digital assistants (PDAs), such as Palm-
Pilots or cellular telephones with connectivity to a network such as the Internet.
Developers of handheld systems and applications face many challenges, most
of which are due to the limited size of such devices. For example, a PDA is
typically about 5 inches in height and 3 inches in width, and it weighs less than
one-half pound. Due to this limited size, most handheld devices have a small
amount of memory, include slow processors, and feature small display screens.
We will take a look now at each of these limitations.

Many handheld devices have between 512 KB and 8 MB of memory. (Con-
trast this with a typical PC or workstation, which may have several hundred
megabytes of memory!) Asa result, the operating system and applications must
manage memory efficiently. This includes returning all allocated memory back
to the memory manager once the memory is no longer being used. In Chapter
10 we will explore virtual memory, which allows developers to write programs
that behave as if the system has more memory than may be physically available.
Currently, many handheld devices do not use virtual memory techniques, thus
forcing program developers to work within the confines of limited physical
memory.

A second issue of concern to developers of handheld devices is the speed
of the processor used in the device. Processors for most handheld devices often
run at a fraction of the speed of a processor in a PC. Faster processors require
more power. To include a faster processor in a handheld device would require a
larger battery that would have to be replaced (or recharged) more frequently. To
minimize the size of most handheld devices, smaller, slower processors which
consume less power are typically used. Therefore, the operating system and
applications must be designed not to tax the processor.

The last issue confronting program designers for handheld devices is the
small display screens typically available. Whereas a monitor for a home com-
puter may measure up to 21 inches, the display for a handheld device is often
no more than 3 inches square. Familiar tasks, such as reading e-mail or brows-
ing web pages, must be condensed onto smaller displays. One approach for
displaying the content in web pages is web clipping, where only a small subset
of a web page is delivered and displayed on the handheld device.

Some handheld devices may use wireless technology, such as BlueTooth
(Section 1.5), allowing remote access to e-mail and web browsing. Cellular
telephones with connectivity to the Internet fall into this category. However,

 

 
