228  Chapter7 Process Synchronization

written out to stable storage. We therefore require that, prior to a write(X)
operation being executed, the log records corresponding to X be written onto
stable storage.

Note the performance penalty inherent in this system. Two physical writes
are required for every logical write requested. Also, more storage is needed: for
the data themselves and for the log of the changes. In cases where the data are
extremely important and fast failure recovery is necessary, the price is worth
the functionality.

Using the log, the system can handle any failure that does not result in the
loss of information on nonvolatile storage. The recovery algorithm uses two
procedures:

* undo(T;), which restores the value of all data updated by transaction T; to
the old values

« redo(T;), which sets the value of all data updated by transaction T; to the
new values

The set of data updated by T; and their respective old and new values can
be found in the log.

The undo and redo operations must be idempotent (that is, multiple
executions of an operation have the same result as does one execution) to
guarantee correct behavior, even if a failure occurs during the recovery process.

If a transaction T; aborts, then we can restore the state of the data that
it has updated by simply executing undo(Ti). If a system failure occurs, we
restore the state of all updated data by consulting the log to determine which
transactions need to be redone and which need to be undone. This classification
of transactions is accomplished as follows:

Transaction T; needs to be undone if the log contains the < T; starts>
record, but does not contain the < Tj commits> record.

Transaction T; needs to be redone if the log contains both the < T; starts>
and the < T; commits> records.

7.9.3 Checkpoints

When a system failure occurs, we must consult the log to determine those
transactions that need to be redone and those that need to be undone. In
principle, we need to search the entire log to make these determinations. There
are two major drawbacks to this approach:

1. The searching process is time-consuming.

2. Most of the transactions that, according to our algorithm, need to be redone
have already actually updated the data that the log says they need to
