758

Chapter 26 Maximum Flow

To see that no vertex preceding u in L has excess flow, we denote the vertex
that will be u in the next iteration by u’. The vertices that will precede w’ in the
next iteration include the current u (due to line 11) and either no other vertices
(if u is relabeled) or the same vertices as before (if u is not relabeled). When u
is discharged, it has no excess flow afterward. Thus, if u is relabeled during
the discharge, no vertices preceding u’ have excess flow. If u is not relabeled
during the discharge, no vertices before it on the list acquired excess flow during
this discharge, because L remained topologically sorted at all times during the
discharge (as just pointed out, admissible edges are created only by relabeling,
not pushing), and so each push operation causes excess flow to move only to
vertices further down the list (or to s or t). Again, no vertices preceding u’ have
excess flow.

Termination: When the loop terminates, u is just past the end of L, and so the
loop invariant ensures that the excess of every vertex is 0. Thus, no basic oper-
ations apply.

Analysis

We shall now show that RELABEL-TO-FRONT runs in O(V°*) time on any flow
network G = (V,£). Since the algorithm is an implementation of the generic
push-relabel algorithm, we shall take advantage of Corollary 26.21, which pro-
vides an O(V) bound on the number of relabel operations executed per vertex and
an O(V?) bound on the total number of relabel operations overall. In addition, Ex-
ercise 26.4-3 provides an O(VE) bound on the total time spent performing relabel
operations, and Lemma 26.22 provides an O(VE) bound on the total number of
saturating push operations.

Theorem 26.30
The running time of RELABEL-TO-FRONT on any flow network G = (V, E)
is O(V3).

Proof Let us consider a “phase” of the relabel-to-front algorithm to be the time
between two consecutive relabel operations. There are O(V) phases, since there
are O(V?) relabel operations. Each phase consists of at most |V| calls to Dis-
CHARGE, which we can see as follows. If DISCHARGE does not perform a re-
label operation, then the next call to DISCHARGE is further down the list L, and
the length of L is less than |V|. If DISCHARGE does perform a relabel, the next
call to DISCHARGE belongs to a different phase. Since each phase contains at
most |V| calls to DISCHARGE and there are O(V) phases, the number of times
DISCHARGE is called in line 8 of RELABEL-TO-FRONT is O(V*). Thus, the total
