404 Chapter 11 File-System Interface

The most common recent approach is to combine access control lists with
the more general (and easier to implement) owner, group, and universe access-
control scheme that was described above. For example, Solaris 2.6 and beyond
uses the three categories of access by default, but allows access control lists to
be added to specific files and directories when more fine-grained access control
is desired.

As an example, consider a person, Sara, who is writing a new book. She
has hired three graduate students (Jim, Dawn, and Jill) to help with the project.
The text of the book is kept in a file named book. The protection associated with
this file is as follows:

Sara should be able to invoke all operations on the file.

e Jim, Dawn, and Jill should be able only to read and write the file; they
should not be allowed to delete the file.

« All other users should be able to read, but not write, the file. (Sara is
interested in letting as many people as possible read the text so that she
can obtain appropriate feedback.)

To achieve such a protection, we must create a new group, say text, with
members Jim, Dawn, and Jill. The name of the group fext must be then
associated with the file book, and the access right must be set in accordance
with the policy we have outlined.

Now consider a visitor to whom Sara would like to grant temporary access
to chapter 1. The visitor cannot be added to the text group because that grants to
the vistor access to all chapters. Because files can only be in one group, another
group cannot be added to chapter 1. With the addition of access-control-list
functionality, the visitor can be added to the access control list of chapter 1.

For this scheme to work properly, permissions and access lists must be
controlled tightly. This control can be accomplished in several ways. For
example, in the UNIX system, groups can be created and modified by only the
manager of the facility (or by any superuser). Thus, this control is achieved
through human interaction. In the VMS system, the owner of the file can create
and modify this list. Access lists are discussed further in Section 18.4.2.

With the more limited protection classification, only three fields are needed
to define protection. Each field is often a collection of bits, each of which either
allows or prevents the access associated with it. For example, the UNIX system
defines three fields of 3 bits each—rwx, where r controls read access, w controls
write access, and x controls execution. A separate field is kept for the file owner,
for the file’s group, and for all other users. In this scheme, 9 bits per file are
needed to record protection information. Thus, for our example, the protection
fields for the file book are as follows: For the owner Sara, all 3 bits are set; for the
group text, the r and w bits are set; and for the universe, only the r bit is set.
