 

1.10 Computing Environments 21

A good example of this movement occurred with the MULTIplexed
Information and Computing Services (MULTICS) operating system. MULTICS
was developed from 1965 to 1970 at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) as a computing utility. It ran on a large, complex mainframe computer
(the GE 645). Many of the ideas that were developed for MULTICS were
subsequently used at Bell Laboratories (one of the original partners in the
development of MULTICS) in the design of UNIX. The UNIX operating system
was designed circa 1970 for a PDP-11 minicomputer. Around 1980, the features
of UNIX became the basis for UNIX-like operating systems on microcomputer
systems, and they are being included in more recent operating systems such
as Microsoft Windows NT, IBM OS/2, and the Macintosh operating system.
Thus, the features developed for a large mainframe system have moved to
microcomputers over time.

At the same time as features of large operating systems were being scaled
down to fit PCs, more powerful, faster, and more sophisticated hardware sys-
tems were being developed. The personal workstation is a large PC—for
example, the Sun SPARCstation, the HP/ Apollo, the IBM RS/6000, and the Intel
Pentium class system running Windows NT or a UNIX derivative. Many uni-
versities and businesses have large numbers of workstations tied together with
local-area networks. As PCs gain more sophisticated hardware and software,
the line dividing the two categories—mainframes and microcomputers—is
blurring.

1.10 = Computing Environments

Now that we have traced the development of operating systems from the first
hands-on systems through multiprogrammed and time-shared systems to PCs
and handheld computers, we can give a brief overview of how such systems
are used in a variety of computing environment settings.

1.10.1 Traditional Computing

As computing matures, the lines among many of the traditional computing
environments are blurring. Consider the “typical office environment.” Just
a few years ago, this environment consisted of PCs connected to a network,
with servers providing file and print service. Remote access was awkward,
and portability was achieved by laptop computers carrying some of the user’s
workspace. Terminals attached to mainframes were prevalent at many compa-
nies as well, with even fewer remote access and portability options.

The current trend is toward more ways to access these environments. Web
technologies are stretching the boundaries of traditional computing. Com-
panies implement portals which provide web accessibility to their internal
servers. Network computers are essentially terminals that understand web-
