234

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

COMPOSITE OBJECT
STRUCTURE

SCHEMA
SCRIPT

BUNCH

Any object that has parts is called a composite object. Categories of composite objects
are often characterized by the structure of those objects, that is, the parts and how the parts are
related. For example, a biped has exactly two legs that are attached to its body:

Va Biped(a) >
Ah .b.b Leg(l)) A Leg(I2)A Body(b) A
PartOf(l,,@A PartOf(l,a) A PartOf(b,a) A
Attached(1,,b) A Attached(l, b) A
TAb AW; Legs) \ PantOf(.as (z=h Vly =h)

This general form of sentence can be used to define the structure of any composite object,
including events: for example, for all baseball games, there exist nine innings such that each
is a part of the game, and so on. A generic event description of this kind is often called a
schema or script, particularly in the area of natural language understanding. Some approaches
to text understanding rely mainly on the ability to recognize instances of schematic events from
descriptions of their parts, so that the text can be organized into coherent events, and questions can
be answered about parts not explicitly mentioned. We discuss these issues furtherin Chapter 22.

We can define a PartPartition relation analogous to the Partition relation for categories
(see Exercise 8.4). An object is composed of the parts in its PartPartirion, and can be viewed as
deriving some properties from those parts. For example, the mass of a composite object is the
sum of the masses of the parts. Notice that this is not the case with categories: categories have
no mass, even though their elements might.

It is also useful to define composite objects with definite parts but no particular structure
For example, we might want to say, "The apples in this bag weigh three pounds." Rather than
commit the error of assigning the weight to the category of apples-in-the-bag, we can make a
bunch out of the apples. For example, ifthe apples are Apple). Applez, andApples, then

BunchOf\{Apple; , Applex, Apples })

denotes the composite object with the three apples as parts. We can then use the bunch as a normal,
albeit unstructured, object. Notice that BunchOfApples) is the composite object consisting of
all apples — not to be confused with Apples, the category.

Representing change with events

Section 7.6 showed how situation calculus could be used to represent change. Situation calculus
is perfect for the vacuum world, the wumpus world, or any world in which a single agent takes
discrete actions. Unfortunately, situation calculus has two problems that limit its applicability.
First, situations are instantaneous points in time, which are not very useful for describing the
gradual growth of a kitten into a cat, the flow of electrons along a wire, or any other process
where change occurs continuously over time. Second, situation calculus works best when only
one action happens at a time. When there are multiple agents in the world, or when the world
can change spontaneously, situation calculus begins to break down. It is possible to prop it back
up for a while by defining composite actions, as in Exercise 7.12. If there are actions that have
different durations, or whose effects depend on duration, then situation calculus in its intended
form cannot be used at all.
