Section 8.6.

Summary 263

 

89 Construct a representation for exchange rates between currencies that allows fluctuations
on a daily basis.

810 In this chapter, we sketched some of the properties of buying events. Provide a formal
logical description of buying using event calculus

8.11 Describe the event of trading something for something else. Describe buying as a kind of
trading where one of the objects is a sum of money.

812 The exercises on buying and trading used a fairly primitive notion of ownership. For
example, the buyer starts by owning the dollar bills. This picture begins to break down when, for
example, one's money is in the bank, because there is no longer any specific collection of dollar
bills that one owns. The picture is complicated still further by borrowing, leasing, renting, and
bailment. Investigate the various commonsense and legal concepts of ownership, and propose a
scheme by which they can be represented formally.

8.13 You are to create a system for advising computer science undergraduates on what courses
to take over an extended period in order to satisfy the program requirements. (Use whatever
requirements are appropriate for your institution.) First, decide on a vocabulary for representing
all the information, then represent it; then use an appropriate query to the system, that will return
a legal program ofstudy as a solution. You should allow for some tailoring to individual students,
in that your system should ask the student what courses or equivalents he has already taken, and
not generate programs that repeat those courses.

Suggest ways in which your system could be improved, for example to take into account
knowledge about student preferences, workload, good and bad instructors, and so on. For each
kind of knowledge, explain how it could be expressed logically. Could your system easily
incorporate this information to find the best program of study for a student?

8.14 Figure 8.2 shows the top levels ofa hierarchy for everything. Extend it to include as many
real categories as possible. A good way to do this is to cover all the things in your everyday life.
This includes objects and events. Start with waking up, proceed in an orderly fashion noting
everything that you see, touch, do, and think about. For example, a random sampling produces
music, news, milk, walking, driving, gas, Soda Hall, carpet, talking, Professor Fateman, chicken
curry, tongue, $4, sun, the daily newspaper, and so on.

You should produce both a single hierarchy chart (large sheet of paper) and a listing of
objects and categories with one or more relations satisfied by members of each category. Every
object should be in a category, and every category should be incorporated in the hierarchy.

815 (Adapted from an example by Doug Lenat.) Your mission is to capture, in logical form,
enough knowledge to answer a series of questions about the following simple sentence:

Yesterday John went to the North Berkeley Safeway and bought two pounds of
tomatoes and a pound of ground beef.

Start by trying to represent its content as a series of assertions. You should write sentences that
have straightforward logical structure (¢.g., statements that objects have certain properties; that
objects are related in certain ways; that all objects satisfying one property satisfy another). The
following may help you get started:

 
