28 Chapter 1. Introduction

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Daniel Crevier's (1993) Artificial Intelligence gives a complete history of the field, and Raymond
Kurzweil’s (1990) Age of Intelligent Machines situates AI in the broader context of computer
science and intellectual history in general. Dianne Martin (1993) documents the degree to which
early computers were endowed by the media with mythical powers of intelligence

The methodological status of artificial intelligence is discussed in The Sciences of the Ar-
tificial, by Herb Simon (1981), which discusses research areas concerned with complex artifacts.
It explains how AI can be viewed as both science and mathematics.

Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, by John Haugeland (1985) gives a readable account of
the philosophical and practical problems of AI. Cognitive science is well-described by Johnson-
Laird's The Computer and the Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science. Baker (1989)
covers the syntactic part of modern linguistics, and Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet (1990) cover
semantics. Alien (1995) covers linguistics from the AI point of view.

Early AI work is covered in Feigenbaum and Feldman's Computers and Thought, Minsky's
Semantic Information Processing, and the Machine Intelligence series edited by Donald Michie
A large number of influential papers are collected in Readings in Artificial Intelligence (Webber
and Nilsson, 1981). Early papers on neural networks are collected in Neurocomputing (Anderson
and Rosenfeld, 1988). The Encyclopedia of AXShapiro, 1992) contains survey articles on almost
every topic in AI. These articles usually provide a good entry point into the research literature on
each topic. The four-volume Handbook of Artificial Intelligence (Barr and Feigenbaum, 1981)
contains descriptions of almost every major AI system published before 1981.

The most recent work appears in the proceedings of the major AI conferences: the biennial
International Joint Conference on AI (IJCAT), and the annual National Conference on AI, more
often known as AAAI, after its sponsoring organization. The major journals for general AI are
Artificial Intelligence, Computational Intelligence, the IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, and the electronic Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research. There
are also many journals devoted to specific areas, which we cover in the appropriate chapters
Commercial products are covered in the magazines AJ Expert and PC AI. The main professional
societies for AI are the American Association for Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), the ACM Special
Interest Group in Artificial Intelligence (SIGART), and the Society for Artificial Intelligence and
Simulation of Behaviour (AISB), AAAI’s A/ Magazine and the SIGART Bulletin contain many
topical and tutorial articles as well as announcements of conferences and workshops

 

 

EXERCISES

These exercises are intended to stimulate discussion, and some might be set as term projects.
Alternatively, preliminary attempts can be made now, and these attempts can be reviewed after
completing the book.

11 Read Turing’s original paper on AI (Turing, 1950). In the paper, he discusses several
potential objections to his proposed enterprise and his test for intelligence. Which objections

 
