136 ceurrer rive Basic Computer Organization and Design

hardwired control

microprogrammed
control

control unit

timing signals

a control signal. The control signals are generated in the control unit and
provide controlinputs for the multiplexers in the common bus, control inputs
in processor registers, and microoperations for the accumulator.

There are two major types of control organization: hardwired control and
microprogrammed control. In the hardwired organization, the control logic is
implemented with gates, flip-flops, decoders, and other digital circuits. It has
the advantage that it can be optimized to produce a fast mode of operation.
In the microprogrammed organization, the control information is stored in a
control memory. The control memory is programmed to initiate the required
sequence of microoperations. A hardwired control, as the name implies, re-
quires changes in the wiring among the various components if the design has
to be modified or changed. In the microprogrammed control, any required
changes or modifications can be done by updating the microprogram in control
memory. A hardwired control for the basic computer is presented in this
section. A microprogrammed control unit for a similar computer is presented
in Chap. 7.

The block diagram of the control unit is shown in Fig, 5-6. It consists of
two decoders, a sequence counter, and a number of control logic gates. An
instruction read from memory is placed in the instruction register (IR). The
position of this register in the common bus system is indicated in Fig. 5-4. The
instruction register is shown again in Fig. 5-6, where it is divided into three
parts: the Ibit, the operation code, and bits 0 through 11. The operation code
in bits 12 through 14 are decoded with a 3 x 8 decoder. The eight outputs of
the decoder are designated by the symbols Dy through D;. The subscripted
decimal number is equivalent to the binary value of the corresponding opera-
tion code. Bit 15 of the instruction is transferred to a flip-flop designated by the
symbol I. Bits 0 through 11 are applied to the control logic gates. The 4-bit
sequence counter can count in binary from 0 through 15. The outputs of the
counter are decoded into 16 timing signals T, through Ts The internal logic
of the control gates will be derived later when we consider the design of the
computer in detail.

The sequence counter SC can be incremented or cleared synchronously
(see the counter of Fig. 2-11). Most of the time, the counter is incremented to
provide the sequence of timing signals out of the 4 x 16 decoder. Once in
awhile, the counter is cleared to 0, causing the next active timing signal to be
Tp. Asan example, consider the case where SCis incremented to provide timing
signals To, T,, Tz,Ts, and, insequence. At time T,, SCis cleared to Oif decoder
output Dj is active. This is expressed symbolically by the statement

 

DT~ SC —0

The timing diagram of Fig. 5-7 shows the time relationship of the control
signals, The sequence counter SC responds to the positive transition of the
lock. Initially, the CLR input of SC is active. The first positive transition of the
