238

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

Thus, And(p,q) is the category of composite “p-q-events,” where a p-q-event is an event in which
both ap and ag occur. If you think ofa p-event as a piece of "videotape" of ap happening, and
a q-event as a "videotape" of a g happening, then the p-q-event is like having the two pieces of.
tape spliced together in parallel (see Figure 8.4(a)).

 

 

- e ~ ~« e ~

P 2 oe

4 eeees Sk See
) ©

 

 

 

Figure 8.4 A depiction of complex events. (a) T(pA q, e) (b) Tipvqe) (0) TipV g, &)

 

 

 

Once a method for conjoining event categories is defined, it is convenient to extend the
syntax to allow regular infix connective symbols to be used in place of the function name:

Tip Nq.e) TiAnd(p,q).e Tp, e) AT(q, &

This is fine as long as you remember that in T(pA q, 5), the expression p A q is aterm denoting a
category of events, not a sentence

One might think that we can just go ahead and define similar functions for disjunctive
and negated events. In fact, because the T predicate is essentially a conjunction (over all the
subintervals of the interval in question), it can interact in two different ways with disjunction and
negation. For example, consider the English sentence "One ofthe two shops was open all day on
Sunday." This could mean, "Either the first shop was open all day on Sunday, or the second shop
was open all day on Sunday" (Figure 8.4(b)), or it could mean, "At any given time on Sunday, at
least one of the two shops was open" (Figure 8.4(c)). Both of these meanings are useful sorts of
things to say, so we will need a concise representation for each. There are no accepted notations
in this case, so we will make some up. Let V be used for the first kind of disjunctive event, and
V be used for the second. For the first, we have the following definition:

T(p¥q.e) <> T(p,e) V T(q.e)

We leave the second as an exercise, along with the definitions for negated events.

Times, intervals, and actions

In this section, we flesh out the vocabulary of time intervals. Because it is a limited domain, we
can be more complete in deciding on a vocabulary and encoding general rules. Time intervals
are partitioned into moments and extended intervals. The distinction is that only moments have §
zero duratio

 

Partition'{Moments, Extendedintervats} Intervals)
Vi i€Intervals = ( G Moments < Duration(i\=0)

Now we invent a time scale and associate points on that scale with moments, giving us absolute
times. The time scale is arbitrary; we will measure it in seconds and say that the moment at
