12.2 File-System Implementation 413

to take. The details of device drivers and the I/O infrastructure are covered in
Chapter 13.

The basic file system needs only to issue generic commands to the appro-
priate device driver to read and write physical blocks on the disk. Each physical
block is identified by its numeric disk address (for example, drive 1, cylinder
73, track 2, sector 10).

The file-organization module knows about files and their logical blocks,
as well as physical blocks. By knowing the type of file allocation used and
the location of the file, the file-organization module can translate logical block
addresses to physical block addresses for the basic file system to transfer. Each
file’s logical blocks are numbered from 0 (or 1) through N, whereas the physical
blocks containing the data usually do not match the logical numbers, so a
translation is needed to locate each block. The file-organization module also
includes the free-space manager, which tracks unallocated blocks and provides
these blocks to the file-organization module when requested.

Finally, the logical file system manages metadata information. Metadata
includes all of the file-system structure, excluding the actual data (or contents of
the files). The logical file system manages the directory structure to provide
the file-organization module with the information the latter needs, given a
symbolic file name. It maintains file structure via file control blocks. A file
control block (FCB) contains information about the file, including ownership,
permissions, and location of the file contents. The logical file system is also
responsible for protection and security, as was discussed in Chapter 11 and will
be further discussed in Chapter 18.

Many implemented file systems currently exist. Most operating systems
support more than one file system. For example, most CD-ROMs are written
in the High Sierra format, which is a standard format agreed upon by CD-ROM
manufacturers. Without such a standard, there would be little or no interoper-
ability between systems trying to use CD-ROMs. Aside from removable media
file systems, each operating system has one (or more) disk-based file system.
UNIX uses the UNIX file system (UFS) as a base. Windows NT supports disk
file-system formats of FAT, FAT32 and NTFS (or Windows NT File System), as
well as CD-ROM, DVD, and floppy-disk file-system formats. By using a layered
structure for file-system implementation, duplication of code is minimized. The
1/0 control and sometimes the basic file system code can be used by multiple
file systems. Each file system may then have its own logical file system and
file-organization modules.

12.2 = File-System Implementation

As was described in Section 11.1.2, operating systems implement open and
close systems calls for processes to request access to file contents. In this
