352 Chapter 10 Virtual Memory

several localities. In the extreme, if A is infinite, the working set is the set of
pages touched during the process execution.

The most important property of the working set is its size. If we compute
the working-set size, WSS;, for each process in the system, we can then consider

D=> WSs,

where D is the total demand for frames. Each process is actively using the pages
in its working set. Thus, process i needs WSS; frames. If the total demand is
greater than the total number of available frames (D > m), thrashing will occur,
because some processes will not have enough frames.

Use of the working-set model is then simple. The operating system mon-
itors the working set of each process and allocates to that working set enough
frames to provide it with its working-set size. If there are enough extra frames,
another process can be initiated. If the sum of the working-set sizes increases,
exceeding the total number of available frames, the operating system selects
a process to suspend. The process’ pages are written out and its frames are
reallocated to other processes. The suspended process can be restarted later.

This working-set strategy prevents thrashing while keeping the degree of
multiprogramming as high as possible. Thus, it optimizes CPU utilization.

The difficulty with the working-set model is keeping track of the working
set. The working-set window is a moving window. At each memory reference,
a new reference appears at one end and the oldest reference drops off the other
end. A page is in the working set if it is referenced anywhere in the working-set
window. We can approximate the working-set model with a fixed interval timer
interrupt and a reference bit.

For example, assume A is 10,000 references and we can cause a timer
interrupt every 5,000 references. When we get a timer interrupt, we copy and
clear the reference-bit values for each page. Thus, if a page fault occurs, we can
examine the current reference bit and 2 in-memory bits to determine whether a
page was used within the last 10,000 to 15,000 references. If it was used, at least
1 of these bits will be on. If it has not been used, these bits will be off. Those
pages with at least 1 bit on will be considered to be in the working set. Note that
this arrangement is not entirely accurate, because we cannot tell where, within
an interval of 5,000, a reference occurred. We can reduce the uncertainty by
increasing the number of our history bits and the frequency of interrupts (for
example, 10 bits and interrupts every 1,000 references). However, the cost to
service these more frequent interrupts will be correspondingly higher.

10.6.3 Page-Fault Frequency

The working-set model is successful, and knowledge of the working set can
be useful for prepaging (Section 10.8.1), but it seems a clumsy way to control
thrashing. A strategy that uses the page-fault frequency (PFF) takes a more
direct approach.
