242 carter eiGHT Central Processing Unit

bus system

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Antheetic
Ly logic uit
ALU)

 

 

 

 

Figure 81 Major components of CPU.

a task that in large part involves choosing the hardware for implementing the
machine instructions. The user who programs the computer in machine or
assembly language must be aware of the register set, the memory structure,
the type of data supported by the instructions, and the function that each
instruction performs.

Design examples of simple CPUs are carried out in Chaps. 5 and 7. This
chapter describes the organization and architecture of the CPU with an empha-
sis on the user’s view of the computer. We briefly describe how the registers
communicate with the ALU through buses and explain the operation of the
memory stack. We then present the type of instruction formats available, the
addressing modes used toretrieve data from memory, and typical instructions
commonly incorporated in computers. The last section presents the concept of
reduced instruction set computer (RISC).

8-2 General Register Organization

In the programming examples of Chap. 6, we have shown that memory
locations are needed for storing pointers, counters, return addresses, tempo-
rary results, and partial products during multiplication Having to refer to
memory locations for such applications is time consuming because memory
access is the most time-consuming operation in, a computer. St is more conve-
nient and more efficient to store these intermediate values in processor regis-
ters. When a large number of registers are included in the CPU, it is most
efficientto connect them through a common bus sy stem. The registers commu-
nicate with eachothernotonly for direct data transfers, butalso while perform-
ing various microoperations. Hence it is necessary to provide a common unit
that can perform all the arithmetic, logic, and shift microoperations in the
processor.

‘A bus organization for seven CPU registers is shown in Fig. 8-2. The
output of each register is connected to two multiplexers (MUX) to form the two
buses 4 and B. The selection lines in each multiplexer select one register or the
input data for the particular bus. The A and B buses form the inputs to a
