22 CHAPTER ONE Digital Logic Circuits

» Sox s
: ’ FA
ct

@) Logic diagram () Block diagram
Figure 1-18 Full-adder circuit.

 

1-6 Flip-Flops

The digital circuits considered thus far have been combinational, where the
outputsat any giventime are entirely dependent on the inputs that are present
at that time. Although every digital system is likely to have a combinational
Gircuit, most systems encountered in practice also include storage elements,
which require that the system be describedin terms of sequential circuits. The
‘most common type of sequential circuit is the synchronous type. Synchronous
sequential circuits employ signals that affect the storage elements only at
discrete instants of time. Synchronization is achieved by a timing device called
a clock pulse generator that produces a periodic train of clock pulses. The clock
pulses are distributed throughout the system in such a way that storage
elements are affected only with the arrival of the synchronization pulse.
Clocked synchronous sequential circuits are the type most frequently encoun-
tered in practice. They seldom manifest instability problems and their timing
is easily broken down into independent discrete steps, each of which may be
considered separately.

clocked sequential The storage elements employed in clocked sequential circuits are called

circuit flip-flops. A flip-flop is a binary cell capable of storing one bit of information.
Ithastwo outputs, one for thenormal value and one for the complement value
of the bit stored in it. A flip-flop maintains a binary state until directed by a
lock pulse to switch states. The difference among various types of flip-flops
isin the number of inputs they possess and in the manner in which the inputs
affect the binary state. The mast common types of flip-flops are presented
below.

 

SR Flip-Flop

The graphic symbol of the SR flip-flop is shown in Fig. 1-19(a). It has three
inputs, labeled S (for set), R (for reset), and C (for clock). It has an output Q
and sometimes the flip-flop has a complemented output, which is indicated
with a small circle at the other output terminal. There is an arrowhead-shaped
symbol in front of the letter C to designate a dynamic input. The dynamic
