SECTION 8.5 Addressing Modes. 263

type instruction. It is the address where control branches in response to a
branch-type instruction. We have already defined two addressing modes in
Chap. 5. They are summarized here for reference.

Direct Address Mode: In this mode the effective address is equal to the
address part of the instruction. The operand resides in memory and its address
is given directly by the address field of the instruction. In a branch-type
instruction the address field specifies the actual branch address.

Indirect Address Mode: In this mode the address field of the instruction
gives the address where the effective address is stored in memory. Control
fetches the instruction from memory and uses its address part to access mem-
ory again to read the effective address. The indirect address mode is also
explained in Sec. 5-1 in conjunction with Fig. 5-2

‘A fewaddressing modes require that the address field of the instruction
be added to the content ofa specific register in the CPU. The effective address
in these modes is obtained from the following computation:

effective address = address part of instruction + content of CPU register

‘The CPU register used in the computation may be the program counter, an
index register, or a base register. In either case we have a different addressing
mode which is used for a different application.

Relative Address Mode: _In this mode the content of the program counter is
added to the address part of the instruction in order to obtain the effective
address. The address part of the instruction is usually a signed number (in 2's
complement representation) which can be either positive or negative. When
this number is added to the content of the program counter, the result pro-
duces an effective address whose position in memory isrelative to the address
of the next instruction. To clarify with an example, assume that the program
counter contains the number 825 and the address part of the instruction
contains the number 24. The instruction at location 825 is read from memory
during the fetch phase and the program counter is then incremented by one
to 826. The effective address computation for the relative address mode is
826 + 24 = 850. This is 24 memory locations forward from the address of the
next instruction. Relative addressing is often used with branch-type instruc-
tions when the branch address is in the area surrounding the instruction word
itself. It results in a shorter address field in the instruction format since the
relative address can be specified with a smaller number of bits compared to the
number of bits required to designate the entire memory address.

Indexed Addressing Mode: _In this mode the content of an index registeris
added to the address part of the instruction to obtain the effective address. The
