262 cuarrer e1oHT Central Processing Unit

effective address

Zero-address instructions in a stack-organized computer are implied-mode
instructions since the operands are implied to be on top of the stack.

Immediate Mode: In this mode the operand is specified in the instruction
itself. In other words, an immediate-mode instruction has an operand field
rather than an address field. The operand field contains the actual operand to
be used in conjunction with the operation specified in the instruction. Imme-
diate-mode instructions are useful for initializing registers to a constant value.

It was mentioned previously that the address field of an instruction may
specify either a memory word or a processor register. When the address field
specifiesa processor register, the instruction is said to be in the register mode.

 

Register Mode: Inthismode the operands are in registers that reside within
the CPU. The particular register is selected from a register field in the instruc-
tion. A k-bit field can specify any one of 2* registers.

Register Indirect Mode: _In this mode the instruction specifiesa registerin the
CPU whose contents give the address of the operand in memory. In other
words, the selected register contains the address of the operand rather than
the operand itself. Before using a register indirect mode instruction, the pro-
grammer must ensure that the memory address of the operand is placed in the
Processor register with a previous instruction. A reference to the register is
then equivalent to specifying a memory address. The advantage of a register
indirect mode instruction is that the address field of the instruction uses fewer
bits to select a register than would have been required to specify a memory
address directly.

Autoincrement or Autodecrement Mode: This is similar to the register in-
direct mode except that the register is incremented or decremented after (or
before) its value is used to access memory. When the address stored in the
register refers to a table of data in memory, it is necessary to increment or
decrement the register after every access to the table. This can be achieved by
using the increment or decrement instruction. However, because it is such a
common requirement, some computers incorporate a special mode that auto-
matically increments or decrements the content of the register after data access.

The address field of an instruction is used by the control unit in the CPU
toobtainthe operand from memory. Sometimes the value givenin the address
field is the address of the operand, but sometimes it is just an address from
which the address of the operand is calculated. To differentiate among the
various addressing modes it is necessary to distinguish between the address
part of the instruction and the effective address used by the control when
executing the instruction. The effective address is defined to be the memory
address obtained from the computation dictated by the given addressing
mode. The effective address is the address of the operand in a computational-
