48 Chapter 2 Computer-System Structures

with its execution from the point at which it left off (when its previous time slice
ran out).

Another use of the timer is to compute the current time. A timer interrupt
signals the passage of some period, allowing the operating system to compute
the current time in reference to some initial time. If we have interrupts every
1 second, and we have had 1427 interrupts since we were told that it was 1:00
PM., then we can compute that the current time is 1:23:47 PM. Some computers
determine the current time in this manner, but the calculations must be done
carefully for the time to be kept accurately, since the interrupt-processing time
(and other times when interrupts are disabled) tends to cause the software clock
to slow down. Most computers have a separate hardware time-of-day clock that
is independent of the operating system.

2.6 = Network Structure

There are basically two types of networks: local-area networks (LAN) and
wide-area networks (WAN). The main difference between the two is the way in
which they are geographically distributed. Local-area networks are composed
of processors that are distributed over small geographical areas (such as a single
building or a number of adjacent buildings). Wide-area networks, on the other
hand, are composed of a number of autonomous processors that are distributed
over a large geographical area (such as the United States). These differences
imply major variations in the speed and reliability of the communications
network, and they are reflected in the distributed operating-system design.

2.6.1 Local-Area Networks

Local-area networks emerged in the early 1970s, as a substitute for large main-
frame computer systems. For many enterprises, it is more economical to have
a number of small computers, each with its own self-contained applications,
rather than a single large system. Because each small computer is likely to
need a full complement of peripheral devices (such as disks and printers), and
because some form of data sharing is likely to occur in a single enterprise, it
was a natural step to connect these small systems into a network.

LANs are usually designed to cover a small geographical area (such as a
single building, or a few adjacent buildings) and are generally used in an office
environment. All the sites in such systems are close to one another, so the
communication links tend to have a higher speed and lower error rate than
do their counterparts in wide-area networks. High-quality (expensive) cables
are needed to attain this higher speed and reliability. It is also possible to use
the cable exclusively for data network traffic. Over longer distances, the cost of
using high-quality cable is enormous, and the exclusive use of the cable tends
to be prohibitive.
