134 © cuarrer ive Basic Computer Organization and Design

hexadecimal code

programmers and users. The hexadecimal code is equal to the equivalent hexa-
decimal number of the binary code used for the instruction. By using the
hexadecimal equivalent we reduced the 16 bitsof an instruction code to four digits
with each hexadecimal digit being equivalent to four bits. A memory-reference
instruction has an address part of 12 bits. The address part is denoted by three
x's and stand for the three hexadecimal digits corresponding to the 12-bit address.
The hast bit of the instruction is designated by the symbol J. When I = 0, the last
fourbits of an instruction havea hexadecimaldigitequivalentfrom 0 to 6 since
the last bit is 0. When I = 1, the hexadecimal digit equivalent of the last four
bits of the instruction ranges from 8 to E since the last bit is 1

ter-reference instructions use 16 bits to specify an operation. The
leftmost four bits are always 0111, which is equivalent to hexadecimal 7. The
other three hexadecimal digits give the binary equivalent of the remaining 12
bits. The input-output instructions also use all 16 bits to specify an operation.
The last four bits are always 1111, equivalent to hexadecimal F.

 

 

Instruction Set Completeness

Before investigating the operations performed by the instructions, let us dis-
cuss the type of instructions that must be included in a computer. A computer
should have a set of instructions so that the user can construct machine
language programs to evaluate any function that is known to be computable.
The set of instructions are said to be complete if the computer includes a
sufficient number of instructions in each of the following categories:

1. Arithmetic, logical, and shift instructions

2. Instructions for moving information to and from memory and processor
registers

3. Program control instructions together with instructions that check
status conditions

4. Input and output instructions

Arithmetic, logical, and shift instructions provide computational capabil-
ities for processing the type of data that the user may wish toemploy. The bulk
of the binary information in a digital computer is stored in memory, but all
computations are done in processor registers. Therefore, the user must have
the capability of moving information between these two units Decision-
making capabilities are an important aspect of digital computers. For example,
two numbers can be compared, and if the first is greater than the second, it
may be necessary to proceed differently than if the second is greater than the
first. Program control instructions such as branch instructions are used to
change the sequence in which the program is executed. Input and output
instructions are needed for communication between the computer and the
