Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

Complete description of the shopping simulation

We start by giving a PAGE (percepts, actions, goals, and environment) description of the shopping }
simulation. First the percepts:

1, The agent receives three percepts at each time step: feel, sound, and vision.

2. The feel percept is just a bump or no bump, as in the vacuum world. The agent perceives
a bump only when on the previous time step it executed a Forward action and there is not
enough room in the location it tried to move to.

3. The sound percept is a list of spoken words. The agent perceives words spoken by agents
within two squares of it.

4. Ifthe agent's camera is zoomed in, it perceives detailed visual images ofeach object in the

square it is zoomed at

If the agent's camera is not zoomed in, it perceives coarse visual images of each object in

the three squares directly and diagonally ahead.

6. A visual percept consists of a relative location, approximate size, color, shape, and possibly
some other features. It will be explained in detail later.

wn

Now for the actions:

1. An agent can speak a string of words.

iS)

An agent can go one square forward.

An agent can turn 90° to the right or left.

An agent can zoom its camera in at its current square, or at any of the three squares directly

or diagonally ahead.
. An agent can also zoom its camera out.

An agent can grab an object that is within one square of it. To do so, it needs to specify

the relative coordinates ofthe object, and it needs to be empty-handed. ]
7. An agent can release an object that it has grabbed. To do so, it needs to specify the relative
coordinates of the point where it wants to release the object.

Aw

Dun

The agent's goal initially will be to buy all the items on a shopping list. This goal can be modified
if some items are unavailable or too expensive. The agent should also try to do the shopping
quickly, and avoid bumping into things. A more ambitious problem is to give the agent the goal
of making dinner, and let it compose the shopping list.

The environment is the interior of a store, along with all the objects and people in it. As }
in the vacuum and wumpus worlds, the store is represented by a grid of squares, with aisles
separating rows of display cases. At one end of the store are the checkout stands and their
attendant clerks. Other customers and store employees may be anywhere in the store. The agent
begins at the entrance, and must leave the store from the same square. There is an EXIT sign there
in case the agent forgets. There are also signs marking the aisles, and smaller signs (readable
only when the camera zooms in) marking some (but not necessarily all) ofthe items for sale.

Areal agent would have to decipher the video signals from the camera (or some digitization
of them). We assume that this work has already been done. Still, the vision component of a
percept is a complex list of descriptions. The first component of each description is its relative

 
