122 Chapter 4 Processes

One issue that must be dealt with concerns differences in data representa-
tion on the client and server machines. Consider the representation of 32-bit
integers. Some systems use the high memory address to store the most signif-
icant byte (known as big-endian), while other systems store the least significant
byte at the high memory address (known as litle-endian). To resolve this, many
RPC systems define a machine-independent representation of data. One such
representation is known as external data representation (XDR). On the client
side, parameter marshalling involves converting the machine-dependent data
into XDR before being sent to the server. On the server side, the XDR data is
unmarshalled and converted into the machine-dependent representation for the
server.

The RPC mechanism is common on networked systems, so we should
discuss several other issues in regard to its operation. One important issue is
the semantics of a call. Whereas local procedure calls fail only under extreme
circumstances, RPCs can fail, or be duplicated and executed more than once,
due to common network errors. Because we are dealing with message transfer
over unreliable communication links, it is much easier for an operating system
to ensure that a message was acted on at most once, than it is to ensure that the
message was acted on exactly once. Because local procedure calls have the latter
meaning, most systems attempt to duplicate that functionality. They do so by
attaching to each message a timestamp. The server must keep a history of all
the timestamps of messages it has already processed, or a history large enough
to ensure that repeated messages are detected. Incoming messages that have a
timestamp already in the history are ignored. Generation of these timestamps
is discussed in Section 17.1.

Another important issue concerns the communication between a server
and a client. With standard procedure calls, some form of binding takes
place during link, load, or execution time (Chapter 9), such that a procedure
call’s name is replaced by the memory address of the procedure call. The
RPC scheme requires a similar binding of the client and the server port, but
how does a client know the port numbers on the server? Neither system
has full information about the other because they do not share memory. Two
approaches are common. First, the binding information may be predetermined,
in the form of fixed port addresses. At compile time, an RPC call has a fixed
port number associated with it. Once a program is compiled, the server cannot
change the port number of the requested service. Second, binding can be
done dynamically by a rendezvous mechanism. Typically, an operating system
provides a rendezvous (also called a matchmaker) daemon on a fixed RPC
port. A client then sends a message, containing the name of the RPC, to the
rendezvous daemon requesting the port address of the RPC it needs to execute.
The port number is returned, and the RPC calls may be sent to that port until
the process terminates (or the server crashes). This method requires the extra
overhead of the initial request, but is more flexible than the first approach.
Figure 4.12 shows a sample interaction.
