390 Chapter 11 File-System Interface

 

root | dict | spell

 

 

 

 

 

 

list

 

list

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 11.9 Acyclic-graph directory structure.

their own directories. The common subdirectory should be shared. A shared
directory or file will exist in the file system in two (or more) places at once.

A tree structure prohibits the sharing of files or directories. An acyclic
graph allows directories to have shared subdirectories and files (Figure 11.9).
The same file or subdirectory may be in two different directories. An acyclic
graph, that is, a graph with no cycles, is a natural generalization of the tree-
structured directory scheme.

A shared file (or directory) is not the same as two copies of the file. With
two copies, each programmer can view the copy rather than the original, but
if one programmer changes the file, the changes will not appear in the other’s
copy. With a shared file, only one actual file exists, so any changes made by one
person are immediately visible to the other. Sharing is particularly important
for subdirectories; a new file created by one person will automatically appear
in all the shared subdirectories.

When people are working as a team, all the files they want to share may
be put into one directory. The UFDs of all the team members would each
contain this directory of shared files as a subdirectory. Even when there is a
single user, his file organization may require that some files be put into different
subdirectories. For example, a program written for a particular project should
be both in the directory of all programs and in the directory for that project.

Shared files and subdirectories can be implemented in several ways. A
common way, exemplified by many of the UNIX systems, is to create a new
directory entry called a link. A link is effectively a pointer to another file or
subdirectory. For example, a link may be implemented as an absolute or relative
path name. When a reference to a file is made, we search the directory. If the
