Section 8.5,

The Grocery Shopping World 253

 

aa

Most of the navigation problem is the same as in the vacuum or wumpus world. The agent
needs to remember where it started, and can compute its current location from the movements it
has made where it is now. The supermarket is not as hostile as the wumpus world so it is safer
to explore, but an agent can find better routes if it knows that supermarkets are generally laid
out in aisles. Supermarkets also provide aisle numbers, unlike the wumpus world, so that the
agent does not need to rely on dead reckoning. On the second trip to a store, it can save a lot of
wandering by remembering where things are. It is not helpful, however, to remember the exact
location of each individual item, because the tomato that is at location [x,y] today will probably
be gone tomorrow. Because much of the logic is the same as for the wumpus world, it will not
be repeated here.

A typical navigation problem is to locate the tomatoes. The following strategy is usually
believed to work:

1. Ifthe agent knows the location of the tomatoes from a previous visit, calculate a path to
that spot from the current location.

2. Otherwise, ifthe location of the vegetable aisle is known, plan a path there

3. Otherwise, move along the front of the store until a sign for the vegetable aisle is spotted.

4. Ifnone ofthese work, wander about and find someone to ask where the tomatoes are. (This
is covered in the "Communicating" section.)

5. Once the vegetable aisle is found, move down the aisle with the camera zoomed out,
looking for something red. When spotted, zoom in to see ifthey are in fact tomatoes. (This
is covered in the "Gathering" section.)

Gathering

Once in the right aisle, the agent still needs to find the items on its list. This is done by matching
the visual percepts against the expected percepts from each category of objects. In the wumpus
world, this kind of perception is trivial—a breeze signals a pit and a stench signals a wumpus
But in the grocery shopping world, there are thousands of different kinds of objects and many of
them (such as tomatoes and apples) present similar percepts. The agent never can be sure that it
has classified an object correctly based on its percepts, but it can know when it has made a good
guess. The shopping agent can use the following classification rules:

1. If only one known category matches a percept, assume the object is a member of that
category. (This may lead to an error when an unknown object is sighted.)

2. Ifa percept matches several categories, but there is a sign nearby that identifies one of
them, assume the object is a member of that category.

3. If there is an aisle sign that identifies one category (or one supercategory), assume the
object is of that category. For example, we could categorize a round, red percept as a
tomato rather than an apple ifwe were in an aisle marked "Vegetables" and not "Fruit." At
a cricket match, it would be something else altogether.
