118 Chapter 4 Processes

host X
(146.86.5.20)

    
 

web server
(161.25.19.8)

Figure 4.9 Communication using sockets.

All connections must be unique. Therefore, if another process also on host
X wished to establish another connection with the same web server, it would be
assigned a port number greater than 1024 and not equal to 1625. This ensures
that all connections consist of a unique pair of sockets.

Although most program examples in this text use C, we will illustrate
sockets using Java as it provides a much easier interface to sockets and has a
rich library for networking utilities. Those interested in socket programming in
C or C++ should consult the Bibliographical Notes.

Java provides three different types of sockets. Connection-oriented (TCP)
sockets are implemented with the Socket class. Connectionless (UDP) sockets
use the DatagramSocket class. A third type is the MulticastSocket class, which
is a subclass of the DatagramSocket class. A multicast socket allows data to
be sent to multiple recipients.

As an example of Java-based sockets, we now present a Java class that
implements a time-of-day server. The operation allows clients to request the
time of day from the server. The server listens to port 5155, although the
port could be any arbitrary number greater than 1024. When a connection is
received, the server returns the time of day to the client.

The time-of-day server is shown in Figure 4.10. The server creates a
ServerSocket that specifies it will listen to port 5155. It then begins listening
to the port with the accept method. The server blocks on the accept method
waiting for a client to request a connection. When a connection request is
received, accept returns a socket that the server can use to communicate with
the client.

The details illustrating how the server communicates with the socket are
as follows. The server first establishes a PrintWriter object that it will use to
communicate with the client. A PrintWriter object allows the server to write
to the socket using the normal print and print1n methods for output. The
