254 — cuarrersicHT Central Processing Unit

stack operations

The procedure consists of first converting the arithmetic expression into
its equivalent reverse Polish notation The operands are pushed into the stack
in the order in which they appear. The initiation of an operation depends on
whether we havea calculator or a computer. Ina calculator, the operators are
entered through the keyboard. In a computer, they must be initiated by
instructions that contain an operation field (no address field is required). The
following microoperations are executed with the stack when an operation is,
entered in a calculator or issued by the control in a computer: (1) the two
topmost operands in the stack are used for the operation, and (2) the stack is
popped and the result of the operationreplaces the lower operand. By pushing
the operands into the stack continuously and performing the operations as,
defined above, the expression is evaluated in the proper order and the final
result remains on top of the stack.

The following numerical example may clarify this procedure. Consider
the arithmetic expression

 

 

 

(3*4) + 6*6)
In reverse Polish notation, it is expressed as
3455644

Now consider the stack operations shown in Fig, 8-5. Each box represents one
stack operation and the arrow always points to the top of the stack. Scanning
the expression from left to right, we encounter two operands. First the number
3 is pushed into the stack, then the number 4. The next symbol is the multi-
plication operator *. This causes a multiplication of the two topmost items in
the stack The stack is then popped and the product is placed on top of the
stack, replacing the two original operands. Next we encounter the two
operands 5 and 6, so they are pushed into the stack. The stack operation that
results from the next * replaces these two numbers by their product. The last
operation causes an arithmetic addition of the two topmost numbers in the
stack to produce the final result of 42

Scientific calculators that employ an internal stack require that the user
convert the arithmetic expressions into reverse Polish notation Computers
that use a stack-organized CPU provide a system program to perform the

 

 

Figure 8-5 Stack operations to evaluate 3+ 4+5 +6.

 

 

 

 

 

 

+b 3} +2} fz) fe] fe] +a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
