Section 8.6.

Summary 261

 

PSYCHOLOGICAL
REASONNG

EXERCISES

most complete attempt to capture commonsense reasoning about space appears in the work
of Emest Davis (1986; 1990). As with qualitative physics, it appears that an agent can go
a long way, so to speak, without resorting to a full metric representation. When such a
representation is necessary, techniques developed in robotics (Chapter 25) can be used.

0 Psychological reasoning: The development of a working psychology for artificial agents
to use in reasoning about themselves and other agents. This is often based on so-called
"folk psychology," the theory that humans in general are believed to use in reasoning
about themselves and other humans. When Al researchers provide their artificial agents
with psychological theories for reasoning about other agents, the theories are frequently
based on the researchers’ description of the logical agents’ own design. Also, this type
of psychological theorizing frequently takes place within the context of natural language
understanding, where divining the speaker's intentions is of paramount importance. For
this reason, the historical and bibliographical background for this topic has been relegated
to other chapters, especially Chapter 22.

The proceedings of the international conferences on Principles of Knowledge Represen-
tation and Reasoning provide the most up-to-date sources for work in this area. Readings in
Knowledge Representation (Brachman and Levesque, 1985) and Formal Theories ofthe Common-
sense World (Hobbs and Moore, 1985) are excellent anthologies on knowledge representation;
the former focuses more on historically important papers in representation languages and for-
malisms, the latter on the accumulation of the knowledge itself. Representations ofCommonsense
Knowledge (Davis, 1990) is a good recent textbook devoted specifically to knowledge represen-
tation rather than AI in general. Hughes and Cresswell (1968; 1984) and Chellas (1980) are
introductory texts on modal logic; 4 Manual ofIntensional Logic (van Benthem, 1985) provides
a useful survey of the field. The proceedings of the annual conference Theoretical Aspects of
Reasoning About Knowledge (TARK) contain many interesting papers from AI, distributed sys-
tems, and game theory. Rescher and Urquhart (1971) and van Benthem (1983) cover temporal
logic specifically. David Harel (1984) provides an introduction to dynamic logic.

81 Extend the vocabulary from Section 8.3 to define addition and an adder circuit.
82 Represent the following six sentences using the representations developed in the chapter.

a. Water is a liquid between 0 and 100 degrees.

b. Water boils at 100 degrees.

c. The water in John's water bottle is frozen.

d. Perrier is a kind of water.

e. John has Perrier in his water bottle.

f. All liquids have a freezing point. (Don't use HasFreezingPoint!)
