266 © cHarreR EIGHT Central Processing Unit

set of
basic operations

TABLE 8-4 Tabular List of Numerical Example

 

 

‘Addressing Effective Content

‘Mode ‘Address. of AC
Direct address 500 800
Immediate operand. 201 500
Indirect address 800 300
Relative address 702 325
Indexed address 600 900
Register = 400
Register indirect 400 700
Autoincrement 400 700
399 450

‘Autodecrement

8-6 Data Transfer and Manipulation

Computers provide an extensive set of instructions to give the user the flexi-
bility to carry out various computational tasks. The instruction set of different
computers differ from each other mostly in the way the operands are deter-
mined from the address and mode fields. The actual operations available in the
instruction set are not very different from one computer to another. It so
happens that the binary code assignments in the operation code field is differ-
ent in different computers, even for the same operation. It may also happen
that the symbolicnamegiven to instructions inthe assembly language notation
is differentin differentcomputers even or the same instruction Nevertheless,
there is a set of basic operations that most, if not all, computersinclude in their
instruction repertoire. The basic set of operations available in a typical com-
puter is the subject covered in this and the next section.
‘Most computer instructions can be classified into three categories:

1. Data transfer instructions
2. Data manipulation instructions
3. Program control instructions

Data transfer instructions cause transfer of data from one location to another
without changing the binary information content. Data manipulation instruc-
tions are those that perform arithmetic, logic, and shift operations. Program
control instructions provide decision-making capabilities and change the path
taken by the program when executed in the computer. The instruction set of
a particularcomputer determines the register transfer operations and control
decisions that are available to the user.
