36 Chapter 2 Computer-System Structures

set aside, and are mapped to the device registers. Reads and writes to these
memory addresses cause the data to be transferred to and from the device
registers. This method is appropriate for devices that have fast response times,
such as video controllers. In the IBM PC, each location on the screen is mapped
to a memory location. Displaying text on the screen is almost as easy as writing
the text into the appropriate memory-mapped locations.

Memory-mapped 1/0 is also convenient for other devices, such as the serial
and parallel ports used to connect modems and printers to a computer. The
CPU transfers data through these kinds of devices by reading and writing a few
device registers, called an I/O port. To send out a long string of bytes through a
memory-mapped serial port, the CPU writes one data byte to the data register,
then sets a bit in the control register to signal that the byte is available. The
device takes the data byte, and then clears the bit in the control register to signal
that it is ready for the next byte. Then, the CPU can transfer the next byte. If
the CPU uses polling to watch the control bit, constantly looping to see whether
the device is ready, this method of operation is called programmed I/O (PIO). If
the CPU does not poll the control bit, but instead receives an interrupt when the
device is ready for the next byte, the data transfer is said to be interrupt driven.

Registers that are built into the CPU are generally accessible within one
cycle of the CPU clock. Most CPUs can decode instructions and perform
simple operations on register contents at the rate of one or more operations
per clock tick. The same cannot be said of main memory, which is accessed
via a transaction on the memory bus. Memory access may take many cycles
of the CPU clock to complete, in which case the processor normally needs
to stall, since it does not have the data required to complete the instruction
that it is executing. This situation is intolerable because of the frequency of
memory accesses. The remedy is to add fast memory between the CPU and
main memory. A memory buffer used to accommodate a speed differential,
called a cache, is described in Section 2.4.1.

2.3.2 Magnetic Disks

Magnetic disks provide the bulk of secondary storage for modern computer
systems. Conceptually, disks are relatively simple (Figure 2.5). Each disk platter
has a flat circular shape, like a CD. Common platter diameters range from 1.8 to
5.25 inches. The two surfaces of a platter are covered with a magnetic material.
We store information by recording it magnetically on the platters.

A read-write head “flies” just above each surface of every platter. The
heads are attached to a disk arm, which moves all the heads as a unit. The sur-
face of a platter is logically divided into circular tracks, which are subdivided
into sectors. The set of tracks that are at one arm position forms a cylinder.
There may be thousands of concentric cylinders in a disk drive, and each track
may contain hundreds of sectors. The storage capacity of common disk drives
is measured in gigabytes.

 
