Section 8.5

The Grocery Shopping World 249

 

—

position with respect to the agent's position and orientation. For example, the relative position
[-2,1] is the square two squares to the agent's left and one square ahead. The second component
is the size of the object, given as the average diameter of the object in meters. Next is the color
of the object, given as a symbol (red, green, yellow, orange, ...), followed by the object's shape
(flat, round, square, ...). Finally, we assume that an optical character recognition routine has
run over the video image; if there: are any letters in the visual field, they are given as a list of
words. Figure 8.8 shows an overview of a supermarket, with the agent at [4,5] still dressed for the
wumpus world. The agent is facing left. Figure 8.9(a) shows what the agent perceives with the
camera Zoomed out, and Figure 8.9(b) shows the agent's visual percept with the camera zoomed
in at the square [3,6].

Organizing knowledge

The grocery shopping domain is too big to handle all at once. Instead, we will break it down
into smaller clusters of knowledge, work on each cluster separately, and then see how they fit
together. One good way of decomposing the domain into clusters is to consider the tasks facing
the agent. This is called a functional decomposition. We divide the domain into five clusters:

< Menu Planning: The agent will need to know how to modify the shopping list when the
store is out of stock of an item.

0 Navigating: As in the wumpus world, the agent will need to understand the effect of
movement actions and create an internal map of the world.

0 Gathering: The agent must be able to find and gather the items it wants. Part of this
involves inducing objects from percepts: the agent will need recognition rules to infer that
ared roughly spherical object about three inches in diameter could be a tomato.

0 Communicating: The agent should be able to ask questions when there is something it
cannot find out on its own.

0 Paying: Even a shy agent that prefers not to ask questions will need enough interagent
skills to be able to pay the checkout clerk. The agent will need to know that $5.00 is too
much for a single tomato, and that if the total price is $17.35, then it should receive $2.65
in change from a $20 bill

An advantage of functional decomposition is that we can pose a problem completely within a
cluster and see if the knowledge can solve it. Other kinds of decomposition often require the
whole knowledge base to be fleshed out before the first question can be posed.

Menu-Planning

A good cook can walk into a market, pick out the best bargain from the various fish, fowl, or
other main course ingredients that look fresh that day, select the perfect accompanying dishes,
and simultaneously figure out how to make tomorrow's meal from whatever will be left over. A
competent errand runner can take a shopping list and find all the items on it. Our agent will be
closer to the second of these, but we will give it some ability to make intelligent choices

Suppose the store is out of tomatoes one day. An agent with the shopping list "tomatoes,
lettuce, cucumber, olive oil, vinegar" should recognize that the ingredients form a salad, and that
