 

344 Chapter 10 Virtual Memory

As you might expect, neither MFU nor LEU replacement is common. The
implementation of these algorithms is expensive, and they do not approximate
OPT replacement well.

0.4.7 Page-Buffering Algorithm

Other procedures are often used in addition to a specific page-replacement
algorithm. For example, systems commonly keep a pool of free frames. When
a page fault occurs, a victim frame is chosen as before. However, the desired
page is read into a free frame from the pool before the victim is written out. This
procedure allows the process to restart as soon as possible, without waiting for
the victim page to be written out. When the victim is later written out, its frame
is added to the free-frame pool.

An expansion of this idea is to maintain a list of modified pages. Whenever

the paging device is idle, a modified page is selected and is written to the disk.
Its modify bit is then reset. This scheme increases the probability that a page
will be clean when it is selected for replacement, and will not need to be written
out.
‘Another modification is to keep a pool of free frames, but to remember
which page was in each frame. Since the frame contents are not modified when
a frame is written to the disk, the old page can be reused directly from the
free-frame pool if it is needed before that frame is reused. No I/O is needed in
this case. When a page fault occurs, we first check whether the desired page is
in the free-frame pool. If it is not, we must select a free frame and read into it.

This technique is used in the VAX/VMS system, with a FIFO replacement
algorithm. When the FIFO replacement algorithm mistakenly replaces a page
that is still in active use, that page is quickly retrieved from the free-frame
buffer, and no 1/O is necessary. The free-frame buffer provides protection
against the relatively poor, but simple, FIFO replacement algorithm. This
method is necessary because the early versions of the VAX did not implement
the reference bit correctly.

10.5 = Allocation of Frames

How do we allocate the fixed amount of free memory among the various
processes? If we have 93 free frames and two processes, how many frames
does each process get?

The simplest case of virtual memory is the single-user system. Consider a
single-user system with 128 KB memory composed of pages of size 1 KB. Thus,
there are 128 frames. The operating system may take 35 KB, leaving 93 frames
for the user process. Under pure demand paging, all 93 frames would initially
be put on the free-frame list. When a user process started execution, it would
generate a sequence of page faults. The first 93 page faults would all get free
