650 Let UsC

 

camps—the Windows world and the Linux world. Since its

humble beginning about a decade ago, Linux has steadily
drawn the attention of programmers across the globe and has
successfully created a community of its own. How big and
comunitted is this community is one of the hottest debates that is
raging in all parts of the world. You can look at the hot discussions
and the flame wars on this issue on numerous sites on the internet.
Before you decide to join the Windows or the Linux camp you
should first get familiar with both of them. The last 4 chapters
concentrated on Windows programming. This and the next one
would deal with Linux programming. Without any further
discussions let us now set out on the Linux voyage. I hope you
find the journey interesting and exciting.

T oday the programming world is divided into two major

What is Linux

Linux is a clone of the Unix operating system. Its kernel was
written from scratch by Linus Torvalds with assistance from a
loosely-knit team of programmers across the world on Internet. It
has all the features you would expect in a modern OS. Moreover,
unlike Windows or Unix, Linux is available completely free of
cost. The kernel of Linux is available in source code fom.
Anybody is free to change it to suit his requirement, with a
precondition that the changed kernel can be distributed only in the
source code form. Several programs, frameworks, utilities have
been built around the Linux kernel. A common user may not want
the headaches of downloading the kernel, going through the
complicated compilation process, then downloading the
frameworks, programs and utilities. Hence many organizations
have come forward to make this job easy. They distribute the
precompiled kernel, programs, utilities and frameworks on a
common media. Moreover, they also provide installation scripts
for easy installations of the Linux OS and applications. Some of
the popular distributions are RedHat, SUSE, Caldera, Debian,
Mandrake, Slackware, etc. Each of them contain the same kernel
