6.4 Multiple-Processor Scheduling 169

The definition of a multilevel feedback queue scheduler makes it the most
general CPU-scheduling algorithm. It can be configured to match a specific
system under design. Unfortunately, it also requires some means of selecting
values for all the parameters to define the best scheduler. Although a multilevel
feedback queue is the most general scheme, it is also the most complex.

6.4 = Multiple-Processor Scheduling

Our discussion thus far has focused on the problems of scheduling the CPU in
a system with a single processor. If multiple CPUs are available, the scheduling
problem is correspondingly more complex. Many possibilities have been tried,
and, as we saw with single-processor CPU scheduling, there is no one best
solution. In the following, we discuss briefly some of the issues concerning
multiprocessor scheduling. (Complete coverage of multiprocessor scheduling
is beyond the scope of this text; for more information, please refer to the Biblio-
graphical Notes.) We concentrate on systems where the processors are identical
(or homogeneous) in terms of their functionality; any available processor can
then be used to run any processes in the queue. We also assume uniform
memory access (UMA). In Chapters 15 through 17 we discuss systems where
processors are different (a heterogeneous system). Only programs compiled
for a given processor's instruction set could be run on that processor.

Even within a homogeneous multiprocessor, there are sometimes limita-
tions on scheduling. Consider a system with an I/O device attached to a private
bus of one processor. Processes wishing to use that device must be scheduled
to run on that processor, otherwise the device would not be available.

If several identical processors are available, then load sharing can occur. It
would be possible to provide a separate queue for each processor. In this case,
however, one processor could be idle, with an empty queue, while another
processor was very busy. To prevent this situation, we use a common ready
queue. All processes go into one queue and are scheduled onto any available
processor.

In such a scheme, one of two scheduling approaches may be used. In
one approach, each processor is self-scheduling. Each processor examines
the common ready queue and selects a process to execute. As we shall see
in Chapter 7, if we have multiple processors trying to access and update a
common data structure, each processor must be programmed very carefully.
We must ensure that two processors do not choose the same process, and that
processes are not lost from the queue. The other approach avoids this problem
by appointing one processor as scheduler for the other processors, thus creating
a master-slave structure.

Some systems carry this structure one step further, by having all scheduling
decisions, I/O processing, and other system activities handled by one single
processor—the master server. The other processors only execute user code.
