Exercises 313

© Swapping: Any algorithm can have swapping added to it. At intervals
determined by the operating system, usually dictated by CPU-scheduling
policies, processes are copied from main memory to a backing store, and
later are copied back to main memory. This scheme allows more processes
to be run than can be fit into memory at one time.

.

Sharing: Another means of increasing the multiprogramming level is to
share code and data among different users. Sharing generally requires
that either paging or segmentation be used, to provide small packets of
information (pages or segments) that can be shared. Sharing is a means
of running many processes with a limited amount of memory, but shared
programs and data must be designed carefully.

Protection: If paging or segmentation is provided, different sections of a
user program can be declared execute only, read only, or read—write. This
restriction is necessary with shared code or data, and is generally useful
in any case to provide simple run-time checks for common programming
errors.

= Exercises

9.1 Name two differences between logical and physical addresses.
9.2. Explain the difference between internal and external fragmentation.
9.3. Describe the following allocation algorithms:

a. First fit

b. Best fit

c. Worst fit

9.4 When a process is rolled out of memory, it loses its ability to use the CPU
(at least for a while). Describe another situation where a process loses its
ability to use the CPU, but where the process does not get rolled out.

9.5 Given memory partitions of 100 KB, 500 KB, 200 KB, 300 KB, and 600 KB (in
order), how would each of the first-fit, best-fit, and worst-fit algorithms
place processes of 212 KB, 417 KB, 112 KB, and 426 KB (in order)? Which
algorithm makes the most efficient use of memory?

9.6 Consider a system where a program can be separated into two parts: code
and data. The CPU knows whether it wants an instruction (instruction
fetch) or data (data fetch or store). Therefore, two base-limit register
pairs are provided: one for instructions and one for data. The instruction
base-limit register pair is automatically set to read only, so programs can
