88 Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

An alternative is to compute and display the performance measures in
real time. For example, a timer can trigger a routine to store the current
instruction pointer value. The result is a statistical picture of the program
locations most frequently used within the program. This approach may allow
system operators to become familiar with system behavior and to modify
system operation in real time.

3.8 = System Generation

We can design, code, and implement an operating system specifically for one
machine at one site. More commonly, however, operating systems are designed
to run on any of a class of machines at a variety of sites with a variety of
peripheral configurations. The system must then be configured or generated for
each specific computer site, a process sometimes known as system generation
(SYSGEN).

The operating system is normally distributed on disk or tape. To generate
a system, we use a special program. The SYSGEN program reads from a
given file, or asks the operator of the system for information concerning the
specific configuration of the hardware system, or probes the hardware directly
to determine what components are there. The following kinds of information
must be determined.

¢ What CPU will be used? What options (extended instruction sets, floating-
point arithmetic, and so on) are installed? For multiple-CPU systems, each
CPU must be described.

¢ How much memory is available? Some systems will determine this value
themselves by referencing memory location after memory location until an
“jllegal address” fault is generated. This procedure defines the final legal
address and hence the amount of available memory.

© What devices are available? The system will need to know how to address
each device (the device number), the device interrupt number, the device’s
type and model, and any special device characteristics.

¢ What operating-system options are desired, or what parameter values are
to be used? These options or values might include how many buffers of
which sizes should be used, what type of CPU-scheduling algorithm is
desired, what the maximum number of processes to be supported is, and
so on.

Once this information is determined, it can be used in several ways. At one
extreme, a system administrator can use it to modify a copy of the source code of
the operating system. The operating system then is completely compiled. Data
