230

  

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

REIFICATION

INHERITANCE

TAXONOMY

 
  
 
   
   
  
  
   
  
   
    
   
   
  
  
 
   
  
  

make predictions about objects once they are classified. One infers the presence of certain objects
from perceptual input, infers category membership from the perceived properties of the objects,
and then uses category information to make predictions about the objects. For example, from its
green, mottled skin, large size, and ovoid shape, one can infer that an object is a watermelon;
from this, one infers that it would be useful for fruit salad.
There are two main choices for representing categories in first-order logic. The first we
have already seen: categories are represented by unary predicates. The predicate symbol Tomato,
for example, represents the unary relation that is true only for objects that are tomatoes, and
Tomato(x)means thatx is a tomato.
The second choice is to reify the category. Reification is the process of turning a predicate
or function into an object in the language.’ We will see several examples of reification in this
chapter. In this case, we use Tomatoes as a constant symbol referring to the object that is the set of'|
all tomatoes. We use x G Tomatoes to say thatx is a tomato. Reified categories allow us to make
assertions about the category itself, rather than about members of the category. For example, we
can say Population(Humans) =5, 000, 000, 000,even though there is no individual human witha
population of five billion.
Categories perform one more important role: they serve to organize and simplify the
knowledge base through inheritance. If we say that all instances of the category Food are edible,
and if we assert that Fruit is a subclass of Food and Apples is a subclass of Fruit, then we know
that every apple is edible. We say that the individual apples inherit the property of edibility, in
this case from their membership in the Food category. :
Subclass relations organize categories into a taxonomy or taxonomic hierarchy. Tax-
onomies have been used explicitly for centuries in technical fields. For example, systematic
biology aims to provide a taxonomy of all living and extinct species; library science has de-
veloped a taxonomy of all fields of knowledge, encoded as the Dewey Decimal system: tax,
authorities and other government departments have developed extensive taxonomies of occupa-
tions and commercial products. Taxonomies are also an important aspect of general commonsense
knowledge, as we will see in our investigations that follow.
First-order logic makes it easy to state facts about categories, either by relating objects to
categories or by quantifying over their members:

+ An object is a member ofa category. For example:
Tomato,2G Tomatoes

+ A category is a subclass of another category. For example:
Tomatoes C Fruit

+ All members of a category have some properties. For example:
Wx x G Tomatoes = Red(x)A Round(x)

+ Members of a category can be recognized by some properties. For example:
Wx Red(Interior(x))A Green(Exterior(x))A x € Melons = «x € Watermelons

+ A category as a whole has some properties. For example:
Tomatoes G DomesticatedSpecies

7 The term "reification" comes from the Latin word res, or thing. John McCarthy proposed the term “thingification7]
but it never caught on
