238 cura SEVEN Micopengrimmed Conca!

72.

7m,

7B.

7-24,

 

A computer has 16 registers, an ALU (arithmetic logic unit) with 22 opers-

tions, and shifter with eight operations, all cannected to a coqunon bus

system.

a. Focrmulate a control word for 2 microoperation.

1b. Specify the number of bits in each field of the control word and give a
general encoding scheme.

<. Show the bits of the contol word thet specify the mi:ruoperation
RA—RS + RE.

‘Assume that the imput 1ogic of the micro program sequencer of Fig. 7-8 has

feurinputs, Ia Ih fo T(test), and three outputs, 5.-So and. Theoperations

that are pedormed in the unit ave listed in the following table. Ocsign the

input logic circuit using @ minimum number of gates.

 

by lo Operation

0 Increment CAR if T = 1, jumpto AD if T = 0
1 Jump to AD voconditionably
0 Wnerement CAR uncundidanally
0 Jump to AD if T= 1, iocremem CAR if T =0
0 Caf subroutine if T = 1, increment CAR if T = 0
1 Return frexn subroutine unconditionally
1 Map externa) addrexs unconditionally

wn oOoS

Design 2 7-bit combinational circuit incrementer for the microprogram 3e-
quencer of Fig, 75 (see Fig. ¢8). Modify the incementer by induding a
control input D. When D = 0, the clrewit increments by one, but when
D @ 1 the circuit increments by two.

Insert an exchusive-OR gate between MUX 2 and the input logic of Fig. 78.
‘One input to the gete comes from the test output of the multpleser. The
other Input to the gate comes from a bit labeled P (for polarty) in the
microinstruction from contcol memory. The output of the gate Goes to the
input T of the input logic. What does the polarity control P accomplish?

 

 

 

REFERENCES

 

 

 

1. Dasgupta, S, Camputer Arahitecture: A Modem Synthesis, Vol. 1. New York: John
Wiley, 1989.

2 Gosline, G. W., Computer Orgoniaation: Hardware) Softuare, And ed. Fagh woud
ffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986.

3. Hamacher, V. C..Z. G. Veanesic, and S. G. Zaky, Commuter Organization, 30d ed
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.
