266  Chapter8 Deadlocks

8.8 = Summary

A deadlock state occurs when two or more processes are waiting indefinitely for
an event that can be caused only by one of the waiting processes. Principally,
there are three methods for dealing with deadlocks:

Use some protocol to prevent or avoid deadlocks, ensuring that the system
will never enter a deadlock state.

Allow the system to enter deadlock state, detect it, and then recover.

Ignore the problem all together, and pretend that deadlocks never occur
in the system. This solution is the one used by most operating systems,
including UNIX.

A deadlock situation may occur if and only if four necessary conditions
hold simultaneously in the system: mutual exclusion, hold and wait, no pre-
emption, and circular wait. To prevent deadlocks, we ensure that at least one of
the necessary conditions never holds.

Another method for avoiding deadlocks that is less stringent than the
prevention algorithms is to have a priori information on how each process will
be utilizing the resources. The banker's algorithm, for example, needs to know
the maximum number of each resource class that may be requested by each
process. Using this information, we can define a deadlock-avoidance algorithm.

If a system does not employ a protocol to ensure that deadlocks will never
occur, then a detection-and-recovery scheme must be employed. A deadlock-
detection algorithm must be invoked to determine whether a deadlock has
occurred. If a deadlock is detected, the system must recover either by terminat-
ing some of the deadlocked processes, or by preempting resources from some
of the deadlocked processes.

Ina system that selects victims for rollback primarily on the basis of cost
factors, starvation may occur. As a result, the selected process never completes
its designated task.

= Exercises

8.1 List three examples of deadlocks that are not related to a computer-system
environment.

8.2 Is it possible to have a deadlock involving only one process? Explain your
answer.

8.3 People have said that proper spooling would eliminate deadlocks. Cer-
tainly, it eliminates from contention card readers, plotters, printers, and so
on. It is even possible to spool tapes (called staging them), which would
