SECTION 86 Data Transfer ard Manipulation 267

Data Transfer Instructions

Data transfer instructions move data fromone place in the computer to another
without changing the data content. The most common transfers are between
memory and processor registers, between processor registers and input or
output, and between the processor registers themselves. Table 8-5 gives a list
of eight data transfer instructions used in many computers. Accompanying
each instruction is a mnemonic symbol. It must be realized that different
computers use different mnemonics for the same instruction name.

The load instruction has been used mostly to designate a transfer from
memory toa processor register, usually an accumulator. The store instruction
designates a transfer from a processor register into memory. The move instruc-
tion has been used in computers with multiple CPU registers to designate a
transfer from one register to another. It has also been used for data transfers
between CPU registers and memory or between two memory words The
exchange instruction swaps information between two registers or a register and
amemory word. The input and output instructions transfer data among proces-
sor registers and input or output terminals. The push and pop instructions
transfer data between processor registers and a memory stack

It must be realized that the instructions listed in Table 8-5, as well as in
subsequent ables in this section, are often associated with a variety of address-
ing modes. Some assembly language conventions modify the mnemonic sym-
bol to differentiate between the different addressing modes For example, the
mnemonic for load immediate becomes LDL Other assembly language conven-
tions use a special character to designate the addressing mode. For example,
the immediate mode is recognized from a pound sign # placed before the
operand. In any case, the important thing is to realize that each instruction can
occur with a variety of addressing modes. As an example, consider the load to
accumulator instruction when used with eight different addressing modes.

TABLE 8-5 Typical Data Transfer

 

Instructions
‘Name Mnemonic

Load LD
Store sT
Move Mov
Exchange xCH
Input IN
Output OUT
Push PUSH

Pop POP
