 

 

2.1 Computer-System Operation 29

from a user program that an operating-system service be performed. The
interrupt-driven nature of an operating system defines that system’s general
structure. For each type of interrupt, separate segments of code in the operating
system determine what action should be taken. An interrupt service routine is
provided that is responsible for dealing with the interrupt.

When the CPU is interrupted, it stops what it is doing and immediately
transfers execution to a fixed location. The fixed location usually contains
the starting address where the service routine for the interrupt is located.
The interrupt service routine executes; on completion, the CPU resumes the
interrupted computation. A time line of this operation is shown in Figure 2.2.

Interrupts are an important part of a computer architecture. Each computer
design has its own interrupt mechanism, but several functions are common.
The interrupt must transfer control to the appropriate interrupt service routine.
The straightforward method for handling this transfer would be to invoke
a generic routine to examine the interrupt information; the routine, in turn,
would call the interrupt-specific handler. However, interrupts must be handled
quickly, and, given that only a predefined number of interrupts is possible,
a table of pointers to interrupt routines can be used instead. The interrupt
routine is then called indirectly through the table, with no intermediate routine
needed. Generally, the table of pointers is stored in low memory (the first 100
or so locations). These locations hold the addresses of the interrupt service
routines for the various devices. This array, or interrupt vector, of addresses is
then indexed by a unique device number, given with the interrupt request, to
provide the address of the interrupt service routine for the interrupting device.
Operating systems as different as MS-DOS and UNIX dispatch interrupts in this
manner.

The interrupt architecture must also save the address of the interrupted
instruction. Many old designs simply stored the interrupt address in a fixed
location or in a location indexed by the device number. More recent architec-

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 

CPU user
process
executing

VO interrupt
processing

vo idle
device transferring

vO transfer vo transfer
request done request done

Figure 2.2 Interrupt time line for a single process doing output.
