214 CHAPTER SEVEN Microprogrammed Control

microinstruction

microprogram

control memory

‘a microprogrammed control unit. Each word in control memory contains within
it a microinstruction. The microinstruction specifies one or more microopera-
tions for the system. A sequence of microinstructions constitutes a micropro-
gram. Since alterations of the microprogram are not needed once the control
unit is in operation, the control memory can be a read-only memory (ROM).
The content of the words in ROM are fixed and cannot be altered by simple
programming since no writing capability is available in the ROM. ROM words
are made permanent during the hardware production of the unit. The use of
a microprogram involves placing all control variables in words of ROM for use
by the control unit through successive read operations. The content of the word
in ROM ata given address specifies a microinstruction.

‘A more advanced development known as dynamic microprogramming
permits a microprogram to be loaded initially from an auxiliary memory such
asa magnetic disk. Control units that use dynamicmicroprogramming employ
a writable control memory. This type of memory can be used for writing (to
change the microprogram) but is used mostly for reading. A memory that is
part of acontrol unit is referred to as a control memory.

A computer that employs a microprogrammed control unit will have two
separate memories: a main memory and a control memory. The main memory
isavailable to the user for storing the programs. The contents of main memory
may alter when the data are manipulated and every time that the program is
changed. The user's program in main memory consistsof machine instructions
and data. In contrast, the control memory holds a fixed microprogram that
cannot be altered by the occasional user. The microprogram consists of mi-
croinstructions that specify various internal control signals for execution of
register microoperations. Each machine instruction initiatesa series of microin-
structions in control memory. These microinstructions generate the microop-
erations to fetch the instruction from main memory; to evaluate the effective
address, to execute the operation specified by the instruction, and to return
control to the fetch phase in order to repeat the cycle for the next instruction.

The general configuration of amicroprogrammed control unit is demon-
strated in the block diagram of Fig. 7-1. The control memory is assumed to be
a ROM, within which all control information is permanently stored. The

 

 

Figure 7-1 Microprogrammed control organization.

 

Exemat_, [New conta con ee
nt col Le
input | aces sides |p| memory || “dna
naar regster (ROM) regster

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nextaddeess information

 
