iS)
v

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

. react to what it perceives;
extract abstract descriptions of the current state from percepts;
maintain an internal model of relevant aspects of the world that are not directly
available from percepts;
4. express and use information about the desirability of actions in various circumstances;
5. use goals in conjunction with knowledge about actions to construct plans.

« Knowledge about actions and their effects can be represented using the conventions of
situation calculus. This knowledge enables the agent to keep track of the world and to
deduce the effects of plans of action.

« We have a choice of writing diagnostic rules that reason from percepts to propositions
about the world or causal rules that describe how conditions in the world cause percepts to
come about. Causal rules are often more flexible and entail a widerrange of consequences,
but can be more expensive to use in inference.

wre

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Although even Aristotle's logic deals with generalizations over objects, true first-order logic dates
from the introduction of quantifiers in Gottlob Frege's (1879) Begriffschriff'Concept Writing"
or "Conceptual Notation"). Frege's ability to nest quantifiers was a big step forward, but he used
an awkward notation. (An example appears on the front cover of this book.) The present notation
for first-order logic is substantially due to Giuseppe Peano (1889), but the semantics is virtually
identical to Frege's.

A major barrier to the development of first-order logic had been the concentration on one-
place predicates to the exclusion of many-place relational predicates. This fixation on one-place
predicates had been nearly universal in logical systems from Aristotle up to and including Boole.
The first systematic treatment of the logic of relations was given by Augustus De Morgan (1864).
De Morgan cited the following example to show the sorts of inferences that Aristotle's logic
could not handle: "All horses are animals; therefore, the head ofa horse is the head ofan animal."
This inference is inaccessible to Aristotle because any valid rule that can support this inference
must first analyze the sentence using the two-place predicate “xis the head ofy.” The logic of
relations was studied in depth by Charles Sanders Peirce (1870), who also developed first-order
logic independently of Frege, although slightly later (Peirce, 1883).

Leopold Léwenheim (1915) gave a systematic treatment of model theory in 1915. This
paper also treated the equality symbol as an integral part of logic. Léwenheim’s results were
further extended by Thoralf Skolem (1920). Tarski (1935) gave an explicit definition of truth and
model-theoretic satisfaction in first-order logic, using set theory. (An English translation of this
German article is given in (Tarski, 1956).)

McCarthy (1958) was primarily responsible for the introduction of first-order logic as atool
for building AI systems, and later (1963) proposed the use of states of the world, or situations,
as objects to be reasoned about using first-order logic. The first AI system to make substantial
use of general-purpose reasoning about actions in first-order logic was QA3 (Green, 1969b).
