274

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

 

from this address, If the condition is not met, the program counter is not
changed and the next instruction is taken from the next location in sequence.

‘The skip instruction does not need an address field and is therefore a
zero-address instruction. A conditional skip instruction will skip the next
instruction if the condition is met. This is accomplished by incrementing the
program counter during the execute phase in addition to its being incremented
during the fetch phase. If the condition is not met, control proceeds with the
next instruction in sequence where the programmer inserts an unconditional
branch instruction. Thus a skip-branch pair of instructions causes a branch if
the condition is not met, while a single conditional branch instruction causes
a branch if the condition is met.

The call and return instructions are used in conjunction with subroutines.
Their performance and implementation are discussed later in this section. The
compare and test instructions do not change the program sequence directly.
They are listed in Table 8-10 because of their application in setting conditions
for subsequent conditional branch instructions. The compare instruction per-
forms a subtraction between two operands, but the result of the operation is
not retained. However, certain status bit conditions are set as a result of the
operation Similarly, the test instruction performs the logical AND of two
operands and updates certain status bits without retaining the result or chang-
ing the operands. The status bits of interest are the carry bit, the sign bit, a zero
indication, and an overflow condition. The generation of these status bits will
be discussed first and then we will show how they are used in conditional
branch instructions.

Status Bit Conditions

It is sometimes convenient to supplement the ALU circuit in the CPU with a
status register where status bit conditions can be stored for further analysis.
Status bits are also called condition-code bits or flag bits. Figure 8-8 shows the
block diagram of an 8-bit ALU with a 4-bit statusregister. The four status bits
are symbolized by C, S, Z, and V. The bits are set or cleared as a result of an
operation performed in the ALU.

1. Bit C (carry) is set to1if the end carry Cyis 1. It is cleared to Oif the carry
is 0.

2. Bit S (sign) is set to 1 if the highest-order bit F, is 1 It is set to 0 if the
bit is 0.

3. BitZ (zero) issetto1 ifthe output ofthe ALUcontains all's. Itis cleared
to 0 otherwise. In other words, Z = 1 if the output is zero and Z = 0
if the output is not zero.

4. Bit V (overflow) is set to 1 if the exclusive-OR of the last two carries is
equal to 1, and cleared to 0 otherwise. This is the condition for an
