Section 9.6.

sNGONPLETE

COMPLETENESS
THEOREM

RESOLUTION
ALGORITHM

SEMDECIDABLE

Resolution: A Complete Inference Procedure 277

Unfortunately, chaining with Modus Ponens cannot derive S(A)forus. The problem is that
Vx P(x) =} R(x) cannot be converted to Hor form, and thus cannot be used by Modus Ponens.
That means that a proof procedure using Modus Ponens is incomplete: there are sentences
entailed by the knowledge base that the procedure cannot infer.

The question of the existence of complete proof procedures is of direct concem to mathe-
maticians. If a complete proof procedure can be found for mathematical statements, two things
follow: first, all conjectures can be established mechanically; second, all of mathematics can
be established as the logical consequence of a set of fundamental axioms. A complete proof
procedure for first-order logic would also be of great value in AI: barring practical issues of
computational complexity, it would enable a machine to solve any problem that can be stated in
the language.

The question of completeness has therefore generated some of the most important mathe-
matical work of the twentieth century. This work culminated in the results proved by the German
mathematician Kurt Godel in 1930 and 1931. Godel has some good news for us; his complete-
ness theorem showed that, for first-order logic, any sentence that is entailed by another set of
sentences can be proved from that set. That is, we can find inference rules that allow a complete
proof procedure R:

if KB —a then KBl pa

The completeness theorem is like saying that a procedure for finding a needle in a haystack does
exist. This is not a trivial claim, because universally quantified sentences and arbitrarily nested
function symbols add up to haystacks of infinite size. Godel showed that a proofprocedure exists,
but he did not demonstrate one; it was not until 1965 that Robinson published his resolution
algorithm, which we discuss in the next section.

There is one problem with the completeness theorem that is a real nuisance. Note that
we said that ifa sentence follows, then it can be proved. Normally, we do not know until the
proof is done that the sentence does follow; what happens when the sentence doesn't follow?
Can we tell? Well, for first-order logic, it turns out that we cannot; our proof procedure can go
on and on, but we will not know ifit is stuck in a hopeless loop or if the proof is just about to
pop out. (This is like the halting problem for Turing machines.) Entailment in first-order logic
is thus semidecidable, that is, we can show that sentences follow from premises, if they do, but
we cannot always show it ifthey do not. As a corollary, consistency of sets of sentences (the
question of whether there is a way to make all the sentences true) is also semidecidable.

9.6 RESOLUTION: A COMPLETE INFERENCE PROCEDURE

Recall from Chapter 6 that the simple version of the resolution inference rule for propositional
logic has the following form:

VB, af 7 . = , 8 7
OVE, BVT y equivalently 22 9 BS 7
av7 a>
