6 Chapter1 Introduction

goal of computer systems is to execute user programs and to make solving user
problems easier. Toward this goal, computer hardware is constructed. Since
bare hardware alone is not particularly easy to use, application programs are
developed. These programs require certain common operations, such as those
controlling the I/O devices. The common functions of controlling and allocating
resources are then brought together into one piece of software: the operating
system.

In addition, we have no universally accepted definition of what is part
of the operating system. A simple viewpoint is that it includes everything a
vendor ships when you order “the operating system.” The storage (memory,
disks, and tapes) requirements and features included, however, vary greatly
across systems. (The storage capacity of a system is measured in gigabytes. (A
kilobyte or KB is 1,024 bytes, a megabyte or MBis 1, 024? bytes, and a gigabyte or
GB is 1, 024° bytes, but computer manufacturers often round off these numbers
and say that a megabyte is 1 million bytes, and a gigabyte is 1 billion bytes.))
Some systems take up less than 1 megabyte of space and lack even a full-
screen editor, whereas others require hundreds of megabytes of space and are
entirely based on graphical windowing systems. A more common definition
is that the operating system is the one program running at all times on the
computer (usually called the kernel), with all else being application programs.
This last definition is the one that we generally follow. The matter of what
constitutes an operating system is becoming important. In 1998, the United
States Department of Justice filed suit against Microsoft, in essence claiming
that Microsoft included too much functionality in its operating systems and
thus prevented competition from application vendors.

1.1.3 System Goals

It is easier to define an operating system by what it does than by what it is,
but even this can be tricky. The primary goal of some operating system is
convenience for the user. Operating systems exist because they are supposed
to make it easier to compute with them than without them. This view is
particularly clear when you look at operating systems for small PCs.

The primary goal of other operating systems is efficient operation of the
computer system. This is the case for large, shared, multiuser systems. These
systems are expensive, so it is desirable to make them as efficient as possible.
These two goals—convenience and efficiency —are sometimes contradictory.
In the past, efficiency was often more important than convenience (Section
1.2.1). Thus, much of operating-system theory concentrates on optimal use
of computing resources. Operating systems have also evolved over time. For
example, UNIX started with a keyboard and printer as its interface, limiting how
convenient it could be for the user. Over time, hardware changed, and UNIX
was ported to new hardware with more user-friendly interfaces. Many graphic
