214

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

Only one student failed both History and Biology.

The best score in History was better than the best score in Biology.

Every person who dislikes all vegetarians is smart.

No person likes a smart vegetarian.

There is a woman who likes all men who are not vegetarians

There is a barber who shaves all men in town who do not shave themselves
No person likes a professor unless the professor is smart.

. Politicians can fool some of the people all of the time, and they can fool all of the people
some of the time, but they can't fool all of the people all of the time.

roo me Bo

oon

73 We noted that there is often confusion because the = connective does not correspond
directly to the English "if ... then" construction. The following English sentences use "and,"
"or," and "if" in ways that are quite different from first-order logic. For each sentence, give
both a translation into first-order logic that preserves the intended meaning in English, and
a straightforward translation (as if the logical connectives had their regular first-order logic
meaning). Show an unintuitive consequence of the latter translation, and say whether each
translation is valid, satisfiable or invalid.
a. One more outburst like that and you’l] be in contempt of court.
b. Annie Hall is on TV tonight, ifyou're interested.
c. Either the Red Sox win or I'm out ten dollars
d. The special this morning is ham and eggs.
e. Maybe I'll come to the party and maybe I won't
f Well, I like Sandy and I don't like Sandy.
g. Idon'tjump off the Empire State Building implies ifIjump off the Empire State Building
then I float safely to the ground.
h. It is not the case that if you attempt this exercise you will get an F. Therefore, you will
attempt this exercise.

Ifyou lived here you would be home now. If you were home now, you would not be here.
Therefore, if you lived here you would not be here

74 Give a predicate calculus sentence such that every world in which it is true contains exactly
one object.

75 Represent the sentence "All Germans speak the same languages" in predicate calculus. Use
Speaks(x,/), meaning that person x speaks language J.

76 Write axioms describing the predicates Grandchild GreatGrandparent, Brother, Sister,
Daughter, Son, Aunt, Uncle, BrotherinLaw, SisterInLaw, and FirstCousin. Find out the proper
definition of mth cousin n times removed, and write it in first-order logic.

Write down the basic facts depicted in the family tree in Figure 7.4. Using the logical rea-
soning system in the code repository, TELL it all the sentences you have written down, and ASK it
whoare Elizabeth's grandchildren, Diana's brothers-in-law,and Zara’s great-grandparents.

 
