 

1.11 Summary — 23

functionality. Others are hardware devices with a special-purpose operating
system embedded within, providing just the functionality desired.

The use of embedded systems continues to expand. The power of those
devices, both as standalone units and as members of networks and the Web, is
sure to increase as well. Entire houses can be computerized, so that a central
computer—either a general-purpose computer or an embedded system—can
control heating and lighting, alarm systems, and even coffee makers. Web
access can let a home-owner tell the house to heat up before he arrives home.
Someday, the refrigerator may call the grocery store when it notices the milk is
gone.

1.11 = Summary

Operating systems have been developed over the past 45 years for two main
purposes. First, the operating system attempts to schedule computational activ-
ities to ensure good performance of the computing system. Second, it provides
a convenient environment for the development and execution of programs.
Initially, computer systems were used from the front console. Software such
as assemblers, loaders, linkers, and compilers improved the convenience of
programming the system, but also required substantial set-up time. To reduce
the set-up time, facilities hired operators and batched similar jobs.

Batch systems allowed automatic job sequencing by a resident operating
system and greatly improved the overall utilization of the computer. The
computer no longer had to wait for human operation. CPU utilization was still
low, however, because of the slow speed of the I/O devices relative to that of
the CPU. Off-line operation of slow devices provided a means to use multiple
reader-to-tape and tape-to-printer systems for one CPU.

To improve the overall performance of the computer system, developers
introduced the concept of multiprogramming, so that several jobs could be kept
in memory at one time. The CPU is switched back and forth among them to
increase CPU utilization and to decrease the total time needed to execute the
jobs.

Multiprogramming also allows time sharing. Time-shared operating sys-
tems allow many users (from one to several hundred) to use a computer system
interactively at the same time.

PCs are microcomputers; they are considerably smaller and less expensive
than mainframe systems. Operating systems for these computers have ben-
efited from the development of operating systems for mainframes in several
ways. However, since an individual has sole use of the computer, CPU utiliza-
tion is no longer a prime concern. Hence, some of the design decisions made for
mainframe operating systems may not be appropriate for these smaller systems.
Other design decisions, such as those for security, are appropriate for both small
and large systems, as PCs can now be connected to other computers and users
through networks and the Web.
