Section 7.9. Toward a Goal-Based Agent 211

 

7.9 TOWARD A GOAL-BASED AGENT,

The preceding set of action value statements is sufficient to prescribe a reasonably intelligent
exploration policy. It can be shown (Exercise 7,15) that the agent using these axioms will always
succeed in finding the gold safely whenever there is a safe sequence of actions that does so. This
is about as much as we can ask from a logical agent.

Once the gold is found, the policies need to change radically. The aim now is to return to
the start square as quickly as possible. What we would like to do is infer that the agent now has
the goal of being at location [1.1]:

V.5 Holding(Gold,s) > GoalLocation((1, 1],s)

The presence of an explicit goal allows the agent to work out a sequence of actions that will
achieve the goal. There are at least three ways to find such a sequence:

0 Inference: It is not hard to write axioms that will allow us to ASK the KB for a sequence
of actions that is guaranteed to achieve the goal safely. For the 4 x 4 wumpus world, this
is feasible, but for larger worlds, the computational demands are too high. In any case, we
have the problem of distinguishing good solutions from wasteful solutions (e.g., ones that
make a long series of wandering moves before getting on the right track).

0 Search: We can use a best-first search procedure (see Chapter 4) to find a path to the goal.
This requires the agent to translate its knowledge into a set of operators, and accompanying
state representation, so that the search algorithm can be applied.

0 Planning: This involves the use of special-purpose reasoning systems designed to reason
about actions. Chapter 11 describes these systems in detail, explaining their advantages
over search algorithms.

7.10 _ SUMMARY

This chapter has shown how first-order logic can be used as the representation language for a
knowledge-based agent. The important points are as follows:

+ First-order logic is a general-purpose representation language that is based on an onto-

logical commitment to the existence of objects and relations in the world.

Constant symbols and predicate symbols name objects and relations, respectively. Com-

plex terms name objects using function symbols. The interpretation specifies what the

symbols refer to.

+ An atomic sentence consists of a predicate applied to one or more terms; it is true just
when the relation named by the predicate holds between the objects named by the terms.
Complex sentences use connectivesjust like propositional logic, and quantified sentences
allow the expression of general rules.

* It is possible to define an agent that reasons using first-order logic. Such an agent needs to
