244 cuarrerticHT Central Processing Unit

control word

common arithmetic logic unit (ALU). The operation selected in the ALU deter-
mines the arithmetic or logic microoperation thatis to be performed. Theresult
ofthe microoperation is available for output data and also goes into the inputs
of all the registers. The register that receives the information from the output
bus is selected by a decoder. The decoder activates one of the register load
inputs, thus providing a transfer path between the data in the output bus and
the inputs of the selected destination register.

The control unit that operates the CPU bus system directs the information
flow throughthe registers and ALU by selecting the various components in the
system. For example, to perform the operation

R1CR2 + RB

the control must provide binary selection variables to the following selector
inputs:

1. MUX A selector (SELA}: to place the content of R2 into bus A.

2. MUX B selector (SELB): to place the content of R3 into bus B.

3. ALU operation selector (OPR): to provide the arithmetic addition
A+B.

4. Decoder destination selector (SELD}: to transfer the content of the
output bus into R1.

The four control selection variables are generated in the control unit and
mustbe available at thebeginning ofaclockcycle. Thedatafromthe two source
registers propagate through the gates in the multiplexers and the ALU, to the
output bus, and into the inputs of the destination register, all during the clock
cycle interval Then, when the next clock transition occurs, the binary informa-
tion from the output bus is transferred into R 1. Toachieve a fast response time,
the ALU is constructed with high-speed circuits. The buses are implemented
with multiplexers or three-state gates, as shown in Sec. 4-3.

Control Word
There are 14 binary selection inputs in the unit, and their combined value
specifies a control word. The 14-bit control word is defined in Fig. 8-2(b). It
consists of four fields. Three fields contain three bits each, and one field has,
five bits. The three bits of SELA select a source register for the A input of the
ALU. The three bits of SELB select a register for the B input of the ALU. The
three bits of SELD select a destination register using the decoder and its seven
load outputs. The five bits of OPR select one of the operations in the ALU. The
‘bit control word when applied to the selection inputs specify a particular
microoperation.

The encoding of the register selections is specified in Table 8-1. The 3-bit
