80  Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

 

 

Figure 3.10 Windows NT client-server structure.

3.6 = Virtual Machines

Conceptually, a computer system is made up of layers. The hardware is the
lowest level in all such systems. The kernel running at the next level uses the
hardware instructions to create a set of system calls for use by outer layers. The
system programs above the kernel are therefore able to use either system calls
or hardware instructions, and in some ways these programs do not differentiate
between these two. Thus, although they are accessed differently, they both
provide functionality that the program can use to create even more advanced
functions. System programs, in turn, treat the hardware and the system calls as
though they were both at the same level.

Some systems carry this scheme a step further by allowing the system
programs to be called easily by the application programs. As before, although
the system programs are at a level higher than that of the other routines, the
application programs may view everything under them in the hierarchy as
though the latter were part of the machine itself. This layered approach is
taken to its logical conclusion in the concept of a virtual machine. The VM
operating system for IBM systems is the best example of the virtual-machine
concept, because IBM pioneered the work in this area.

By using CPU scheduling (Chapter 6) and virtual-memory techniques
(Chapter 10), an operating system can create the illusion that a process has its
own processor with its own (virtual) memory. Of course, normally, the process
has additional features, such as system calls and a file system, that are not pro-
vided by the bare hardware. The virtual-machine approach, on the other hand,
does not provide any additional functionality, but rather provides an interface
that is identical to the underlying bare hardware. Each process is provided with
a (virtual) copy of the underlying computer (Figure 3.11).

The physical computer shares resources to create the virtual machines. CPU
scheduling can share out the CPU to create the appearance that users have their
own processors. Spooling and a file system can provide virtual card readers and
virtual line printers. A normal user time-sharing terminal provides the function
of the virtual-machine operator’s console.
