memory address

SECTION 52 Computer Registers 131

and PC, have 12 bits each since they hold a memory address. When the
contents of AR or PC are applied to the 16-bit common. bus, the four most
significant bits are set to0’s. When AR or PCreceive information from the bus,
only the 12 least significant bits are transferred into the register.

‘The input register INPR and the output register OUTR have 8 bits each
and communicate with the eight least significant bits in the bus. INPR is
connected to provide information to the bus but OUTR can only receive infor-
‘mation from the bus. This is because INPR receives a character from an input
device which is then transferred to AC. OUTR receives a character from AC and
delivers it to an output device. There is no transfer from OUTR to any of the
other registers.

The 16 lines of the common bus receive information from six registers and
the memory unit. The bus lines are connected to the inputs of six registers and
the memory. Five registers have three control inputs: LD (load), INR (incre-
ment), and CLR (clear). This type of register is equivalent to a binary counter
with parallel load and synchronous clear similar to the one shown in Fig. 2-11.
The increment operation is achieved by enabling the count input of the coun-
ter. Two registers have only a LD input. This type of register is shown in
Fig. 2-7.

The input data and output data of the memory are connected to the
common bus, but the memory address is connected to AR. Therefore, AR must
always be used to specifya memory address. By using a single register for the
address, we eliminate the need for an address bus that would have been
needed otherwise. The content of any register can be specified for the memory
data input during a write operation. Similarly, any register can receive the data
from memory after a read operation except AC.

‘The 16 inputs of AC come from an adder and logic circuit. This circuit has
threesets of inputs. Oneset of 16-bitinputs comefromthe outputsof AC. They
are used to implement register microoperations such as complement AC and
shift AC. Another set of 16-bit inputs come from the data register DR. The
inputs from DR and AC are used for arithmeticand logicmicrooperations, such
as add DR to AC or AND DR to AC. The result of an addition is transferred
to AC and the end carry-out of the addition is transferred to flip-flop E (ex-
tended AC it), A third set of &-bit inputs come from the input register INPR.
The operation of INPR and OUTR is explained in Sec. 5-7.

‘Note that the content of any register can be applied onto the bus and an
operation can be performed in the adder and logiccircuit during the same clock
cycle. The clock transition at the end of the cycle transfers the content of the
bus into the designated destination register and the output of the adder and
logic circuit into AC. For example, the two microoperations

DR <= AC and AC < DR

can be executed at the same time. This can be done by placing the content of
AC on the bus (with $;5,S) = 100), enabling the LD (load) input of DR, trans-
