298 Chapter? Memory Management

where p; is an index into the outer page table and p2 is the displacement within
the page of the outer page table. The address-translation method for this
architecture is shown in Figure 9.13. Because address translation works from
the outer page table inwards, this scheme is also known as a forward-mapped
page table. The Pentium-II uses this architecture.

The VAX architecture also supports a variation of two-level paging. The
VAX is a 32-bit machine with page size of 512 bytes. The logical-address space of
a process is divided into four equal sections, each of which consists of 2°° bytes.
Each section represents a different part of the logical-address space of a process.
The first 2 high-order bits of the logical address designate the appropriate
section. The next 21 bits represent the logical page number of that section, and
the final 9 bits represent an offset in the desired page. By partitioning the page
table in this manner, the operating system can leave partitions unused until a
process needs them. An address on the VAX architecture is as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

 

section page offset
5 P a
2 21 9

where s designates the section number, p is an index into the page table, and d
is the displacement within the page.

The size of a one-level page table for a VAX process using one section still
is 2” bits « 4 bytes per entry = 8 MB. So that main-memory use is reduced even
further, the VAX pages the user-process page tables.

For a system with a 64-bit logical-address space, a two-level paging scheme
is no longer appropriate. To illustrate this point, let us suppose that the page
size in such a system is 4 KB (2!2). In this case, the page table will consist of
up to 2° entries. If we use a two-level paging scheme, then the inner page
tables could conveniently be one page long, or contain 2'° 4-byte entries. The
addresses would look like:

logical address

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

af

 

 

 

 

outer-page
table

 

 

 

 

 

page of
page table

 

 

 

Figure 9.13 Address translation for a two-level 32-bit paging architecture.
