Section 1.1.

TURING TEST

NeTURAL,
Proceso NSE

asow) EDGE
A EEReSENTATON
AUTOMATED
REASONING

MACHINE LEARNING

What is Al?

 

"The exciting new effort to make computers
think . .. machines with minds, in the full
and literal sense" (Haugeland, 1985)

“[The automation of] activities that we asso-
ciate with human thinking, activities such as
decision-making, problem solving, learning
...” (Bellman, 1978)

"The study of mental faculties through the
use of computational models"
(Charniak and McDermott, 1985)

"The study of the computations that make
it possible to perceive, reason, and act"
(Winston, 1992)

 

"The art of creating machines that perform
functions that require intelligence when per-
formed by people" (Kurzweil, 1990)

"The study of how to make computers do
things at which, at the moment. people are
better" (Rich and Knight, | 991)

"A field of study that seeks to explain and
emulate intelligent behavior in terms of
computational processes" (Schalkoff, 1 990)

"The branch of computer science that is con-
cemed with the automation of intelligent
behavior" (Luger and Stubblefield, 1993)

 

 

 

Figure 11 Some definitions of Al. They are organized into four categories:

Systems that think like humans.

 

Systems that think rationally.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Systems that act like humans. | Systems that act rationally.
2 —~—~—~——E—E— — OTN I

 

confirmation. A rationalist approach involves a combination of mathematics and engineering.
People in each group sometimes cast aspersions on work done in the other groups, but the truth
is that each direction has yielded valuable insights. Let us look at each in more detail.

Acting humanly: The Turing Test approach

The Turing Test, proposed by Alan Turing (1950), was designed to provide a satisfactory
operational definition of intelligence. Turing defined intelligent behavior as the ability to achieve
human-level performance in all cognitive tasks, sufficient to fool an interrogator. Roughly
speaking, the test he proposed is that the computer should be interrogated by a human via a
teletype, and passes the test ifthe interrogator cannot tell ifthere is a computer or a human at the
other end. Chapter 26 discusses the details of the test, and whether or not a computer is really
intelligent ifit passes. For now, programming a computer to pass the test provides plenty to work
on. The computer would need to possess the following capabilities:

0 natural language processing to enable it to communicate successfully in English (or some

other human language);
<> knowledge representation to store information provided before or during the interrogation;

~ automated reasoning to use the stored information to answer questions and to draw new
conclusions;

< machine learning to adapt to new circumstances and to detect and extrapolate patterns

Turing's test deliberately avoided direct physical interaction between the interrogator and the
computer, because physical simulation of a person is unnecessary for intelligence. However,
