272

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

shifts, arithmetic shifts, or rotate-type operations. In either case the shift may
be to the right or to the left.

Table 8-9 lists four types of shift instructions. The logical shift inserts 0
to the end bit position. The end position is the leftmost bit for shift right and
the rightmost bit position for the shift left. Arithmetic shifts usually con-
form with the rules for signed-2’s complement numbers. These rules are given
in Sec. 46, The arithmetic shift-right instruction must preserve the sign bit in
the leftmost position. The sign bit is shifted to the right together with the rest
of the number, but the sign bit itself remains unchanged. This is a shift-right
operation with the end bit remaining the same. The arithmetic shift-left in-
struction inserts 0 to the end position and is identical to the logical shift-left
instruction. For this reason many computers do not provide a distinct arith-
metic shift-eft instruction when the logical shift-left instruction is already
available.

The rotate instructions produce a circular shift. Bits shifted out at one end
ofthe word are not lostas in a logical shift but are circulated back into the other
end. The rotate through carry instruction treats a carry bit as an extension of
the register whose word is being rotated. Thus a rotate left through carry
instruction transfers the carry bit into the rightmost bit position of the register,
transfers the leftmost bit position into the carry, and at the same time, shifts
the entire register to the left.

Some computers have a multiple-field format for the shift instructions,
(One field contains the operation code and the others specify the type of shift
and the number of times that an operand is to be shifted. A possible instruction.
code format of a shift instruction may include five fields as follows:

Op REG TYPE RL COUNT

Here OP isthe operation code field; REGisa register address that specifies the
location of the operand; TYPE is a 2-bit field specifying the four different types
of shifts; RL is a 1-bit field specifying a shift right or left; and COUNT isa k-bit
field specifying up to 2' - 1 shifts. With such a format, itis possible to specify
the type of shift, the direction, and the number of shifts, all in one instruction.

  

  

 

TABLE 8-9 Typical Shift Instructions

Name ‘Mnemonic

Logical shift right SHR
Logical shift left SHL
Arithmetic shift right SHRA
‘Arithmetic shift left SHLA
Rotate right ROR
Rotate left ROL

Rotate right through carry RORC
Rotate left through carry ROLC
