276

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

TABLE 8-11 Conditional Branch Instructions

 

‘Mnemonic Branch condition Tested condition
BZ Branch if zero Zz
BNZ Branch if not zero Zz
BC Branch if carry c
BNC Branch if no carry c
BP Branch if plus s
BM Branch if minus Ss
BY Branch if overflow v
BNV Branch if no overflow v

Unsigned compare conditions (A — B)
BHI Branch if higher A>B
BHE Branch if higher or equal ADB
BLO Branch if lower A<B
BLOE Branch if lower or equal ASB
BE Branch if equal =B
BNE Branch if not equal AaB

‘Signed compare conditions (A — B)
BGT Branch if greater than A>B
BGE Branch if greater or equal ADB
BLT Branch if less than A<B
BLE Branch if less or equal ASB
BE Branch if equal

 

BNE Branch if not equal AaB

inserted to define the 0 state. Thus BC is Branch on Carry, and BNC is Branch
on No Carry. If the stated condition is true, program control is transferred to
the address specified by the instruction. If not, control continues with the
instruction that follows. The conditional instructions can be associated also
with the jump, skip, call, or return type of program control instructions.

The zero status bit is used for testing if the result of an ALU operation
is equal to zero or not. The carry bit is used to check if there is a carry out of
the most significant bit position of the ALU. Itis also used in conjunction with
therotateinstructionsto check the bit shifted from the end position of a register
into the carry position. The sign bit reflects the state of the most significant bit
ofthe output from the ALU. S = 0 denotes a positive sign and $ = I, a negative
sign. Therefore, a branch on plus checks for a sign bit of 0 and a branch on
minus checks for a sign bit of 1. It must be realized, however, that these two
conditional branch instructions can be used to check the value of the most
significant bit whether it represents a sign or not. The overflow bit is used in
conjunction with arithmetic operations done on signed numbers in 2's comple-
ment representation.

 
