18 Chapter1 Introduction

puter must analyze the data and possibly adjust controls to modify the sensor
inputs. Systems that control scientific experiments, medical imaging systems,
industrial control systems, and certain display systems are real-time systems.
Some automobile-engine fuel-injection systems, home-appliance controllers,
and weapon systems are also real-time systems.

A real-time system has well-defined, fixed time constraints. Processing
must be done within the defined constraints, or the system will fail. For
instance, it would not do for a robot arm to be instructed to halt after it had
smashed into the car it was building. A real-time system functions correctly
only if it returns the correct result within its time constraints. Contrast this
requirement toa time-sharing system, where it is desirable (but not mandatory)
to respond quickly, or to a batch system, which may have no time constraints at
all.

Real-time systems come in two flavors: hard and soft. A hard real-time
system guarantees that critical tasks be completed on time. This goal requires
that all delays in the system be bounded, from the retrieval of stored data to
the time that it takes the operating system to finish any request made of it. Such
time constraints dictate the facilities that are available in hard real-time systems.
Secondary storage of any sort is usually limited or missing, with data instead
being stored in short-term memory or in read-only memory (ROM). ROM is
located on nonvolatile storage devices that retain their contents even in the case
of electric outage; most other types of memory are volatile. Most advanced
operating-system features are absent too, since they tend to separate the user
from the hardware, and that separation results in uncertainty about the amount
of time an operation will take. For instance, virtual memory (Chapter 10) is
almost never found on real-time systems. Therefore, hard real-time systems
conflict with the operation of time-sharing systems, and the two cannot be
mixed. Since none of the existing general-purpose operating systems support
hard real-time functionality, we do not concern ourselves with this type of
system in this text.

A less restrictive type of real-time system is a soft real-time system, where
a critical real-time task gets priority over other tasks, and retains that priority
until it completes. As in hard real-time systems, the operating-system kernel
delays need to be bounded: A real-time task cannot be kept waiting indefinitely
for the kernel to run it. Soft real time is an achievable goal that can be mixed
with other types of systems. Soft real-time systems, however, have more limited
utility than hard real-time systems. Given their lack of deadline support, they
are risky to use for industrial control and robotics. They are useful, however
in several areas, including multimedia, virtual reality, and advanced scientific
projects—such as undersea exploration and planetary rovers. These systems
need advanced operating-system features that cannot be supported by hard
real-time systems. Because of the expanded uses for soft real-time functionality,
it is finding its way into most current operating systems, including major
versions of UNIX.
