Chapter 1. Introduction

 

ll

RATIONALITY

be done.' The advent of usable computers in the early 1950s turned the learned but armchair
speculation conceming these mental faculties into a real experimental and theoretical discipline.
Many felt thatthe new "Electronic Super-Brains" had unlimited potential for intelligence. "Faster
Than Einstein" was a typical headline. But as well as providing a vehicle for creating artificially
intelligent entities, the computer provides a tool for testing theories of intelligence, and many
theories failed to withstand the test-—a case of "out of the armchair, into the fire." AI has turned
out to be more difficult than many at first imagined, and modem ideas are much richer, more
subtle, and more interesting as a result.

AI currently encompasses a huge variety of subfields, from general-purpose areas such as
perception and logical reasoning, to specific tasks such as playing chess, proving mathematical
theorems, writing poetry, and diagnosing diseases. Often, scientists in other fields move gradually
into artificial intelligence, where they find the tools and vocabulary to systematize and automate
the intellectual tasks on which they have been working all their lives. Similarly, workers in AI
can choose to apply their methods to any area of human intellectual endeavor. In this sense, it is
truly a universal field.

Wuat is Al?

We have now explained why AI is exciting, but we have not said what it is. We could just say,
"Well, ithas to do with smart programs, so let's get on and write some." But the history ofscience
shows that it is helpful to aim at the right goals. Early alchemists, looking for a potion for eternal
life and a method to turn lead into gold, were probably offon the wrong foot. Only when the aim
changed, to that of finding explicit theories that gave accurate predictions of the terrestrial world,
in the same way that early astronomy predicted the apparent motions of the stars and planets,
could the scientific method emerge and productive science take place.

Definitions of artificial intelligence according to eight recent textbooks are shown in Fig-
ure 1.1. These definitions vary along two main dimensions. The ones on top are concerned,
with thoughtprocesses and reasoning, whereas the ones on the bottom address behavior. Also,
the definitions on the left measure success in terms of human performance, whereas the ones
on the right measure against an ideal concept of intelligence, which we will call rationality. A!
system is rational ifit does the right thing. This gives us four possible goals to pursue in artificial,
intelligence, as seen in the caption of Figure 1.1.

Historically, all four approaches have been followed. As one might expect, a tension exists
between approaches centered around humans and approaches centered around rationality.” A!
human-centered approach must be an empirical science, involving hypothesis and experimental

| A more recent branch of philosophy is concemed with proving that AI is impossible. We will retum to this interesting:
viewpoint in Chapter 26.

2 We should point out that by distinguishing between human and rational behavior, we are not suggesting that humans
are necessarily irrational” in the sense of "emotionally unstable” or "insane." One merely need note that we often make:
mistakes; we are not all chess grandmaster even though we may know all the rules of chess, and unfortunately, not
everyone gets an A on the exam. Some systematic errors in human reasoning are cataloged by Kahneman et al, (1982).
