m4

Chapter 1. Tntroduction

AI becomes an industry (1980-1988)

The first successful commercial expert system, RI, began operation at Digital Equipment Cor-
poration (McDemnott, 1982). The program helped configure orders for new computer systems,
and by 1986, it was saving the company an estimated $40 million a year. By 1988, DEC's AI
group had 40 deployed expert systems, with more on the way. Du Pont had 100in use and 500 in
development, saving an estimated $10 million a year. Nearly every major U.S. corporation had
its own AI group and was either using or investigating expert system technology.

In 1981, the Japanese announced the "Fifth Generation" project, a 10-year plan to build
intelligent computers running Prolog in much the same way that ordinary computers run machine
code. The idea was that with the ability to make millions of inferences per second, computers
would be able to take advantage of vast stores ofrules. The project proposed to achieve full-scale
natural language understanding, among other ambitious goals.

The Fifth Generation project fueled interest in AI, and by taking advantage of fears of
Japanese domination, researchers and corporations were able to generate support for a similar

investment in the United States. The Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation i

(MCC) was formed as a research consortium to counter the Japanese project. In Britain, the
Alvey report reinstated the funding that was cut by the Lighthill report.'® In both cases, AI was
part of a broad effort, including chip design and human-interface research.

The booming AI industry also included companies such as Carnegie Group, Inference,
Intellicorp, and Teknowledge that offered the software tools to build expert systems, and hard-
ware companies such as Lisp Machines Inc., Texas Instruments, Symbolics, and Xerox that
were building workstations optimized for the development of Lisp programs. Over a hundred
companies built industrial robotic vision systems. Overall, the industry went from a few million
in sales in 1980 to $2 billion in 1988.

The return of neural networks (1986—present)

Although computer science had neglected the field of neural networks after Minsky and Papert's
Perceptrons book, work had continued in other fields, particularly physics. Large collections
of simple neurons could be understood in much the same way as large collections of atoms in
solids. Physicists such as Hopfield (1982) used techniques from statistical mechanics to analyze
the storage and optimization properties of networks, leading to significant cross-fertilization of.
ideas. Psychologists including David Rumelhart and Geoff Hinton continued the study of neural
net models of memory. As we discuss in Chapter 19, the real impetus came in the mid-1980s
when at least four different groups reinvented the back-propagation learning algorithm first found
in 1969 by Bryson and Ho. The algorithm was applied to many learning problems in computer
science and psychology, and the widespread dissemination of the results in the collection Parallel
Distributed Processing (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986) caused great excitement.

At about the same time, some disillusionment was occurring conceming the applicability
of the expert system technology derived from MYCIN-type systems.. Many corporations and

16 To save embarrassment, a new field called IKBS (Intelligent Knowledge-BasedSystems) was defined because Artificial
Intelligence had been officially cancelled.
