382 Chapter 11. File-System Interface

11.2.3 Other Access Methods

Other access methods can be built on top of a direct-access method. These
methods generally involve the construction of an index for the file. The index,
like an index in the back of a book, contains pointers to the various blocks. To
find a record in the file, we first search the index, and then use the pointer to
access the file directly and to find the desired record. .

For example, a retail-price file might list the universal product codes (UPCs)
for items, with the associated prices. Each record consists of a 10-digit UPC and
a 6-digit price, for a 16-byte record. If our disk has 1,024 bytes per block, we
can store 64 records per block. A file of 120,000 records would occupy about
2,000 blocks (2 million bytes). By keeping the file sorted by UPC, we can define
an index consisting of the first UPC in each block. This index would have 2,000
entries of 10 digits each, or 20,000 bytes, and thus could be kept in memory. To
find the price of a particular item, we can (binary) search the index. From this
search, we would know exactly which block contains the desired record and
access that block. This structure allows us to search a large file doing little 1/0.

With large files, the index file itself may become too large to be kept in
memory. One solution is to create an index for the index file. The primary
index file would contain pointers to secondary index files, which would point
to the actual data items.

For example, IBM’s indexed sequential-access method (ISAM) uses a small
master index that points to disk blocks of a secondary index. The secondary
index blocks point to the actual file blocks. The file is kept sorted on a defined
key. To find a particular item, we first make a binary search of the master index,
which provides the block number of the secondary index. This block is read
in, and again a binary search is used to find the block containing the desired

 

 

 

 

logical record
last name number
Adams
Arthur
Asher

  
    
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

index file relative file

Figure 11.4 Example of index and relative files.
