430 Chapter12 File-System Implementation

we may have to read first the index block and then the desired data block. For
a two-level index, two index-block reads might be necessary. For an extremely
large file, accessing a block near the end of the file would require reading in
all the index blocks to follow the pointer chain before the needed data block
finally could be read. Thus, the performance of indexed allocation depends
on the index structure, on the size of the file, and on the position of the block
desired.

Some systems combine contiguous allocation with indexed allocation by
using contiguous allocation for small files (up to three or four blocks), and
automatically switching to an indexed allocation if the file grows large. Since
most files are small, and contiguous allocation is efficient for small files, average
performance can be quite good.

For instance, the version of the UNIX operating system from Sun Microsys-
tems was changed in 1991 to improve performance in the file-system allocation
algorithm. The performance measurements indicated that the maximum disk
throughput on a typical workstation (12-MIPS SPARCstation1) took 50 percent
of the CPU and produced a disk bandwidth of only 1.5 MB per second. To
improve performance, Sun made changes to allocate space in clusters of size
56 KB whenever possible. (56 KB was the maximum size of a DMA transfer
on Suns at that time.) This allocation reduced external fragmentation, and
thus seek and latency times. In addition, the disk-reading routines were opti-
mized to read in these large clusters. The inode structure was left unchanged.
These changes, plus the use of read-ahead and free-behind (discussed in Section
12.6.2), resulted in 25 percent less CPU being used for substantially improved
throughput.

Many other optimizations are possible and are in use. Given the disparity
between CPU and disk speed, it is not unreasonable to add thousands of extra
instructions to the operating system to save just a few disk-head movements.
Furthermore, this disparity is increasing over time, to the point where hun-
dreds of thousands of instructions reasonably could be used to optimize head
movements.

12.5 = Free-Space Management

Since disk space is limited, we need to reuse the space from deleted files for new
files, if possible. (Write-once optical disks only allow one write to any given
sector, and thus such reuse is not physically possible.) To keep track of free
disk space, the system maintains a free-space list. The free-space list records all
free disk blocks—those not allocated to some file or directory. To create a file,
we search the free-space list for the required amount of space, and allocate that
space to the new file. This space is then removed from the free-space list. When
a file is deleted, its disk space is added to the free-space list. The free-space list,
despite its name, might not be implemented as a list, as we shall discuss.
