438 Chapter 12 File-System Implementation

 

 

 

 

cI

CPU

 

 

 

 

 

controller

 

 

 

 

main memory
Figure 12.13 Various disk-caching locations.

memory is generally more up to date than is the corresponding information
on the disk, because the write of cached directory information to disk does not
necessarily occur as soon as the update takes place.

Consider the possible effect of a computer crash. In this case, the table
of opened files is generally lost, and with it any changes in the directories
of opened files. This event can leave the file system in an inconsistent state:
The actual state of some files is not as described in the directory structure.
Frequently, a special program is run at reboot time to check for and correct disk
inconsistencies.

The consistency checker compares the data in the directory structure with
the data blocks on disk, and tries to fix any inconsistencies it finds. The allo-
cation and free-space-management algorithms dictate what types of problems
the checker can find, and how successful it will be in fixing them. For instance,
if linked allocation is used and there is a link from any block to its next block,
then the entire file can be reconstructed from the data blocks, and the directory
structure can be recreated. The loss of a directory entry on an indexed alloca-
tion system could be disastrous, because the data blocks have no knowledge of
one another. For this reason, UNIX caches directory entries for reads, but any
data write that results in space allocation, or other metadata changes, is done
synchronously, before the corresponding data blocks are written.

12.7.2 Backup and Restore

Because magnetic disks sometimes fail, care must be taken to ensure that the
data are not lost forever. To this end, system programs can be used to back up
data from disk to another storage device, such as a floppy disk, magnetic tape,
or optical disk. Recovery from the loss of an individual file, or of an entire disk,
may then be a matter of restoring the data from backup.

To minimize the copying needed, we can use information from each file’s
directory entry. For instance, if the backup program knows when the last
backup of a file was done, and the file’s last write date in the directory indicates
