14 Chapter 1 Introduction

processes and resources—such as memory—to be shared dynamically among
the various processors, and can lower the variance among the processors. Such
a system must be written carefully, as we shall see in Chapter 7. Virtually
all modern operating systems—including Windows NT, Solaris, Digital UNIX,
0S/2, and Linux—now provide support for SMP.

The difference between symmetric and asymmetric multiprocessing may be
the result of either hardware or software. Special hardware can differentiate the
multiple processors, or the software can be written to allow only one master and
multiple slaves. For instance, Sun’s operating system SunOS Version 4 provides
asymmetric multiprocessing, whereas Version 5 (Solaris 2) is symmetric on the
same hardware.

As microprocessors become less expensive and more powerful, additional
operating-system functions are off-loaded to slave processors (or back-ends).
For example, it is fairly easy to add a microprocessor with its own memory
to manage a disk system. The microprocessor could receive a sequence of
requests from the main CPU and implement its own disk queue and scheduling
algorithm. This arrangement relieves the main CPU of the overhead of disk
scheduling. PCs contain a microprocessor in the keyboard to convert the
keystrokes into codes to be sent to the CPU. In fact, this use of microprocessors
has become so common that it is no longer considered multiprocessing.

1.5 = Distributed Systems

A network, in the simplest terms, is a communication path between two or
more systems. Distributed systems depend on networking for their function-
ality. By being able to communicate, distributed systems are able to share
computational tasks, and provide a rich set of features to users.

Networks vary by the protocols used, the distances between nodes, and
the transport media. TCP/IP is the most common network protocol, although
ATM and other protocols are in widespread use. Likewise, operating-system
support of protocols varies. Most operating systems support TCP/IP, including
the Windows and UNIX operating systems. Some systems support proprietary
protocols to suit their needs. To an operating system, a network protocol
simply needs an interface device—a network adapter, for example—with a
device driver to manage it, and software to package data in the communications
protocol to send it and to unpackage it to receive it. These concepts are
discussed throughout the book.

Networks are typecast based on the distances between their nodes. A
local-area network (LAN), exists within a room, a floor, or a building. A
wide-area network (WAN), usually exists between buildings, cities, or coun-
tries. A global company may have a WAN to connect its offices, worldwide.
These networks could run one protocol or several protocols. The continuing
advent of new technologies brings about new forms of networks. For exam-
