12.7 Recovery 437

others, can be synchronous. Operating systems frequently include a flag in
the open system call to allow a process to request that writes be performed
synchronously. For example, databases use this feature for atomic transactions,
to assure that data reaches stable storage in the required order.

Some systems optimize their page cache by using different replacement
algorithms, depending on the access type of the file. A file being read or
written sequentially should not have its pages replaced in LRU order, because
the most recently used page will be used last, or perhaps never again. Instead,
sequential access may be optimized by techniques known as free-behind and
read-ahead. Free-behind removes a page from the buffer as soon as the next
page is requested. The previous pages are not likely to be used again and waste
buffer space. With read-ahead, a requested page and several subsequent pages
are read and cached. These pages are likely to be requested after the current
page is processed. Retrieving this data from the disk in one transfer and caching
it saves a considerable amount of time. A track cache on the controller does not
eliminate the need for read-ahead on a multiprogrammed system, because of
the high latency and overhead of many small transfers from the track cache to
main memory.

Another method of using main memory to improve performance is com-
mon on PCs. A section of memory is set aside and treated as a virtual disk (or
RAM disk). In this case, a RAM-disk device driver accepts all the standard disk
operations but performs those operations on the memory section, instead of on
a disk. All disk operations can then be executed on this RAM disk and, except
for the lightning-fast speed, users will not notice a difference. Unfortunately,
RAM disks are useful only for temporary storage, since a power failure or a
reboot of the system will usually erase them. Commonly, temporary files such
as intermediate compiler files are stored there.

The difference between a RAM disk and a disk cache is that the contents
of the RAM disk are totally user controlled, whereas those of the disk cache
are under the control of the operating system. For instance, a RAM disk will
stay empty until the user (or programs, at a user’s direction) creates files there.
Figure 12.13 shows the possible caching locations in a system.

12.7 = Recovery

Since files and directories are kept both in main memory and on disk, care must
taken to ensure that system failure does not result in loss of data or in data
inconsistency.

12.7.1 Consistency Checking

As discussed in Section 12.3, part of the directory information is kept in main
memory (or cache) to speed up access. The directory information in main
