12.4 Allocation Methods 425

can be used to satisfy a request. The size of a file does not need to be declared
when that file is created. A file can continue to grow as long as free blocks are
available. Consequently, it is never necessary to compact disk space.

Linked allocation does have disadvantages, however. The major problem
is that it can be used effectively only for sequential-access files. To find the ith
block of a file, we must start at the beginning of that file, and follow the pointers
until we get to the ith block. Each access to a pointer requires a disk read, and
sometimes a disk seek. Consequently, it is inefficient to support a direct-access
capability for linked allocation files.

Another disadvantage to linked allocation is the space required for the
pointers. If a pointer requires 4 bytes out of a 512-byte block, then 0.78 percent
of the disk is being used for pointers, rather than for information. Each file
requires slightly more space than it would otherwise.

The usual solution to this problem is to collect blocks into multiples, called
clusters, and to allocate the clusters rather than blocks. For instance, the file
system may define a cluster as 4 blocks, and operate on the disk in only cluster
units. Pointers then use a much smaller percentage of the file’s disk space.
This method allows the logical-to-physical block mapping to remain simple,
but improves disk throughput (fewer disk head seeks) and decreases the space
needed for block allocation and free-list management. The cost of this approach
is an increase in internal fragmentation, because more space is wasted if a
cluster is partially full than when a block is partially full. Clusters can be used
to improve the disk-access time for many other algorithms, so they are used in
most operating systems.

Yet another problem of linked allocation is reliability. Since the files are
linked together by pointers scattered all over the disk, consider what would
happen if a pointer were lost or damaged. A bug in the operating-system
software or a disk hardware failure might result in picking up the wrong
pointer. This error could result in linking into the free-space list or into another
file. Partial solutions are to use doubly linked lists or to store the file name and
relative block number in each block; however, these schemes require even more
overhead for each file.

An important variation on the linked allocation method is the use of a file-
allocation table (FAT). This simple but efficient method of disk-space allocation
is used by the MS-DOS and OS/2 operating systems. A section of disk at the
beginning of each partition is set aside to contain the table. The table has one
entry for each disk block, and is indexed by block number. The FAT is used
much as is a linked list. The directory entry contains the block number of
the first block of the file. The table entry indexed by that block number then
contains the block number of the next block in the file. This chain continues
until the last block, which has a special end-of-file value as the table entry.
Unused blocks are indicated by a 0 table value. Allocating a new block to a
file is a simple matter of finding the first 0-valued table entry, and replacing
the previous end-of-file value with the address of the new block. The 0 is then
