Section 1.5.

Summary 27

 

the diagnosis. The machine points out the major factors influencing its decision, and explains
the subtle interaction of several of the symptoms in this case. The expert admits his error,
eventually (Heckerman, 1991).

From a camera perched on a street light above the crossroads, the traffic monitor watches
the scene. If any humans were awake to read the main screen, they would see "Citroen 2CV
turning from Place de la Concorde into Champs Elysees," "Large truck of unknown make stopped
on Place de la Concorde," and so on into the night. And occasionally, “Majorincident on Place
de la Concorde, speeding van collided with motorcyclist," and an automatic call to the emergency
services (King ef al., 1993; Koller et al., 1994).

These are just a few examples of artificial intelligence systems that exist today. Not magic
or science fiction—butrather science, engineering, and mathematics, to which this book provides
an introduction.

15 SUMMARY

This chapter defines AI and establishes the cultural background against which it has developed.
Some of the important points are as follows:

Different people think of AI differently. Two important questions to ask are: Are you
concemed with thinking or behavior? Do you want to model humans, or work from an
ideal standard?

In this book, we adopt the view that intelligence is concerned mainly with rational action.
Ideally, an intelligent agent takes the best possible action in a situation. We will study the
problem of building agents that are intelligent in this sense.

Philosophers (going back to 400 B.C.) made AI conceivable by considering the ideas that
the mind is in some ways like a machine, that it operates on knowledge encoded in some
internal language, and that thought can be used to help arrive at the right actions to take.

Mathematicians provided the tools to manipulate statements of logical certainty as well
as uncertain, probabilistic statements. They also set the groundwork for reasoning about
algorithms.

Psychologists strengthened the idea that humans and other animals can be considered
information processing machines. Linguists showed that language use fits into this model.

Computer engineering provided the artifact that makes AI applications possible. AI pro-
grams tend to be large, and they could not work without the great advances in speed and
memory that the computer industry has provided.

The history of Al has had cycles of success, misplaced optimism, and resulting cutbacks
in enthusiasm and funding. There have also been cycles of introducing new creative
approaches and systematically refining the best ones.

Recent progress in understanding the theoretical basis for intelligence has gone hand in
hand with improvements in the capabilities of real systems.
