12.2 File-System Implementation 415

To create a new file, an application program calls the logical file system.
The logical file system knows the format of the directory structures. To create
a new file, it allocates a new FCB, reads the appropriate directory into memory,
updates it with the new file name and FCB, and writes it back to the disk. A
typical FCB is shown in Figure 12.2.

Some operating systems, including UNIX, treat a directory exactly as a
file—one with a type field indicating that it is a directory. Other operating
systems, including Windows NT, implement separate system calls for files and
directories and treat directories as entities separate from files. No matter the
larger structural issues, the logical file system can call the file-organization
module to map the directory I/O into disk-block numbers, which are passed on
to the basic file system and I/O control system. The file-organization module
also allocates blocks for storage of the file’s data.

Now that a file has been created, it can be used for I/O. First, though, it
must be opened. The open call passes a file name to the file system. When a file
is opened, the directory structure is searched for the given file name. Parts of the
directory structure are usually cached in memory to speed directory operations.
Once the file is found, the FCB is copied into a system- wide open-file table in
memory. This table not only stores the FCB, but also has entries for a count of
the number of processes that have the file open.

Next, an entry is made in the per-process open-file table, with a pointer
to the entry in the system-wide open-file table and some other fields. These
other fields can include a pointer to the current location in the file (for the
next read or write operation) and the access mode in which the file is open.
The open call returns a pointer to the appropriate entry in the per-process file-
system table. All file operations are then performed via this pointer. The file
name may not be part of the open-file table, as the system has no use for it once
the appropriate FCB is located on disk. The name given to the index varies.

 

file permissions

 

file dates (create, access, write)

 

tile owner, group, ACL

file size

 

file data blocks:

 

 

 

Figure 12.2 _A typical file control block.

 
