402 Chapter 11 File-System Interface

key properties: Its name may not be reused and its contents may not be
altered. Thus, the name of an immutable file signifies that the contents of the
file are fixed, rather than the file being a container for variable information.
The implementation of these semantics in a distributed system (Chapter 16) is
simple, because the sharing is disciplined (read-only).

11.6 = Protection

When information is kept in a computer system, we want to keep it safe from
physical damage (reliability) and improper access (protection).

Reliability is generally provided by duplicate copies of files. Many comput-
ers have systems programs that automatically (or through computer-operator
intervention) copy disk files to tape at regular intervals (once per day or week
or month) to maintain a copy should a file system be accidentally destroyed.
File systems can be damaged by hardware problems (such as errors in reading
or writing), power surges or failures, head crashes, dirt, temperature extremes,
and vandalism. Files may be deleted accidentally. Bugs in the file-system soft-
ware can also cause file contents to be lost. Reliability is covered in more detail
in Chapter 14.

Protection can be provided in many ways. For a small single-user system,
we might provide protection by physically removing the floppy disks and
locking them in a desk drawer or file cabinet. In a multiuser system, however,
other mechanisms are needed.

11.6.1 Types of Access

The need to protect files is a direct result of the ability to access files. Systems
that do not permit access to the files of other users do not need protection. Thus,
we could provide complete protection by prohibiting access. Alternatively, we
could provide free access with no protection. Both approaches are too extreme
for general use. What is needed is controlled access.

Protection mechanisms provide controlled access by limiting the types of
file access that can be made. Access is permitted or denied depending on
several factors, one of which is the type of access requested. Several different
types of operations may be controlled:

¢ Read: Read from the file.

« Write: Write or rewrite the file.

Execute: Load the file into memory and execute it.

¢ Append: Write new information at the end of the file.

© Delete: Delete the file and free its space for possible reuse.

List: List the name and attributes of the file.
