  

Section 9.3

Generalized Modus Ponens 269

 

g.3__GENERALIZED MODUS PONENS

PUrRALIZED
fobUS Eons

In this section, we introduce a generalization of the Modus Ponens inference rule that does in a
single blow what required an And-Introduction, Universal Elimination, and Modus Ponens in the
earlier proof. The idea is to be able to take a knowledge base containing, for example:

Missile(M 1)

Owns(Nono, M1)

Vx Missile(x)A Owns(Nono, x)= Sells(West, Nono, x)
and infer in one step the new sentence

Sells( West, Nono,M1)

Intuitively, this inference seems quite obvious. The key is to find some x in the knowledge base
such that x is a missile and Nono owns x, and then infer that West sells this missile to Nono.
More generally, ifthere is some substitution involving x that makes the premise ofthe implication
identical to sentences already in the knowledge base, then we can assert the conclusion of the
implication, after applying the substitution. In the preceding case, the substitution {x/M1}
achieves this.

We can actually make Modus Ponens do even more work. Suppose that instead ofknowing
Owns(Nono, M |).we knew that everyone owns MI (a communal missile, as it were):

Vy Owns(y,M1)
Then we would still like to be able to conclude that Sells( West, Nono, M1). This inference could
be carried out if we first applied Universal Elimination with the substitution {y/Nono}to get
Owns(Nono, M1).The generalized version of Modus Ponens can do it in one step by finding a
substitution for both the variables in the implication sentence and the variables in the sentences to
be matched. In this case, applying the substitution {x/M1, y/Nono} to the premise Owns(Nono, x)
and the sentence Owns(y, M1 )will make them identical. Ifthis can be done for all the premises
of the implication, then we can infer the conclusion of the implication. The rule is as follows:

© Generalized Modus Ponens: For atomic sentences pj, p;’, and g, where there is a substi-
tution 0 such that SuBsT(4, p;’) = SuBsT(4, p;), for all i:

Pils pry sees Po (Di App A... APn >)
SuBST(6,@)
There are n + 1 premises to this rule: the n atomic sentences p;’ and the one implication. There
is one conclusion: the result of applying the substitution to the consequent g. For the example
with West and the missile:

Pt is Missile(M1) pr is Missile(x)
‘po is Owns(y,M1) po is Owns(Nono, x)
0 is {x/M1, y/Nono} q is Sells( West, Nono, x)

SuBST(4, q) is Sells(West,Nono, M1)
Generalized Modus Ponens is an efficient inference rule for three reasons:

I. It takes bigger steps, combining several small inferences into one.

 
