3.1 System Components 59

Only the device driver knows the peculiarities of the specific device to which it
is assigned.

We discussed in Chapter 2 how interrupt handlers and device drivers are
used in the construction of efficient I/O subsystems. In Chapter 13, we will
discuss how the 1/O subsystem interfaces to the other system components,
manages devices, transfers data, and detects I/O completion.

3.1.5 Secondary-Storage Management

The main purpose of a computer system is to execute programs. These pro-
grams, with the data they access, must be in main memory, or primary storage,
during execution. Because main memory is too small to accommodate all data
and programs, and because the data that it holds are lost when power is lost,
the computer system must provide secondary storage to back up main mem-
ory. Most modern computer systems use disks as the principal on-line storage
medium, for both programs and data. Most programs—including compilers,
assemblers, sort routines, editors, and formatters—are stored on a disk until
loaded into memory, and then use the disk as both the source and destination
of their processing. Hence, the proper management of disk storage is of central
importance to a computer system.

The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with disk management:

« Free-space management
© Storage allocation
© Disk scheduling

Because secondary storage is used frequently, it must be used efficiently. The
entire speed of operation of a computer may hinge on the speeds of the disk
subsystem and of the algorithms that manipulate that subsystem. Techniques
for secondary-storage management will be discussed in Chapter 14.

3.1.6 Networking

A distributed system is a collection of processors that do not share memory,
peripheral devices, or a clock. Instead, each processor has its own local memory
and clock, and the processors communicate with one another through various
communication lines, such as high-speed buses or networks. The processors in
a distributed system vary in size and function. They may include small micro-
processors, workstations, minicomputers, and large, general-purpose computer
systems.

The processors in the system are connected through a communication net-
work, which can be configured in a number of different ways. The network
may be fully or partially connected. The communication-network design must
