5.3 Threading Issues 135

5.3. = Threading Issues

In this section we discuss some of the issues to consider with multithreaded
programs.

5.3.1 The fork and exec System Calls

In Chapter 4 we described how the fork system call is used to create a separate,
duplicate process. In a multithreaded program, the semantics of the fork and
exec system calls change. If one thread in a program calls fork, does the
new process duplicate all threads or is the new process single-threaded? Some
UNIX systems have chosen to have two versions of fork, one that duplicates
all threads and another that duplicates only the thread that invoked the fork
system call. The exec system call typically works in the same way as described
in Chapter 4. That is, if a thread invokes the exec system call, the program
specified in the parameter to exec will replace the entire process—including
all threads and LWPs.

Usage of the two versions of fork depends upon the application. If exec
is called immediately after forking, then duplicating all threads is unnecessary,
as the program specified in the parameters to exec will replace the process. In
this instance, duplicating only the calling thread is appropriate. If, however, the
separate process does not call exec after forking, the separate process should
duplicate all threads.

5.3.2 Cancellation

Thread cancellation is the task of terminating a thread before it has completed.
For example, if multiple threads are concurrently searching through a database
and one thread returns the result, the remaining threads might be cancelled.
Another situation might occur when a user presses a button on a web browser
that stops a web page from loading any further. Often a web page is loaded in
a separate thread. When a user presses the stop button, the thread loading the
page is cancelled.

A thread that is to be cancelled is often referred to as the target thread.
Cancellation of a target thread may occur in two different scenarios:

1. Asynchronous cancellation: One thread immediately terminates the target
thread.

2. Deferred cancellation: The target thread can periodically check if it should
terminate, allowing the target thread an opportunity to terminate itself in
an orderly fashion.

The difficulty with cancellation occurs in situations where resources have
been allocated to a cancelled thread or if a thread was cancelled while in
