secrion€s InputOurput Programming 211

616. Write a program to multiply two unsigned positive numbers, each with 16
significant bits, to produce an unsigned double-precision product

617. Write a program to multiply two signed numbers with negative numbers
being initially in signed-2's complement representation. The product should
bbe single-precision and signed-2's complement representation if negative.

618. Write a program to subtract two double-precision numbers.
_ 619. Writea program that evaluates the logicexclusive-OR oftwo logic operands.

620. Write a program for the arithmetic shift-left operation. Branch to OVF if an
overflow occurs

621 Write a subroutine to subtract two numbers. In the calling program, the
BSA instructions followed by the subtrahend and minuend. The difference
is returned to the main program in the third location following the BSA
instruction

622, Write asubroutineto complement each word in a block of data. In thecalling,
program, the BSA instruction is followed by two parameters: the starting
address of the block and the number of words in the block.

623. Writea subroutine tocirculateE and AC four times to the right. If AC contains
hexadecimal 079C and E = 1, what are the contents of AC and E after the
subroutine is executed?

624. Write a program toaccept input characters, pack two characters in one word.
and store them in consecutive locations in a memory buffer. The first address
of the buffer is (400). The size of the buffer is (512) words. If the buffer
overflows, the computer should halt.

625. Write a program to unpack two characters from location WRD and store
them in bits 0 through 7 of locations CH and CH2. Bits 9 through 15 should
contain zeros.

626. Obtaina flowchart for a program to check for a CR code (hexadecimal 0D)
in a memory buffer. The buffercontains two characters per word. When the
code for CR is encountered, the program transfers it to bits 0 through 7 of
location LNE without disturbing bits 8 through 15.

627. Translate the service routine SRV from Table 6-23 to its equivalent hexadec-
imal code. Assume that the routine is stored starting from location 200.

628. Write an interrupt service routine that performs all the required functions

but the input device is serviced only if a special location, MOD, contains all
Y's The output device is serviced only if location MOD contains all 0's.

 

   

 

REFERENCES

 

 

L Booth, T. L,, Introduction to Computer Engineering, 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley,
1984.

2. Gear, C. W,, Computer Organization and Programming, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1980.
