76  Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

 

 

 

signals terminal file system : CPU scheduling
‘handling ‘swapping block VO “page replacement

character 1/0 system system demand paging

terminal drivers disk and tape drivers virtual memory

   

    

device controllers
disks and tapes

memory controllers
physical memory

   

 

 

 

Figure 3.7. UNIX system structure.

down approach, the overall functionality and features are determined and
are separated into components. This separation allows programmers to hide
information; they are therefore free to implement the low-level routines as they
see fit, provided that the external interface of the routine stays unchanged and
that the routine itself performs the advertised task.

3.5.2. Layered Approach

The modularization of a system can be done in many ways. One method is the
layered approach, in which the operating system is broken up into a number of
layers (or levels), each built on top of lower layers. The bottom layer (layer 0) is
the hardware; the highest (layer N) is the user interface.

An operating-system layer is an implementation of an abstract object that
is the encapsulation of data, and of the operations that can manipulate those
data. A typical operating-system layer —say layer M—is depicted in Figure
3.8. It consists of data structures and a set of routines that can be invoked
by higher-level layers. Layer M, in turn, can invoke operations on lower-level
layers.

The main advantage of the layered approach is modularity. The layers
are selected such that each uses functions (or operations) and services of only
lower-level layers. This approach simplifies debugging and system verification.
The first layer can be debugged without any concern for the rest of the system,
because, by definition, it uses only the basic hardware (which is assumed
correct) to implement its functions. Once the first layer is debugged, its correct
functioning can be assumed while the second layer is debugged, and so on.
If an error is found during the debugging of a particular layer, the error must
