364 Chapter10 Virtual Memory

run even though their memory requirements exceed the total available physical
memory. Such processes run in virtual memory.

If total memory requirements exceed the physical memory, then it may
be necessary to replace pages from memory to free frames for new pages.
Various page-replacement algorithms are used. FIFO page replacement is easy
to program, but suffers from Belady’s anomaly. Optimal page replacement
requires future knowledge. LRU replacement is an approximation of optimal,
but even it may be difficult to implement. Most page-replacement algorithms,
such as the second-chance algorithm, are approximations of LRU replacement.

In addition to a page-replacement algorithm, a frame-allocation policy
is needed. Allocation can be fixed, suggesting local page replacement, or
dynamic, suggesting global replacement. The working-set model assumes that
processes execute in localities. The working set is the set of pages in the current
locality. Accordingly, each process should be allocated enough frames for its
current working set.

If a process does not have enough memory for its working set, it will
thrash. Providing enough frames to each process to avoid thrashing may
require process swapping and scheduling.

In addition to requiring that we solve the major problems of page replace-
ment and frame allocation, the proper design of a paging system requires that
we consider page size, 1/O, locking, prepaging, process creation, program struc-
ture, thrashing, and other topics. Virtual memory can be thought of as one level
of a hierarchy of storage levels in a computer system. Each level has its own
access time, size, and cost parameters. A full example of a hybrid, functional
virtual-memory system is presented in the Mach chapter, which is available on
our web site (http:// www bell-labs.com/topic/books, /os-book).

m Exercises

10.1 Under what circumstances do page faults occur? Describe the actions
taken by the operating system when a page fault occurs.

10.2 Assume that you have a page-reference string for a process with m
frames (initially all empty). The page-reference string has length p;

distinct page numbers occur in it. Answer these questions for any page-
replacement algorithms:

a. What is a lower bound on the number of page faults?
b. What is an upper bound on the number of page faults?

10.3 A certain computer provides its users with a virtual-memory space of
2 pytes. The computer has 2’ bytes of physical memory. The virtual
memory is implemented by paging, and the page size is 4,096 bytes.
A user process generates the virtual address 11123456. Explain how
