27

Multithreaded Algorithms

The vast majority of algorithms in this book are serial algorithms suitable for
running on a uniprocessor computer in which only one instruction executes at a
time. In this chapter, we shall extend our algorithmic model to encompass parallel
algorithms, which can run on a multiprocessor computer that permits multiple
instructions to execute concurrently. In particular, we shall explore the elegant
model of dynamic multithreaded algorithms, which are amenable to algorithmic
design and analysis, as well as to efficient implementation in practice.

Parallel computers—computers with multiple processing units—have become
increasingly common, and they span a wide range of prices and performance. Rela-
tively inexpensive desktop and laptop chip multiprocessors contain a single multi-
core integrated-circuit chip that houses multiple processing “cores,” each of which
is a full-fledged processor that can access a common memory. At an intermedi-
ate price/performance point are clusters built from individual computers— often
simple PC-class machines —with a dedicated network interconnecting them. The
highest-priced machines are supercomputers, which often use a combination of
custom architectures and custom networks to deliver the highest performance in
terms of instructions executed per second.

Multiprocessor computers have been around, in one form or another, for
decades. Although the computing community settled on the random-access ma-
chine model for serial computing early on in the history of computer science, no
single model for parallel computing has gained as wide acceptance. A major rea-
son is that vendors have not agreed on a single architectural model for parallel
computers. For example, some parallel computers feature shared memory, where
each processor can directly access any location of memory. Other parallel com-
puters employ distributed memory, where each processor’s memory is private, and
an explicit message must be sent between processors in order for one processor to
access the memory of another. With the advent of multicore technology, however,
every new laptop and desktop machine is now a shared-memory parallel computer,

 
