420 Chapter 12  File-System Implementation

12.3 = Directory Implementation

The selection of directory-allocation and directory-management algorithms has
a large effect on the efficiency, performance, and reliability of the file system.
Therefore, you need to understand the tradeoffs involved in these algorithms.

12.3.1 Linear List

The simplest method of implementing a directory is to use a linear list of file
names with pointers to the data blocks. A linear list of directory entries requires
a linear search to find a particular entry. This method is simple to program
but time-consuming to execute. To create a new file, we must first search the
directory to be sure that no existing file has the same name. Then, we add a
new entry at the end of the directory. To delete a file, we search the directory
for the named file, then release the space allocated to it. To reuse the directory
entry, we can do one of several things. We can mark the entry as unused (by
assigning it a special name, such as an all-blank name, or with a used-unused
bit in each entry), or we can attach it to a list of free directory entries. A third
alternative is to copy the last entry in the directory into the freed location, and
to decrease the length of the directory. A linked list can also be used to decrease
the time to delete a file.

The real disadvantage of a linear list of directory entries is the linear search
to find a file. Directory information is used frequently, and users would notice a
slow implementation of access to it. In fact, many operating systems implement
a software cache to store the most recently used directory information. A cache
hit avoids constantly rereading the information from disk. A sorted list allows a
binary search and decreases the average search time. However, the requirement
that the list must be kept sorted may complicate creating and deleting files,
since we may have to move substantial amounts of directory information to
maintain a sorted directory. A more sophisticated tree data structure, such as a
B-tree, might help here. An advantage of the sorted list is that a sorted directory
listing can be produced without a separate sort step.

12.3.2 Hash Table

Another data structure that has been used for a file directory is a hash table. In
this method, a linear list stores the directory entries, but a hash data structure is
also used. The hash table takes a value computed from the file name and returns
a pointer to the file name in the linear list. Therefore, it can greatly decrease the
directory search time. Insertion and deletion are also fairly straightforward,
although some provision must be made for collisions—situations where two
file names hash to the same location. The major difficulties with a hash table are
its generally fixed size and the dependence of the hash function on that size.
For example, assume that we make a linear-probing hash table that holds
64 entries. The hash function converts file names into integers from 0 to 63, for
