Section 7.6.

 

Representing Change in the World

207

 

 

 

 

 

THE FRAME PROBLEM AND ITS RELATIVES

Many AI texts refer to something called the frame problem. The problem was noticed
soon after situation calculus was applied to reasoning about actions. Originally, it
centered on the apparently unavoidable need for a large number of frame axioms that
made for a very inelegant and inefficient description of actions. Many researchers
considered the problem insoluble within first-order logic. There are at least three
entire volumes of collected papers on the problem, and at least one author (Crockett,
1994)cites the problem as one symptom of the inevitable failure of the AI enterprise

The proliferation of frame axioms is now called the representational frame
problem, and as we have shown, is easily solved using successor-state axioms. The
inferential frame problem concerns the way we make inferences about the world.
When reasoning about the result of a long sequence of actions in situation calculus,
one has to carry each property through all intervening situations one step at a time,
even ifthe property remains unchanged throughout. This is true whether one uses
frame axioms or successor-state axioms. One would like to be able to make only
the changes required by the action descriptions, and have the rest available without
further effort. This seems like the natural and efficient thing to do because we do
not expect more than a small fraction of the world to change at any given moment.
Of course, we cannot expect a general-purpose representation language such as first-
order logic (and associated general-purpose reasoning systems) to have this bias. It is
possible, however, to build special-purpose reasoning systems that do work efficiently
for reasoning about actions that change only a small fraction of the world. These are
called planning systems, and are the subject of Part IV.

Other problems besides the frame problem have surfaced in the study of reasoning
about actions. The qualification problem arises because it is difficult, in the real
world, to define the circumstances under which a given action is guaranteed to work.
In the real world, grabbing a gold brick may not work ifthe brick is wet and slippery,
or if it is electrified or screwed to the table, or if your back gives out when you bend
over, or ifthe guard shoots you, and so on. If some of these conditions are left out of
the successor-state axiom, then the agent is in danger of generating false beliefs.

Finally, the ramification problem concerns the proliferation of implicit conse-
quences of actions. For example, if a gold brick is covered in dust, then when the
agent picks up the brick it also picks up each particle of dust that adheres to the brick.
One prefers to avoid describing the motion of the dust (ifany) as part of the description
of picking up things in general. It is better to state separately that the dust is stuck to
the brick, and to infer the new location of the dust as necessary. Doing this efficiently
requires a special-purpose reasoning system, just as with the frame problem.

 

 

 
