Section 8.4,

General Ontology 227

 

of the circuit, and indeed such simulations are often carried out by circuit designers. We could
also introduce more interesting classes of gates, for example by describing the technology (TTL,
MOS, CMOS, and so on) as well as the input/output specification. If we wanted to discuss
reliability or diagnosis, we would include the possibility that the structure of the circuit, or the
properties of the gates, might change spontaneously. To account for stray capacitances, we
would need to move from a purely topological representation of connectivity to a more realistic
description of geometric properties.

If we look at the wumpus world, similar considerations apply. Although we do include
time, ithas avery simple structure. Nothing happens except when the agent acts, and all changes
can be considered instantaneous. A more general ontology, better suited for the real world, would
allow for simultaneous changes extended over time. We also used the constant symbol Pit to say
that there was a pit in a particular square, because all pits were identical. We could have allowed
for different kinds of pits by having several individuals belonging to the class of pits but having
different properties. Similarly, we might want to allow for several different kinds of animals,
not just wumpuses. It might not be possible to pin down the exact species from the available
percepts, so we would need to build up a wumpus-world biological taxonomy to help the agent
predict behavior from scanty clues.

For any area ofa special-purpose ontology, itis possible to make changes like these to move
toward greater generality. An obvious question then arises: do all these ontologies converge on
a general-purpose ontology? The answer is, "Possibly." In this section, we will present one
version, representing a synthesis of ideas from many knowledge representation efforts in AI and
philosophy. There are two major characteristics of general-purpose ontologies that distinguish
them from collections of special-purpose ontologies:

+ A general-purpose ontology should be applicable in more or less any special-purpose
domain (with the addition of domain-specific axioms). This means that as far as possible,
no representational issue can be finessed or brushed under the carpet. For example, a
general ontology cannot use situation calculus, which finesses the issues of duration and
simultaneity, because domains such as circuit timing analysis require those issues to be
handled properly.

In any sufficiently demanding domain, different areas ofknowledge must be unified because
reasoning and problem solving may involve several areas simultaneously. A robot circuit-
repair system, for instance, needs to reason about circuits in terms of electrical connectivity
and physical layout, and about time both for circuit timing analysis and estimating labor
costs. The sentences describing time therefore must be capable of being combined with
those describing spatial layout, and must work equally well for nanoseconds and minutes,
and for angstroms and meters.

After we present the general ontology, we will apply it to write sentences describing the domain
of grocery shopping. A brief reverie on the subject of shopping brings to mind a vast array of
topics in need of representation: locations, movement, physical objects, shapes, sizes, grasping,
releasing, colors, categories of objects, anchovies, amounts of stuff, nutrition, cooking, nonstick
frying pans, taste, time, money, direct debit cards, arithmetic, economics, and so on. The domain
is more than adequate to exercise our ontology, and leaves plenty of scope for the reader to do
some creative knowledge representation of his or her own.

 
