Chapter 18: Graphics Under Windows 581

 

During the original design of Windows, one of the goals was to
provide ‘device independence’. Device independence means that
the same program should be able to work using different screens,
keyboards and printers without modification to the program.
Windows takes care of the hardware, allowing the programmer to
concentrate on the program itself. If you have ever had to update
the code of an MS-DOS program for the latest printer, plotter,
video display, or keyboard, you will recognize device
independence as a huge advantage for the developer.

Windows programs do not send data directly to the screen or
printer. A Windows program knows where (screen/printer) its
output is being sent. However, it does not know how it would be
sent there, neither does it need to bother to know this. This is
because Windows uses a standard and consistent way to send the
output to screen/printer. This standard way uses an entity called
Device Context, or simply a DC. Different DC’s are associated
with different devices. For example, a screen DC is associated
with a screen, a printer DC is associated with a printer, etc. Any
drawing that we do using the screen DC is directed to the screen.
Sunilarly, any drawing done using the printer DC is directed to the
printer. Thus, the only thing that changes from drawing to screen
and drawing to printer is the DC that is used.

A windows program obtains a handle (ID value) for the screen or
printer’s DC. The output data is sent to the screen/printer using its
DC, and then Windows and the Device Driver for the device takes
care of sending it to the real hardware. The advantage of using the
DC is that the graphics and text commands that we send using the
DC are always the same, regardless of where the physical output is
showing up.

The part of Windows that converts the Windows graphics function
calls to the actual commands sent to the hardware is the GDI, or
Graphics Device Interface. The GDI is a program file called
GDI32.DLL and is stored in the Windows System directory. The
