Chapter 16: C Under Windows 541

 

However, if we decide to install 4 GB memory it would cost a lot.
Hence Windows uses a memory model which makes use of as
much of physical memory (say 128 MB) as has been installed and
simulates the balance amount of memory (4 GB — 128 MB) on the
hard disk. Be aware that this balance memory is simulated as and
when the need to do so arises. Thus memory management is
demand based.

Note that programs cannot execute straight-away from hard disk.
They have to be first brought into physical memory before they
can get executed. Suppose there are multiple programs already in
memory and a new program starts executing. If this new program
needs more memory than what is available right now, then some of
the existing programs (or their parts) would be transferred to the
disk in order to free the physical memory to accommodate the new
program. This operation is often called page-out operation. Here
page stands for a block of memory (usually of size 4096 bytes).
When that part of the program that was paged out is needed it is
brought back into memory (called page-in operation) and some
other programs (or their parts) are paged out. This keeps on
happening without a common user’s knowledge all the time while
working with Windows. A few more facts that you must note
about paging are as follows:

(a) Part of the program that is currently executing might also be
paged out to the disk.

(b) When the program is paged in (from disk to memory) there is
no guarantee that it would be brought back to the same
physical location where it was before it was paged out.

Now imagine how the paging operations would affect our
programming. Suppose we have a pointer pointing to some data
present in a page. If this page gets paged out and is later paged in
to a different physical location then the pointer would obviously
have a wrong address. Hence under Windows the pointer never
holds the physical address of any memory location. It always holds
a virtual address of that location. What is this virtual address? At
