design of input logic

SECTION 7-4 Design of Control Unit 233

‘The purpose of a microprogram sequencer is to present an address to the
control memory so that a microinstruction may be read and executed. The
next-address logic of the sequencer determines the specific address source to
be loaded into the control address register. The choice of the address source
is guided by the next-address information bits that the sequencer receives from
the present microinstruction. Commercial sequencers include within the unit
an internal register stack used for temporary storage of addresses during
microprogram looping and subroutine calls. Some sequencers provide an
output register which can function as the address register for the control
memory.

Toillustrate the internal structure of a typical microprogram sequencer
we will show a particular unit that is suitable for use in the microprogram
computer example developed in the preceding section The block diagram of
the microprogram sequencer is shown in Fig. 7-8 The control memory is
included in the diagram to show the interaction between the sequencer and the
memory attached to it. There are two multiplexers in the circuit. The first
multiplexer selects an address from one of four sources and routes it into a
control address register CAR. The second multiplexer tests the value of a
selected status bit and the result of the test is applied to an input logic circuit.
The output from CAR provides the address for the control memory. The
content of CAR is incremented and applied to one of the multiplexer inputs and
to the subroutine register SBR. The other three inputs to multiplexer number
I come from the address field of the present microinstruction, from the output
of SBR, and from an external source that maps the instruction. Although the
diagram shows a single subroutine register, a typical sequencer will have a
register stack about four to eight levels deep. In this way, a number of subrou-
tinescan be active at the same time. A push and pop operation, in conjunction
witha stack pointer, stores and retrieves the return address during the call and
return microinstructions.

The CD (condition) field of the microinstruction selectgs one of the status
bits in the second multiplexer. If the bit selected is equal to 1, the T (test)
variable is equal to 1; otherwise, it is equal to 0. The T value together with the
two bits from the BR (branch) field go to an input logic circuit. The input logic
ina particular sequencer will determine the ty pe of operations that are available
in the unit. Typical sequencer operations are: increment, branch or jump, call
and return from subroutine, load an external address, push or pop the stack,
and other address sequencing operations. With three inputs, the sequencer
can provide up to eight address sequencing operations. Some commercial
sequencers have three or four inputsin addition to theT input and thus provide
a wider range of operations.

The input logic circuit in Fig, 7-8 has three inputs, fo, {, and T, and three
outputs, S, $,, and L. Variables Sp and S; select one of the source addresses
forCAR. Variable L enables the load input in SBR. The binary values of the two
selection variables determine the path in the multiplexer. For example, with
$,So= 10, multiplexer input number 2 is selected and establishes a transfer
