Section 4.2

Heuristic Functions 105

 

Most.
CONSTRAINED-
VARIABLE

8
2

INING-

$92

AR

£

Ee

ae

IAINING-

Ee

fa

To illustrate the basic idea, we will use the map-coloring problem shown in Figure 4.9.
(The idea of map coloring is to avoid coloring adjacent countries with the same color.) Suppose
that we can use at most three colors (red, green, and blue), and that we have chosen green for
country A andred for country B. Intuitively, it seems obvious that we should colorE next, because
the only possible color for E is blue. All the other countries have a choice of colors, and we
might make the wrong choice and have to backtrack. In fact, once we have colored E blue, then
we are forced to color C red and F green. After that, coloring D either blue or red results in a
solution. In other words, we have solved the problem with no search at all.

Figure 4.9 A map-coloring problem after the first two variables (A and B) have been selected.
Which country should we color next?

 

 

 

 

 

 

This intuitive idea is called the most-constrained-variable heuristic. It is used with
forward checking (see Section 3.7), which keeps track of which values are still allowed for each
variable, given the choices made so far. At each point in the search, the variable with thefewest
possible values is chosen to have a value assigned. In this way, the branching factor in the search
tends to be minimized. For example, when this heuristic is used in solving n-queens problems,
the feasible problem size is increased from around 30 for forward checking to approximately
100. The most-constraining-variable heuristic is similarly effective. It attempts to reduce the
branching factor on future choices by assigning a value to the variable that is involved in the
largest number of constraints on other unassigned variables.

Once a variable has been selected, we still need to choose a value for it. Suppose that
we decide to assign a value to country C after A and B. One's intuition is that red is a better
choice than blue, because it leaves more freedom for future choices. This intuition is the
Jeast-constraining-value heuristic—choose a value that rules out the smallest number of values
in variables connected to the current variable by constraints. When applied to the n-queens
problem, it allows problems up to n=1000 to be solved.

 

 

 
