3.2 Operating-System Services 61

3.1.8 Command-Interpreter System

One of the most important systems programs for an operating system is the
command interpreter, which is the interface between the user and the operating
system. Some operating systems include the command interpreter in the
kernel. Other operating systems, such as MS-DOS and UNIX, treat the command
interpreter as a special program that is running when a job is initiated, or when
auser first logs on (on time-sharing systems).

Many commands are given to the operating system by control statements.
When a new job is started in a batch system, or when a user logs on to a
time-shared system, a program that reads and interprets control statements
is executed automatically. This program is sometimes called the control-card
interpreter or the command-line interpreter, and is often known as the shell.
Its function is simple: To get the next command statement and execute it.

Operating systems are frequently differentiated in the area of the shell,
with a user-friendly command interpreter making the system more agreeable
to some users. One style of user-friendly interface is the mouse-based window-
and-menu system used in the Macintosh and in Microsoft Windows. The
mouse is moved to position the mouse pointer on images, or icons, on the
screen that represent programs, files, and system functions. Depending on
the mouse pointer’s location, clicking a button on the mouse can invoke a
program, select a file or directory —known as a folder—or pull down a menu
that contains commands. More powerful, complex, and difficult-to-learn shells
are appreciated by other users. In some of these shells, commands are typed on
a keyboard and displayed on a screen or printing terminal, with the enter (or
return) key signaling that a command is complete and is ready to be executed.
The MS-DOS and UNIX shells operate in this way.

The command statements themselves deal with process creation and man-
agement, I/O handling, secondary-storage management, main-memory man-
agement, file-system access, protection, and networking.

3.2 m= Operating-System Services

An operating system provides an environment for the execution of programs.
It provides certain services to programs and to the users of those programs.
The specific services provided, of course, differ from one operating system to
another, but we can identify common classes. These operating-system services
are provided for the convenience of the programmer, to make the programming
task easier.

¢ Program execution: The system must be able to load a program into
memory and to run that program. The program must be able to end its
execution, either normally or abnormally (indicating error).
