230 Chapter7 Process Synchronization

transactions share a common semaphore mutex, which is initialized to 1. When
a transaction starts executing, its first action is to execute wait(mutex). After
the transaction either commits or aborts, it executes signal (mutex).

Although this scheme ensures the atomicity of all concurrently execut-
ing transactions, it is nevertheless too restrictive. As we shall see, in many
cases we can allow transactions to overlap their execution, while maintaining
serializability. A number of different concurrency-control algorithms ensure
serializability. These are described below.

7.94.1 Serializability

Consider a system with two data items A and B that are both read and written.
by two transactions Ty and T;. Suppose that these transactions are executed
atomically in the order Ty followed by T;. This execution sequence, which is
called a schedule, is represented in Figure 7.24. In schedule 1 of Figure 7.24, the
sequence of instruction steps is in chronological order from top to bottom, with
instructions of To appearing in the left column and instructions of T; appearing
in the right column.

‘A schedule where each transaction is executed atomically is called a serial
schedule. Each serial schedule consists of a sequence of instructions from
various transactions where the instructions belonging to one single transaction
appear together in that schedule. Thus, for a set of n transactions, there exist
n! different valid serial schedules. Each serial schedule is correct, because itis
equivalent to the atomic execution of the various participating transactions, in
some arbitrary order.

If we allow the two transactions to overlap their execution, then the result-
ing schedule is no longer serial. A nonserial schedule does not necessarily
imply that the resulting execution is incorrect (that is, is not equivalent to a
serial schedule). To see that this is the case, we need to define the notion of con-
flicting operations. Consider a schedule S in which there are two consecutive
operations O; and O; of transactions T; and Tj, respectively. We say that O; and

     

To
read(A)

T1

write(A)

read(B)

write(B)
read(A)
write(A)
read(B)
write(B)

Figure 7.24 Schedule 1: A serial schedule in which Tp is followed by T}.
