116 Chapter4 Processes

been poor performance caused by copying the message first from the sender to
the mailbox, and then from the mailbox to the receiver. The Mach message
system attempts to avoid double-copy operations by using virtual-memory
—management techniques (Chapter 10). Essentially, Mach maps the address
space containing the sender’s message into the receiver’s address space. The
message itself is never actually copied. This message-management technique
provides a large performance boost, but works only for intrasystem messages.
The Mach operating system is discussed in an extra chapter that is posted on
our web site (http:/ /www.bell-labs.com/topic/books/os-book).

4.5.6 An Example: Windows 2000

The Windows 2000 operating system is an example of modern design that
employs modularity to increase functionality and decrease the time needed to
implement new features. Windows 2000 provides support for multiple oper-
ating environments or subsystems, with which application programs commu-
nicate via a message-passing mechanism. The application programs can be
considered to be clients of the Windows 2000 subsystem server.

The message-passing facility in Windows 2000 is called the local procedure-
call (LPC) facility. The LPC in Windows 2000 communicates between two
processes that are on the same machine. It is similar to the standard RPC
mechanism that is widely used, but it is optimized for and specific to Windows
2000. Like Mach, Windows 2000 uses a port object to establish and maintain a
connection between two processes. Every client that calls a subsystem needs
a communication channel, which is provided by a port object and is never
inherited. Windows 2000 uses two types of ports: connection ports and commu-
nication ports. They are really the same but are given different names according
to how they are used. Connection ports are named objects, which are visible to
all processes; they give applications a way to set up a communication channel
(Chapter 21). This communication works as follows:

The client opens a handle to the subsystem’s connection port object.

e The client sends a connection request.

© The server creates two private communication ports, and returns the handle
to one of them to the client.

The client and server use the corresponding port handle to send messages
or callbacks and to listen for replies.

Windows 2000 uses three types of message-passing techniques over a port
that the client specifies when it establishes the channel. The simplest, which is
used for small messages, uses the port’s message queue as intermediate storage
