90  Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

anism for a user to issue a request without writing a program. Commands
may come from files during batch-mode execution, or directly from a keyboard
when in an interactive or time-shared mode. System programs are provided to
satisfy many common user requests.

The types of requests vary according to the level of the request. The system-
call level must provide the basic functions, such as process control and file
and device management. Higher-level requests, satisfied by the command
interpreter or system programs, are translated into a sequence of system calls.
System services can be classified into several categories: program control, status
requests, and I/O requests. Program errors can be considered implicit requests
for service.

Once the system services are defined, the structure of the operating system
can be developed. Various tables are needed to record the information that
defines the state of the computer system and the status of the system's jobs.

The design of a new operating system is a major task. The goals of
the system must be well defined before the design begins. They form the
foundation for choices among various algorithms and strategies that will be
necessary.

Since an operating system is large, modularity is important. Designing a
system as a sequence of layers or using a microkernel is considered a good
technique. The virtual-machine concept takes the layered approach and treats
both the kernel of the operating system and the hardware as though they were
all hardware. Other operating systems may even be loaded on top of this virtual
machine.

Any operating system that has implemented the JVM is able to run all
Java programs, because the JVM abstracts the underlying system to the Java
program, providing an architecture-neutral interface.

Throughout the entire operating-system design cycle, we must be careful to
separate policy decisions from implementation details (or mechanisms). This
separation allows maximum flexibility if policy decisions are to be changed
later.

Operating systems are now almost always written in a systems-
implementation language or in a higher-level language. This feature improves
their implementation, maintenance, and portability. To create an operating
system for a particular machine configuration, we must perform system
generation.

m Exercises
3.1 What are the five major activities of an operating system in regard to
process management?

3.2 What are the three major activities of an operating system in regard to
memory management?
