1.7 Real-Time Systems 17

machine can take ownership of its storage, and restart the application(s) that
were running on the failed machine. The failed machine can remain down, but
the users and clients of the application would only see a brief interruption of
service.

In asymmetric clustering, one machine is in hot standby mode while
the other is running the applications. The hot standby host (machine) does
nothing but monitor the active server. If that server fails, the hot standby host
becomes the active server. In symmetric mode, two or more hosts are running
applications, and they are monitoring each other. This mode is obviously more
efficient, as it uses all of the available hardware. It does require that more than
one application be available to run.

Other forms of clusters include parallel clusters and clustering over a WAN.
Parallel clusters allow multiple hosts to access the same data on the shared
storage. Because most operating systems lack support for this simultaneous
data access by multiple hosts, parallel clusters are usually accomplished by
special versions of software and special releases of applications. For example,
Oracle Parallel Server is a version of Oracle’s database that has been designed
to run on parallel clusters. Each machine runs Oracle, and a layer of software
tracks access to the shared disk. Each machine has full access to all data in the
database.

In spite of improvements in distributed computing, most systems do not
offer general-purpose distributed file systems. Therefore, most clusters do
not allow shared access to data on the disk. For this, distributed file systems
must provide access control and locking to the files to ensure no conflicting
operations occur. This type of service is commonly known asa distributed lock
manager (DLM). Work is ongoing for general-purpose distributed file systems,
with vendors like Sun Microsystems announcing roadmaps for delivery of a
DLM within the operating system.

Cluster technology is rapidly changing. Cluster directions include global
clusters, in which the machines could be anywhere in the world (or anywhere a
WAN reaches). Such projects are still the subject of research and development.

Clustered system use and features should expand greatly as storage-area
networks (SANs), as described in Section 14.6.3, become prevalent. SANs allow
easy attachment of multiple hosts to multiple storage units. Current clusters
are usually limited to two or four hosts due to the complexity of connecting the
hosts to shared storage.

1.7 = Real-Time Systems

Another form of a special-purpose operating system is the real-time system. A
real-time system is used when rigid time requirements have been placed on the
operation of a processor or the flow of data; thus, it is often used as a control
device in a dedicated application. Sensors bring data to the computer. The com-
