26.5 The relabel-to-front algorithm 751

Discharging an overflowing vertex

An overflowing vertex u is discharged by pushing all of its excess flow through
admissible edges to neighboring vertices, relabeling u as necessary to cause edges
leaving u to become admissible. The pseudocode goes as follows.

DISCHARGE(u)

1 while u.e > 0

2 v = u.current

3 ify == NIL

4 RELABEL (u)

5 u.current = u.N.head

6 elseif cf(u,v) > Oand u.h ==v.h +1
7 PusH(u, v)

8 else u.current = v.next-neighbor

Figure 26.9 steps through several iterations of the while loop of lines 1-8, which
executes as long as vertex u has positive excess. Each iteration performs exactly
one of three actions, depending on the current vertex v in the neighbor list u.N.

1. If v is NIL, then we have run off the end of u.N. Line 4 relabels vertex u,
and then line 5 resets the current neighbor of u to be the first one in u.N.
(Lemma 26.29 below states that the relabel operation applies in this situation.)

2. If v is non-NIL and (u,v) is an admissible edge (determined by the test in
line 6), then line 7 pushes some (or possibly all) of u’s excess to vertex v.

3. If v is non-NIL but (w,v) is inadmissible, then line 8 advances u. current one
position further in the neighbor list u.N.

Observe that if DISCHARGE is called on an overflowing vertex u, then the last
action performed by DISCHARGE must be a push from u. Why? The procedure
terminates only when u.e becomes zero, and neither the relabel operation nor ad-
vancing the pointer wu. current affects the value of u.e.

We must be sure that when PUSH or RELABEL is called by DISCHARGE, the
operation applies. The next lemma proves this fact.

Lemma 26.29
If DISCHARGE calls PUSH(uw, v) in line 7, then a push operation applies to (1, v).
If DISCHARGE calls RELABEL (11) in line 4, then a relabel operation applies to u.

Proof The tests in lines 1 and 6 ensure that a push operation occurs only if the
operation applies, which proves the first statement in the lemma.
