10.2 Demand Paging 325

A similar architectural problem occurs in machines that use special address-
ing modes, including autodecrement and autoincrement modes (for example,
the PDP-11). These addressing modes use a register as a pointer and auto-
matically decrement or increment the register as indicated. Autodecrement
automatically decrements the register before using its contents as the operand
address; autoincrement automatically increments the register after using its
contents as the operand address. Thus, the instruction

MOV (R2)+,-(R3)

copies the contents of the location pointed to by register, into the location
pointed to by register3. Register) is incremented (by two for a word, since the
PDP-11 is a byte-addressable computer) after it is used as a pointer; registers is
decremented (by two) before it is used as a pointer. Now consider what will
happen if we get a fault when trying to store into the location pointed to by
registers. To restart the instruction, we must reset the two registers to the values
they had before we started the execution of the instruction. One solution is to
create a new special status register to record the register number and amount
modified for any register that is changed during the execution of an instruction.
This status register allows the operating system to undo the effects of a partially
executed instruction that causes a page fault.

These are by no means the only architectural problems resulting from
adding paging to an existing architecture to allow demand paging, but they
illustrate some of the difficulties. Paging is added between the CPU and the
memory in a computer system. It should be entirely transparent to the user
process. Thus, people often assume that paging could be added to any sys-
tem. Although this assumption is true for a non-demand-paging environment,
where a page fault represents a fatal error, it is not true where a page fault means
only that an additional page must be brought into memory and the process
restarted.

10.2.2 Performance of Demand Paging

Demand paging can have a significant effect on the performance of a computer
system. To see why, let us compute the effective access time for a demand-
paged memory. For most computer systems, the memory-access time, denoted
ma, now ranges from 10 to 200 nanoseconds. As long as we have no page faults,
the effective access time is equal to the memory access time. If, however, a page
fault occurs, we must first read the relevant page from disk, and then access the
desired word.

Let p be the probability of a page fault (0 < p < 1). We would expect p to be
close to zero; that is, there will be only a few page faults. The effective access
time is then

effective access time = (1 — p) x ma + p x page fault time.
