24  Chapter1 Introduction

Parallel systems have more than one CPU in close communication; the CPUs
share the computer bus, and sometimes share memory and peripheral devices.
Such systems can provide increased throughput and enhanced reliability. Dis-
tributed systems allow sharing of resources on geographically dispersed hosts.
Clustered systems allow multiple machines to perform computations on data
contained on shared storage, and let computing continue in the case of failure
of some subset of cluster members.

A hard real-time system is often used as a control device in a dedicated
application. A hard real-time operating system has well-defined, fixed time
constraints. Processing must be done within the defined constraints, or the
system will fail. Soft real-time systems have less stringent timing constraints,
and do not support deadline scheduling.

Recently, the influence of the Internet and the World Wide Web has encour-
aged the development of modern operating systems that include web browsers
and networking and communication software as integral features.

We have shown the logical progression of operating-system development,
driven by inclusion of features in the CPU hardware needed for advanced
functionality. This trend can be seen today in the evolution of PCs, with
inexpensive hardware being improved sufficiently to allow, in turn, improved
characteristics.

= Exercises

1.1 What are the three main purposes of an operating system?

1.2 List the four steps needed to run a program on a completely dedicated
machine.

1.3 What is the main advantage of multiprogramming?

1.4 What are the main differences between operating systems for mainframe
computers and PCs?

1.5 In a multiprogramming and time-sharing environment, several users
share the system simultaneously. This situation can result in various
security problems.

a. What are two such problems?

b. Can we ensure the same degree of security in a time-shared machine
as we have in a dedicated machine? Explain your answer.

1.6 Define the essential properties of the following types of operating systems:
a. Batch

b. Interactive
