258

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

TEMPORAL LOGIC

  
   
     
  
   
    
    
 

the use of genus and species for lower-level classification, although these terms did not have the
precise and specifically biological sense which is now attached to them. Our present system of
biological classification, including the use of "binomial nomenclature" (classification via genus
and species in the technical sense), was invented by the Swedish biologist Carolus Linnaeus,
or Carl von Linne (1707-1778). , Lakoff (1987) presents a model of classification based on
prototypes rather than strict categorical boundaries.

Within modern AI specifically, comprehensive taxonomies have usually been developed
as part of large projects that also included research in other areas of knowledge representation.
These include the “commonsense summer" project led by Jerry Hobbs (1985) and the knowledge
representation portion of the ensuing TACITUS natural language interpretation project (Hobbs,
1986; Hobbs ef a/., 1990), as well as the massive CYC project (Lenat and Guha, 1990). The
taxonomy used in this chapter was developed by the authors, based in part on their experience
in the CYC project and in part on work by Hwang and Schubert (1993) and Davis (1990). An
inspirational discussion of the general project of commonsense knowledge representation appears
in Hayes's (1978; 1985b) "The Naive Physics Manifesto."

The philosophical study of the part-whole relation was initiated by the Polish logician i
Lesniewski (1916), who was a hardcore "nominalist" or skeptic about abstract entities such as i!
sets and numbers. He intended his “mereology" (the name is derived from the Greek word for
"part") as a substitute for mathematical set theory. Although mereology showed promise as a 4
way of analyzing the distinction between mass nouns and count nouns, Lesniewski’s publications |
are extremely difficult to follow, because they are written in a very idiosyncratic formal notation 3
with (in some cases) almost no natural-language commentary. A more readable exposition and i
axiomatization ofmereology was provided in 1940by the philosophers Nelson Goodman (another
hardcore nominalist) and Henry Leonard underthe name of "the calculus ofindividuals" (Leonard
and Goodman, 1940). Goodman's The Structure ofAppearance (1977) applies the calculus of
individuals to what in AI would be called knowledge representation. Quine (1960) also supports j
the nominalist view of substances. Harry Bunt (1985) has provided an extensive analysis of its
use in knowledge representation.

Few if any AI researchers have any problems with abstract entities; the pragmatic "Onto- i
logical Promiscuity" endorsed by Hobbs (1985) in the article of that title is more typical. The
position adopted in this chapter, in which substances are categories of objects, was championed
by Richard Montague (1973). It has also been adopted in the CYC project. Copeland (1993)
mounts a serious but not invincible attack.

Several different approaches have been taken in the study of time and events. The oldest
approach is temporal logic, which is a form of modal logic in which modal operators are used 4
specifically to refer to the times at which facts are true. Typically, in temporal logic, “Op”
means “pwill be true at all times in the future," and “<p” means “p will be true at some time in i
the future." The study of temporal logic was initiated by Aristotle and the Megarian and Stoic
schools in ancient Greece.

In modern times, Findlay (1941) was the first to conceive the idea ofa "formal calculus" for
reasoning about time; Findlay also sketched a few proposed laws of temporal logic. The further;
development of modern temporal logic was carried out by a number of researchers, including
Arthur Prior (1967). The modern development was actually strongly influenced by historical j
studies of Megarian and Stoic temporal logic. Burstall (1974) introduced the idea of using
