354 Chapter 10 Virtual Memory

minimum is the minimum number of pages the process is guaranteed to have in
memory. If sufficient memory is available, a process may be assigned as many
pages as its working-set maximum. (In some circumstances, a process may
be allowed to exceed its working-set maximum.) The virtual-memory manager
maintains a list of free page frames. Associated with this list is a threshold value
that is used to indicate whether there is sufficient free memory available or not.
If a page fault occurs for a process that is below its working-set maximum,
the virtual-memory manager allocates a page from this list of free pages. If
a process is at its working-set maximum and it incurs a page fault, it must
select a page for replacement using a local page-replacement policy. When the
amount of free memory falls below the threshold, the virtual-memory manager
uses a tactic known as automatic working-set trimming to restore the value
above the threshold. Automatic working-set trimming works by evaluating the
number of pages allocated to processes. If a process has been allocated more
pages than its working-set minimum, the virtual-memory manager removes
pages until the process reaches its working-set minimum. A process that is at
its working-set minimum may be allocated pages from the free page frame list
once sufficient free memory is available.

The algorithm used to determine which page to remove from a working
set depends upon the type of processor the operating system is running on.
On single-processor x86 systems, Windows NT uses a variation of the clock
algorithm discussed in Section 10.4.5.2. On Alpha and multiprocessor x86
systems, clearing the reference bit may require invalidating the entry in the
translation look-aside buffer on other processors. Rather than involving this
overhead, Windows NT uses a variation on the FIFO algorithm discussed in
Section 10.4.2.

10.7.2 Solaris 2

When a thread incurs a page fault, the kernel assigns a page to the faulting
thread from the list of free pages it maintains. Therefore, it is imperative that the
kernel maintain a sufficient amount of free memory available. Associated with
this list of free pages is a parameter —lotsfree—which represents a threshold to
begin paging. lotsfree is typically set to 1/64 of the size of the physical memory.
Four times per second, the kernel checks if the amount of free memory is less
than lotsfree.

If the number of free pages falls below lotsfree, a process known as the page-
out starts up. The pageout process is similar to the second-chance algorithm
described in Section 10.4.5.2 (also known as the two-handed-clock algorithm),
which works as follows. The first hand of the clock scans all pages in memory,
setting the reference bit to 0. Ata later point in time, the second hand of the
clock examines the reference bit for the pages in memory, returning those pages
whose bit is still set to 0 to the free list.
