UFO

stack pointer

SECTIONS-3 Stack Organization 247

of all 0's (making the B field 000) A register can be cleared to 0 with an
exclusive-OR operation. This is because x ® x = 0.

Itis apparent from these examples that many other microoperations can
be generated in the CPU. The most efficient way to generate control words with
alarge number of bits is to store them in a memory unit. A memory unit that
stores control wordsis referred toas a control memory. By reading consecutive
control words from memory, it is possible to initiate the desired sequence of
microoperations for the CPU. This type of control is referred to as micropro-
grammed control. A microprogrammed control unit is shown in Fig. 7-8. The
binary control word for the CPU will come from the outputs of the control
memory marked “micro-ops.”

8-3 Stack Organization

‘A useful feature that is included in the CPU of most computers is a stack or
last-in, first-out (LIFO) list. A stack is a storage device that stores information
in such a manner that the item stored last is the first item retrieved. The
operation of a stack can be compared to a stack of trays. The last tray placed
on top of the stack is the first to be taken off.

The stack in digital computers is essentially a memory unit with an
address register that can count only (after an initial value is loaded into it). The
register that holds the address for the stack is calleda stack pointer (SP) because
its value always points at the top item in the stack. Contrary to a stack of trays
where the tray itself may be taken out or inserted, the physical registers of a
stack are always available for reading or writing, It is the content of the word
that is inserted or deleted.

The two operations of a stack re the insertion and deletion of items. The
operation of insertion is called push (or push-down) because it can be thought
ofas the result of pushing anew item on top. The operation of deletion is called
pop (or pop-up) because it can be thought of as the result of removing one item
so that the stack pops up. However, nothing is pushed or popped in a com-
puter stack. Theseoperationsare simulated by incrementing or decrementing
the stack pointer register.

Register Stack

‘Asstack can be placed in a portion of a large memory or it can be organized as
a collection of afinite number of memory words or registers. Figure 8-3 shows
the organization of a 64-word register stack. The stack pointer register SP
containsa binary number whose value is equal to the address of the word that
is currently on top of the stack. Three items are placed in the stack: A, B, and
C, in that order. Item C is on top of the stack so that the content of SP is now
3. Toremove the top item, the stack is popped by reading the memory word
