318  Chapter10 Virtual Memory

can help to ease this restriction, but they generally require special precautions
and extra work by the programmer. This restriction seems both necessary and
reasonable, but it is also unfortunate, since it limits the size of a program to the
size of physical memory.

In fact, an examination of real programs shows us that, in many cases, the
entire program is not needed. For instance,

Programs often have code to handle unusual error conditions. Since these
errors seldom, if ever, occur in practice, this code is almost never executed.

Arrays, lists, and tables are often allocated more memory than they actually
need. An array may be declared 100 by 100 elements, even though it is
seldom larger than 10 by 10 elements. An assembler symbol table may
have room for 3,000 symbols, although the average program has less than
200 symbols.

Certain options and features of a program may be used rarely. For instance,
the routines on U.S. government computers that balance the budget have
only recently been used.

Even in those cases where the entire program is needed, it may not all be
needed at the same time (such is the case with overlays, for example).

The ability to execute a program that is only partially in memory would
confer many benefits:

« A program would no longer be constrained by the amount of physical
memory that is available. Users would be able to write programs for an
extremely large virtual-address space, simplifying the programming task.

e Because each user program could take less physical memory, more pro-
grams could be run at the same time, with a corresponding increase in
CPU utilization and throughput, but with no increase in response time or
turnaround time.

¢ Less I/O would be needed to load or swap each user program into memory,
so each user program would run faster.

Thus, running a program that is not entirely in memory would benefit both
the system and the user.

Virtual memory is the separation of user logical memory from physical
memory. This separation allows an extremely large virtual memory to be pro-
vided for programmers when only a smaller physical memory is available (Fig-
ure 10.1). Virtual memory makes the task of programming much easier, because
the programmer no longer needs to worry about the amount of physical mem-
ory available, or about what code can be placed in overlays; she can concentrate
