 

Exercises 407

be necessary to block logical records into physical records. Again, this task may
be supported by the operating system or left for the application program.

Each device in a file system keeps a volume table of contents or device
directory listing the location of the files on the device. In addition, it is useful
to create directories to allow files to be organized. A single-level directory
in a multiuser system causes naming problems, since each file must have a
unique name. A two-level directory solves this problem by creating a separate
directory for each user. Each user has her own directory, containing her own
files. The directory lists the files by name, and includes such information as the
file’s location on the disk, length, type, owner, time of creation, time of last use,
and so on.

The natural generalization of a two-level directory is a tree-structured
directory. A tree-structured directory allows a user to create subdirectories
to organize his files. Acyclic-graph directory structures allow subdirectories
and files to be shared, but complicate searching and deletion. A general graph
structure allows complete flexibility in the sharing of files and directories, but
sometimes requires garbage collection to recover unused disk space.

Disks are segmented into one or more partitions, each containing a file
system or left “raw”. File systems may be mounted into the system’s naming
structures to make them available. The naming scheme varies by operating
system. Once mounted, the files within the partition are available for use. File
systems may be unmounted to disable access or for maintenance.

File sharing depends on the semantics provided by the system. Files may
have multiple readers, multiple writers, or limits on the sharing. Distributed
file systems allow client hosts to mount partitions or directories from servers,
as long as they can access each other across a network. Remote file systems have
challenges in reliability, performance, and security. Distributed information
systems maintain user, host, and access information such that clients and
servers share state information to manage use and access.

Since files are the main information-storage mechanism in most computer
systems, file protection is needed. Access to files can be controlled separately for
each type of access—read, write, execute, append, delete, list directory, and so
on. File protection can be provided by passwords, by access lists, or by special
ad hoc techniques.

= Exercises

11.1 Consider a file system where a file can be deleted and its disk space
reclaimed while links to that file still exist. What problems may occur
if a new file is created in the same storage area or with the same absolute
path name? How can these problems be avoided?

11.2 Some systems automatically delete all user files when a user logs off or a
job terminates, unless the user explicitly requests that they be kept; other
