control address
register

sequencer

pipeline register

SECTION 74 Control Memory 215

control memory address register specifies the addresso f the microinstruction,
and the control data register holds the microinstruction read from memory.
The microinstruction contains a control word that specifies one or more micro-
operations for the data processor. Once these operations are executed, the
control must determine the next address. The location of the next microinstruc-
tion may be the one next in sequence, or it may be located somewhere else in
the control memory. For this reason it is necessary to use some bits of the
present microinstruction to control the generation of the address of the next
microinstruction. The next address may also be a function of external input
conditions. While the microoperationsare being executed, the next address is
computed in the next address generator circuit and then transferred into the
control address register to read the next microinstruction. Thusa microinstruc-
tion contains bits for initiating microoperations in the data processor part and
bits that determine the address sequence for the control memory.

‘The next address generator is sometimes called a microprogram sequencer,
as it determines the address sequence that is read from control memory. The
address of the next microinstruction can be specified in several ways, depend-
ing on the sequencer inputs. Typical functions of a microprogram sequencer
are incrementing the control address register by one, loading into the control
address register an address from control memory, transferring an external
address, or loading an intial address to start the control operations.

The control data register holds the present microinstruction while the
next address is computed and read from memory. The data register is some-
times called a pipeline register. It allows the execution of the microoperations
specified by the control word simultaneously with the generation of the next
microinstruction. Thiscon figuration requires a two-phase clock, with one clock
applied to the address register and the other to the data register.

The system can operate without the control data register by applying a
single-phase clock to the address register. The control word and next-address
information are taken directly from thecontrol memory. It mustbe realized that
a ROM operates asa combinational circuit, with the address value as the input
and the corresponding word as the output. The content of the specified word
in ROM remains in the output wires as long as its address value remainsin the
address register. No read signalis needed as in arandom-access memory. Each
clock pulse will execute the microoperations specified by the control word and
also transfera new address to the control address register. In the example that
follows we assume a single-phase clock and therefore we do not use a control
data register. In this way the address register is the only component in the
control system that receives clock pulses. The other two components: the
sequencer and the control memory are combinational circuits and do not need
a clock.

‘The main advantage of the microprogrammed controlis the fact that once
the hardware configuration is established, there should be no need for further
hardware or wiring changes. If we want to establish a different control se-

 
