Section 8.6.

Summary 259

 

modal logic to reason about computer programs. Soon thereafter, Vaughan Pratt (1976) designed
dynamic logic, in which modal operators indicate the effects of programs or other actions. For
instance, in dynamic logic, ifa is the name ofa program, then “[a]p” might mean “p would
be true in all world states resulting from executing program a in the current world state", and
"(a)p” might mean “pwould be true in at least one world state resulting from executing program
« in the current world state." Dynamic logic was applied to the actual analysis of programs by
Fischer and Ladner (1977). Pnueli (1977) introduced the idea of using classical temporal logic
to reason about programs. Shoham (1988) discusses the use of temporal logic in AI

Despite the long history of temporal logic, the considerable mathematical theory built up
around it, and its extensive use in other branches of computer science, AI research on temporal
reasoning has more often taken a different approach. A temporal logic is usually conceptualized
around an underlying model involving events, world states, or temporal intervals. The tendency
in AI has been to refer to these events, states, and intervals directly, using terms that denote
them, rather than indirectly through the interpretation of the sentence operators of temporal
logic. The language used is typically either first-order logic or, in some cases, a restricted
algebraic formalism geared toward efficient computation (but still capable of being embedded
within first-order logic). This approach may allow for greater clarity and flexibility in some cases.
Also, temporal knowledge expressed in first-order logic can be more easily integrated with other
knowledge that has been accumulated in that notation.

One of the earliest formalisms of this kind was McCarthy's situation calculus, mentioned
in Chapter 7. McCarthy (1963) introduced situational fluents and made extensive use of them
in later papers. Recent work by Raymond Reiter (1991) and others in the "cognitive robotics"
project at the University of Toronto (Scherl and Levesque, 1993) has re-emphasized the use
of situation calculus for knowledge representation. The relationship between temporal logic
and situation calculus was analyzed by McCarthy and Hayes (1969). They also brought to
the attention of AI researchers the work of philosophers such as Donald Davidson on events.
Davidson's research, collected in (Davidson, 1980), had a heavy emphasis on the analysis
of natural language, particularly of the adverb. It has strongly influenced later AI research,
particularly in natural language understanding. Other philosophical and linguistic approaches to
events that are of significance for AI research are those of Zeno Vendler (1967; 1968), Alexander
Mourelatos (1978), and Emmon Bach (1986)

James Alien's introduction of time intervals, and a small, fixed set ofrelationships between
them, as the primitives for reasoning about time (Alien, 1983; Alien, 1984) marked a major
advance over situation calculus and other systems based on time points or instantaneous events.
Preliminary versions of Alien's work were available as technical reports as early as 1981. Peter
Ladkin (1986a; 1986b) introduced "concave" time intervals (intervals with gaps; essentially,
unions ofordinary "convex" time intervals) and applied the techniques of mathematical abstract
algebra to time representation. Alien (1991) systematically investigates the wide variety of
techniques currently available for time representation. Shoham (1987) describes the reification
of events and sets forth a novel scheme of his own for the purpose. The term "event calculus"
is also used by Kowalski and Sergot (1986), who show how to reason about events in a logic
programming system.

The syntactic theory of mental objects was first studied in depth by Kaplan and Mon-
tague (1960), who showed that it led to paradoxes if not handled carefully. Because it has a

 
