278

Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

GENERALIZED
RESOLUTION
(DISJUNCTIONS)

GENERALIZED
LUTION,
(IMPLICATIONS)

COMUNCTIVE
NORMAL FORM

IMPLICATIVE:
NORMAL FORM

The rule can be understood in two ways. First, we can see it as reasoning by cases. If 3 is false,
then from the first disjunction, a must be true; but if 3 is true, then from the second disjunction §
~ must be true. Hence, either a or - must be true. The second way to understand it is as
transitivity of implication: from two implications, we derive a third that links the premise of the
first to the conclusion of the second. Notice that Modus Ponens does not allow us to derive new
implications; it only derives atomic conclusions. Thus, the resolution rule is more powerful than
Modus Ponens. In this section, we will see that a generalization of the simple resolution rule can
serve as the sole inference rule in a complete inference procedure for first-order logic.

The resolution inference rule

In the simple form of the resolution rule, the premises have exactly two disjuncts. We can extend
that to get a more general rule that says that for two disjunctions of any length, if one of the
disjuncts in one clause (p;) unifies with the negation ofa disjunct in the other (qk), then infer the
disjunction of all the disjuncts except for those two:

0 Generalized Resolution {istunctions): For literals p; and 4,
where UNIFY(p;, 794)

 

P\ MV ss ph wee Pms
giVere ge ---V Qn
SuBst(9.4p) V --- pj 1 V Pit += Por V Qu = = Gk-0V det © V Gn)

  

Equivalently, we can rewrite this in terms of implications:

< Generalized Resolution (implications): For atoms pj, gi, "1, 5;
where UNIFY (pj.gx) = 0.

PiNvee Pj ees APny TLV oe Pry
SEN. ASpy > QV Vee eee V Guy
SUBST (p1A.2)—1AP i APa, AS Rooting MV satin Vion dim Wain VV Ging)

 

Canonical forms for resolution

In the first version of the resolution rule, every sentence is a disjunction of literals. All the
disjunctions in the KB are assumed to be joined in one big, implicit conjunction (as in a normal
KB), so this form is called conjunctive normal form (or CNF), even though each individual
sentence is a disjunction (confusing, isn't it?).

In the second version of the resolution rule, each sentence is an implication with a conjunc-
tion of atoms on the left and a disjunction of atoms on the right. We call this implicative normal
form (or INF), although the name is not standard. We can transform the sentences in (9.40) into
either of the two forms, as we now show. (Notice that we have standardized apart the variable
names in these sentences.)

 
