232 Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

NATURAL KINDS

Some categories have strict definitions: an object is a triangle if and only if it is a
polygon with three sides. On the other hand, most categories in the shopping world
and in the real world are natural kind categories with no clear-cut definition. We
know, for example, that tomatoes tend to be a dull scarlet, roughly spherical, with an
indentation at top where the stem was, about three to four inches in diameter, with a
thin but tough skin and with flesh, seeds, and juice inside. We also know that there is
variation: unripe tomatoes are green, some are smaller or larger than average, cherry
tomatoes are uniformly small. Rather than having a complete definition of tomatoes,
we have a set of features that serves to identify objects that are clearly typical tomatoes,
but may not be able to decide for other objects. (Could there be a square tomato? a
yellow one? a tomato three feet across?)

This poses a problem for a logical agent. The agent cannot be sure that an object
it has perceived is a tomato, and even ifit was sure, it could not be certain which ofthe
properties oftypical tomatoes this one has. This problem is an inevitable consequence
of operating in inaccessible environments. The following mechanism provides a way
to deal with natural kinds within a logical system.

The key idea is to separate what is true ofall instances of a category from what is
true only of typical instances ofa category. So in addition to the category Tomatoes,
we will also have the category Typical(Tomatoes).Here Typical is a function that maps
a category to the subclass of that category that contains only the typical instances:

 

Ve Typical(ciC c¢
Most of the knowledge about natural kinds will actually be about the typical instances:
Vx x6 Typical(Tomatoes) > Red(x) A Spherical(x)

In this way, we can still write down useful facts about categories without providing
exact definitions.

The difficulty of providing exact definitions for most natural categories was
explained in depth by Wittgenstein (1953), in his book Philosophical Investigations.
He used the example of games to show that members of a category shared "family
resemblances" rather than necessary and sufficient characteristics. The Investigations
also revolutionized our understanding of language, as we discuss further in Chapter 22.

The utility of the notion of strict definition was also challenged by Quine (1953).
He pointed out that even the definition of "bachelor" given before is suspect; one might,
for example, question a statement such as "the Pope is a bachelor." The category
"pachelor" still plays a useful role in natural language and in formal knowledge
representation, because it simplifies many sentences and inferences.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
