518
Let Use

i es discussed in this chapter were either too large
00 removed from the mainstream C programmii 7
inclusion in the earlier rol

Enumerated Data Type

As an example, one coul
which can have four

widowed. Don’t confuse these values
married, for instan

mar_status as the number 15 has with a vai

The format of the enum
Here’s how the example

The enumerated data typ
own data type and defi

complicated or when
working on it. Using en
reduce programming errors.

© gives you an opportunity to iny.

ne what values the variable of this ats on

elp in making the program listings more
be an advantage when a Program gets
more than one programmer would be
umerated data type can also help you

Id invent a data ‘ype called mar_status
possible values—single, married, divorced or
with variable names;

s : : S;
ce, has the same relationship to the variable

riable of type int.

definition is similar to that of a structure.
stated above can be implemented:

enum mar_status

{

single, married, divorced, widowed

num mar_status person1, person2 ;

Like structures, this declaration has two parts:

519

Chapter 15: Miscellaneous Features

a) The first part declares the data type and specifies its possible
values. These values are called ‘enumerators’.
(b) The second part declares variables of this data type.

Now we can give values to these variables:
rson1 = married ;
person2 = divorced ;
values that aren’t in the original

Remember, we can’t use
declaration.

Thus, the following expression would cause an error:

person1 = unknown ;

Internally, the compiler treats the enumerators as integers. Each
value on the list of permissible values corresponds to an integer,
starting with 0. Thus, in our example, single is stored as 0, married
is stored as 1, divorced as 2 and widowed as 3.

This way of assigning numbers can be overridden by the

programmer by initializing the enumerators to different integer

values as shown below.

enum mar_status

single = 100, married = 200, divorced = 300, widowed = 400
i

enum mar_status person1, person? ;

Uses of Enumerated Data Type

Enumerated variables are usually used to clarify the operation of a
program. For example, if we need to use employee departments in
a payroll program, it makes the listing easier to read if we use

506
