256

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

registers RO through R15 will have a register address field of four bits. The
binary number 0101, for example, will designate register R5.

‘Computers may have instructions of several different lengths containing
varying number of addresses. The number of address fields in the instruction
formatofa computer depends on the internal organization ofits registers. Most
computers fall into one of three types of CPU organizations:

1. Single accumulator organization.
2. General register organization.
3. Stack organization.

‘An example of an accumulator-type organization is the basic computer
presented in Chap. 5. All operations are performed with an implied accumu-
lator register. The instruction format in this type of computer usesone address
field. For example, the instruction that specifies an arithmetic addition is
defined by an assembly language instruction as

ADD Xx

where X is the address of the operand. The ADD instruction in this case results
in the operation AC —AC + M[X]. AC is the accumulator register and M[X]
symbolizes the memory word located at address X.

An example of a general register type of organization was presented in
Fig. 7-1. The instruction format in this type of computer needs three register
address fields. Thus the instruction for an arithmetic addition may be written
in an assembly language as

ADD RL, R2, RF

todenote the operation R1-R2 + R3. The number of address fields in the
instruction can be reduced from three to two if the destination register is the
same as one of the source registers. Thus the instruction

ADD RL, Re
would denote the operation R1—R1 + R2. Only register addresses for Rl and
R2 need be specified in this instruction.

‘Computers with multiple processor registers use the move instruction

with a mnemonic MOV to symbolize a transfer instruction. Thus the instruc-
tion

MOV RL, Re

denotes the transfer R1—R2 (or R2<-R1, depending on the particular com-
puter), Thus transfer-type instructions need two address fields to specify the
source and the destination.

General register-type computers employ two or three address fields in
