decoding of F fields

arithmetic logic
shift unit

SECTION 74 Design of Control Unit 231

cheaper and faster than a RAM and also to prevent the occasional user from
changing the architecture of the system.

7-4 Design of Control Unit

The bits of the microinstruction are usually divided into fields, with each field
defining a distinct, separate function The various fields encountered in in-
struction formats provide control bits to initiate microoperations in the system,
special bits to specify the way that the next address is to be evaluated, and an
address field for branching. The number of control bits that initiate microop-
erations can be reduced by grouping mutually exclusive variables into fields
and encoding the k bits in each field to provide 2* microoperations. Each field
requires a decoder to produce the corresponding control signals. This method
reduces the size of the microinstruction bits but requires additional hardware
external to the control memory. It also increases the delay time of the control
signals because they must propagate through the decoding circuits.

The encoding of control bits was demonstrated in the programming
example of the preceding section. The nine bits of the microoperation field are
divided into three subfields of three bits each. The control memory output
of each subfield must be decoded to provide the distinct microoperations. The
outputs of the decoders are connected to the appropriate inputs in the proces-
sor unit.

Figure 7-7 shows the three decoders and some of the connections that
must be made from their outputs. Each of the three fields of the microinstruc-
tion presently available in the output of control memory are decoded with a
3 x 8 decoder to provide eight outputs. Each of these outputs must be con-
nected to the proper circuit to initiate the corresponding microoperation as,
specified in Table 7-1. For example, when F1 = 101 (binary 5), the next clock
pulse transition transfers the content of DR(0-10) to AR (symbolized by DRTAR
in Table 7-1). Similarly, when Fl = 110 (binary 6) there is a transfer from PC
to AR (symbolized by PCTAR). Asshown in Fig. 7-7, outputs Sand 6 of decoder
FI are connected to the load input of AR so that when either one of these
outputs is active, information from the multiplexers is transferred to AR. The
multiplexers select the information from DR when output 5 is active and from
PC when output 5 is inactive. The transfer into AR occurs with a clock pulse
transition only when output 5 or output 6 of the decoder are active. The other
outputs of the decoders that initiate transfers between registers must be con-
nected in a similar fashion

‘The arithmetic logic shift unit can be designed as in Figs. 5-19 and 5-20.
Instead of using gates to generate the control signals marked by the symbols
AND, ADD, and DR in Fig. 5-19, these inputs will now come from the outputs
of the decoders associated with the symbols AND, ADD, and DRTAC, respec-

 

 
