12.4 Allocation Methods 423

onto another floppy disk or onto a tape. The original floppy disk was then freed
completely, creating one large contiguous free space. The routine then copied
the files back onto the floppy disk by allocating contiguous space from this one
large hole. This scheme effectively compacts all free space into one contiguous
space, solving the fragmentation problem. The cost of this compaction is time.
The time cost is particularly severe for large hard disks that use contiguous allo-
cation, where compacting all the space may take hours and may be necessary
on a weekly basis. During this down time, normal system operation generally
cannot be permitted, so such compaction is avoided at all costs on production
machines.

Another problem with contiguous allocation is determining how much
space is needed for a file. When the file is created, the total amount of space
it will need must be found and allocated. How does the creator (program or
person) know the size of the file to be created? In some cases, this determination
may be fairly simple (copying an existing file, for example); in general, however,
the size of an output file may be difficult to estimate.

If we allocate too little space to a file, we may find that the file cannot
be extended. Especially with a best-fit allocation strategy, the space on both
sides of the file may be in use. Hence, we cannot make the file larger in place.
Two possibilities then exist. First, the user program can be terminated, with
an appropriate error message. The user must then allocate more space and
run the program again. These repeated runs may be costly. To prevent them,
the user will normally overestimate the amount of space needed, resulting in
considerable wasted space.

The other possibility is to find a larger hole, copy the contents of the file to
the new space, and release the previous space. This series of actions may be
repeated as long as space exists, although it can be time-consuming. However,
in this case, the user never needs to be informed explicitly about what is
happening; the system continues despite the problem, although more and more
slowly.

Even if the total amount of space needed for a file is known in advance,
preallocation may be inefficient. A file that grows slowly over a long period
(months or years) must be allocated enough space for its final size, even though
much of that space may be unused for a long time. The file, therefore, has a
large amount of internal fragmentation.

To minimize these drawbacks, some operating systems use a modified
contiguous-allocation scheme, in which a contiguous chunk of space is allo-
cated initially, and then, when that amount is not large enough, another chunk
of contiguous space, an extent, is added to the initial allocation. The location
of a file’s blocks is then recorded as a location and a block count, plus a link
to the first block of the next extent. On some systems, the owner of the file
can set the extent size, but this setting results in inefficiencies if the owner is
incorrect. Internal fragmentation can still be a problem if the extents are too
large, and external fragmentation can be a problem as extents of varying sizes
