 

Section 1.3.

The History of Artificial Intelligence 25

 

research groups found that building a successful expert system involved much more than simply
buying a reasoning system and filling it with rules. Some predicted an “AI Winter" in which AT
funding would be squeezed severely. It was perhaps this fear, and the historical factors on the
neural network side, that led to a period in which neural networks and traditional AI were seen
as rival fields, rather than as mutually supporting approaches to the same problem.

Recent events (1987-present)

Recent years have seen a sea change in both the content and the methodology of research in
artificial intelligence.'’ It is now more common to build on existing theories than to propose
brand new ones, to base claims on rigorous theorems or hard experimental evidence rather than
on intuition, and to show relevance to real-world applications rather than toy examples.

The field of speech recognition illustrates the pattern. In the 1970s, a wide variety of
different architectures and approaches were tried. Many of these were rather ad hoc and fragile,
and were demonstrated on a few specially selected examples. In recent years, approaches based
on hidden Markov models (HMMs) have come to dominate the area. Two aspects of HMMs are
relevant to the present discussion. First, they are based on a rigorous mathematical theory. This
has allowed speech researchers to build on several decades of mathematical results developed in
other fields. Second, they are generated by a process of training on a large corpus of real speech
data. This ensures that the performance is robust, and in rigorous blind tests the HMMs have
been steadily improving their scores. Speech technology and the related field of handwritten
character recognition are already making the transition to widespread industrial and consumer
applications.

Another area that seems to have benefitted from formalization is planning. Early work by
Austin Tate (1977), followed up by David Chapman (1987), has resulted in an elegant synthesis
of existing planning programs into a simple framework. There have been a number of advances
that built upon each other rather than starting from scratch each time. The result is that planning
systems that were only good for microworlds in the 1970s are now used for scheduling of factory
work and space missions, among other things. See Chapters 11 and 12 for more details.

Judea Pearl's (1988) Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems marked a new accep-
tance of probability and decision theory in AI, following a resurgence of interest epitomized by
Peter Cheeseman's (1985) article "In Defense of Probability." The belief network formalism was
invented to allow efficient reasoning about the combination of uncertain evidence. This approach
largely overcomes the problems with probabilistic reasoning systems of the 1960s and 1970s,
and has come to dominate AI research on uncertain reasoning and expert systems. Work by
Judea Pearl (1982a) and by Eric Horvitz and David Heckerman (Horvitz and Heckerman, 1986;
Horvitz et al., 1986) promoted the idea of normative expert systems: ones that act rationally
according to the laws of decision theory and do not try to imitate human experts. Chapters 14 to
16 cover this area.

17 Some have characterized this change as a victory of the neats—those who think that AI theories should be grounded
in mathematical rigor—over the seruffies—those who would rather try out lots of ideas, write some programs, and then
assess what seems to be working. Both approaches are important. A shift toward increased neatness implies that the field
has reached a level of stability and maturity. (Whether that stability will be disrupted by a new scruffy idea is another
question.)
