70  Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

3.3.2 File Management

We will discuss the file system in more detail in Chapters 11 and 12. We can
identify several common system calls dealing with files, however.

We first need to be able to create and delete files. Either system call
requires the name of the file and perhaps some of the file’s attributes. Once the
file is created, we need to open it and to use it. We may also read, write, or
reposition (rewind or skip to the end of the file, for example). Finally, we
need to close the file, indicating that we are no longer using it.

We may need these same sets of operations for directories if we have a
directory structure for organizing files in the file system. In addition, for either
files or directories, we need to be able to determine the values of various
attributes, and perhaps to reset them if necessary. File attributes include the
file name, a file type, protection codes, accounting information, and so on. At
least two system calls, get file attribute and set file attribute, are
required for this function. Some operating systems provide many more calls.

3.3.3 Device Management

A program, as it is running, may need additional resources to proceed. Addi-
tional resources may be more memory, tape drives, access to files, and so on.
If the resources are available, they can be granted, and control can be returned
to the user program; otherwise, the program will have to wait until sufficient
resources are available.

Files can be thought of as abstract or virtual devices. Thus, many of the
system calls for files are also needed for devices. If the system has multiple
users, however, we must first request the device, to ensure exclusive use of it.
After we are finished with the device, we must release it. These functions are
similar to the open and close system calls for files.

Once the device has been requested (and allocated to us), we can read,
write, and (possibly) reposition the device, just as we can with ordinary
files. In fact, the similarity between I/O devices and files is so great that many
operating systems, including UNIX and MS-DOS, merge the two into a combined
file-device structure. In this case, I/O devices are identified by special file
names.

3.3.4 Information Maintenance

Many system calls exist simply for the purpose of transferring information
between the user program and the operating system. For example, most
systems have a system call to return the current time and date. Other system
calls may return information about the system, such as the number of current
users, the version number of the operating system, the amount of free memory
or disk space, and so on.
