11.3 Directory Structure 383.

record. Finally, this block is searched sequentially. In this way, any record can
be located from its key by at most two direct-access reads. Figure 11.4 shows a
similar situation as implemented by VMS index and relative files.

11.3 = Directory Structure

The file systems of computers can be extensive. Some systems store millions of
files on terabytes of disk. To manage all these data, we need to organize them.
This organization is usually done in two parts. First, disks are split into one or
more partitions, also known as minidisks in the IBM world or volumes in the PC
and Macintosh arenas. Typically, each disk on a system contains at least one
partition, which is a low-level structure in which files and directories reside.
Sometimes, partitions are used to provide several separate areas within one
disk, each treated as a separate storage device, whereas other systems allow
partitions to be larger than a disk to group disks into one logical structure. In
this way, the user needs to be concerned with only the logical directory and
file structure, and can ignore completely the problems of physically allocating
space for files. For this reason partitions can be thought of as virtual disks.
Partitions can also store multiple operating systems, allowing a system to boot
and run more than one.

Second, each partition contains information about files within it. This
information is kept in entries in a device directory or volume table of contents.
The device directory (more commonly known simply as a directory) records
information—such as name, location, size, and type—for all files on that
partition. Figure 11.5 shows the typical file-system organization.

The directory can be viewed as a symbol table that translates file names
into their directory entries. If we take such a view, we see that the directory

 

directory

artition A
P disk 2

 

disk 1
directory partition C

 

partition B
disk 3

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 11.5 A typical file-system organization.
