computer
‘organization

computer design

computer

SETION t-1 Digital Compress 3

 

 

 

 

[ej —~ ee} [Se

Figure 1-1 Block diagram of a digital conpuver

 

and iogic unit for manipulating data, a nu mber of registe rs for storing data, and
control Grcuits for fetching and executing instructions. The memory of a
computer contains storage for instructions and data. It is called a random
accessmemory (RAM) because the CPL can access any location in memory at
random and relsieve the binaryin formation within a fixed interval of time. The
input and output processor ((OP) contains electronic circuits for communicat-
ing and controlling the transfer of information between the computer and the
outside world, The input and output devices connected to the computer
include keyboards, printers, terminals. magnetic disk drives, and other com-
munication devices.

This book provides the basic knowledge necessary to understand the
hardware operations of a computer system. The subject is sometimes consid-
ered from three different points of view, depending on the interest of the
investigator. When dealing with computer hardware it is customary to distin-
guish Between what is referred to as computer organization, computer design,
and computer architecture.

Computer organization is concerned with the way the hardware compo-
nents operate and the way they are connected together to form the computer
system. The various components are assumed tobe in place and the task is to
investigate the organizational steucture to verify that the computer parts oper
ate as intended.

Computer design isconcerned with the hardware design of the computer
Once the computer specifications are formulated, it isthe task of the designer
to develop hardware for the system. Computer design is concerned with the
determination of whathardware should be used and how the parts should be
connected. This aspect of computer hardware is sometimes refered to as
computer implemeniation

Computer architecture is concerned with the structure and behavior of the
‘computer as seen by the user. It indudes the information formats, she instruc
