260

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

MODAL LOGIC

POSSIBLE WORLDS

(QUALITATIVE
PHYSICS

SPATIAL REASONING

natural model in terms of beliefs as physical configurations of a computer or a brain, it has been
popular in AI in recent years. Konolige (1982) and Haas (1986) used it to describe inference
engines of limited power, and Morgenstern (1987) showed how it could be used to describe knowl-
edge preconditions in planning. The methods for planning observation actions in Chapter 13 are
based on the syntactic theory.

Modal logic is the classical method for reasoning about knowledge in philosophy. Modal
logic augments first-order logic with modal operators, such as B (believes) and K (knows),
that take sentences as arguments rather than terms. The proof theory for modal logic restricts
substitution within modal contexts, thereby achieving referential opacity. The modal logic of
knowledge was invented by Jaakko Hintikka (1962). Saul Kripke (1963) defined the semantics
of the modal logic of knowledge in terms of possible worlds. Roughly speaking, a world is
possible for an agent if it is consistent with everything the agent knows. From this, one can
derive rules of inference involving the K operator. Robert C. Moore relates the modal logic of
knowledge to a style of reasoning about knowledge which refers directly to possible worlds in
first-order logic (Moore, 1980; Moore, 1985a). Modal logic can be an intimidatingly arcane field,
but has also found significant applications in reasoning about information in distributed computer
systems (Halpern, 1987). For an excellent comparison of the syntactic and modal theories of
knowledge, see (Davis, 1990).

For obvious reasons, this chapter does not cover every area of knowledge representation in
depth. The three principal topics omitted are the following:

© Qualitative physics: A subfield of knowledge representation concemed specifically with
constructing a logical, nonnumeric theory of physical objects and processes. The term
was coined by Johan de Kleer (1975), although the enterprise could be said to have started
in Fahlman's (1974) BUILD. BUILD was a sophisticated planner for constructing complex
towers of blocks. Fahlman discovered in the process of designing it that most of the effort
(80%, by his estimate) went into modelling the physics of the blocks world to determine
the stability of various subassemblies of blocks, rather than into planning per se. He
sketches a hypothetical naive-physics like process to explain why young children can solve
BUILD-like problems without access to the high-speed floating-point arithmetic used in
BUILD'S physical modelling. Hayes (1985a) uses “histories,” four-dimensional slices of.
space-time similar to Davidson's events, to construct a fairly complex naive physics of
liquids. Hayes was the first to prove that a bath with the plug in will eventually overflow
if the tap keeps running; and that a person who falls into a lake will get wet all over.
De Kleer and Brown (1985) and Ken Forbus (1985) attempted to construct something
like a general-purpose theory of the physical world, based on qualitative abstractions of.
physical equations. In recent years, qualitative physics has developed to the point where
it is possible to analyze an impressive variety of complex physical systems (Sacks and
Joskowicz, 1993; Yip, 1991). Qualitative techniques have been also used to construct
novel designs for clocks, windscreen wipers, and six-legged walkers (Subramanian, 1993;
Subramanian and Wang, 1994). The collection Readings in Qualitative Reasoning about
Physical Systems (Weld and de Kleer, 1990) provides a good introduction to the field

< Spatial reasoning: The reasoning necessary to navigate in the wumpus world and super-
market world is trivial in comparison to the rich spatial structure of the real world. The
