11.5 FileSharing 399

variety of distributed information methods. Sun Microsystems introduced yel-
low pages (since renamed to network information service (NIS)), and most of
the industry adopted its use. It centralizes storage of user names, host names,
printer information, and the like. Unfortunately, it uses unsecure authentica-
tion methods, including sending user passwords unencrypted (in clear text) and
identifying hosts by IP address. Sun’s NIS+ is a much more secure replacement
for NIS, but is also much more complicated and has not been widely adopted.

In the case of Microsoft networks (CIFS), network information is used in
conjunction with user authentication (user name and password) to create a
network login that the server uses to decide whether to allow or deny access to
a requested file system. For this authentication to be valid, the user names must
match between the machines (as with NFS). Microsoft uses two distributed-
naming structures to provide a single namespace for users. The older naming
technology is domains. The newer technology, available in Windows 2000 and
beyond, is active directory. Once established, the distributed-naming facility is
used by all clients and servers to authenticate users.

The industry is moving toward lightweight directory-access protocol
(LDAP) as a secure, distributed naming mechanism. In fact, active directory
is based on LDAP. Sun Microsystems’ Solaris 8 allows LDAP to be used for user
authentication as well as system-wide retrieval of information such as available
printers. If the convergence of the use of LDAP succeeds, then one distributed
LDAP directory will be used by an organization to store all user and resource
information for all computers within that organization. The result would be
secure single sign-on for users, who would enter their authentication infor-
mation once for access to all computers within the organization. It would also
ease systems-administration efforts by combining, into one location, informa-
tion that is currently scattered in various files on each system or in differing
distributed information services.

11.5.2.3 Failure Modes

Local file systems can fail for a variety of reasons, including failure of the disk
containing the file system, corruption of the directory structure or other disk
management information (collectively called metadata), disk-controller failure,
cable failure, or host adapter failure. User or systems-administrator failure
can also cause files to be lost, or entire directories or partitions to be deleted.
Many of these failures would cause a host to crash and an error condition to be
displayed, and require human intervention to repair.

Some failures do not cause loss of data or loss of availability of data.
Redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID) can prevent the loss of a disk
from resulting in the loss of data. RAID is covered further in Section 14.5.

Remote file systems have more failure modes. By nature of the complexity
of network systems and the required interactions between remote machines,
many more problems can interfere with the proper operation of remote file
systems. In the case of networks, the network can be interrupted between
