186

Chapter6 CPU Scheduling

Process Arrival Time Burst Time

Py 0.0 8
Pz 0.4 4
P3 1.0 1

a. What is the average turnaround time for these processes with the
FCFS scheduling algorithm?

b. What is the average turnaround time for these processes with the SJF

scheduling algorithm?

c. The SJF algorithm is supposed to improve performance, but notice
that we chose to run process P; at time 0 because we did not know
that two shorter processes would arrive soon. Compute what the
average turnaround time will be if the CPU is left idle for the first
1 unit and then SJF scheduling is used. Remember that processes
P; and P» are waiting during this idle time, so their waiting time
may increase. This algorithm could be known as future-knowledge
scheduling.

6.5 Consider a variant of the RR scheduling algorithm where the entries in the

ready queue are pointers to the PCBs.

a. What would be the effect of putting two pointers to the same process
in the ready queue?

b. What would be the major advantages and disadvantages of this

scheme?

c. How would you modify the basic RR algorithm to achieve the same
effect without the duplicate pointers?

6.6 What advantage is there in having different time-quantum sizes on differ-

ent levels of a multilevel queueing system?

6.7 Consider the following preemptive priority-scheduling algorithm based

on dynamically changing priorities. Larger priority numbers imply higher
priority. When a process is waiting for the CPU (in the ready queue, but
not running), its priority changes at a rate a; when itis running, its priority
changes at a rate 3. All processes are given a priority of 0 when they enter
the ready queue. The parameters a and 3 can be set to give many different
scheduling algorithms.

a. What is the algorithm that results from 8 > a > 0?

b. What is the algorithm that results froma < <0?

6.8 Many CPU-scheduling algorithms are parameterized. For example, the

RR algorithm requires a parameter to indicate the time slice. Multilevel
