Section 8.4.

ie]
>
Ss

General Ontology

 

Caresones

 

 

 

Anything

ee

AbstractObjects Events

Sets Numbers RepresentationalObjects Intervals Places PhysicalObjects Processes

| a | aa

Categories Sentences Measurements Moments Things Stuff

LN Ln I~

Times Weights Animals Agents Solid Liquid Gas

\%

Humans

 

 

Figure 82 The top-level ontology of the world, showing the topics to be covered later in the

 

chapter. Arcs indicate subset relations.

 

 

daunting at first, representing knowledge of the commonsense world can be highly illuminating

One is constantly amazed by how much one knows but never took the time to think about. With a

good ontology, writing it down becomes more ofa pleasure than aproblem. Connections between
seemingly disparate areas become obvious, and one is awed by the scope of human thought.

The following subsections fill in the details of each topic. We should first state one
important caveat. We have chosen to discuss the content and organization of knowledge using
first-order logic. Certain aspects of the real world are hard to capture in this language. The

principal feature we must omit is the fact that almost all generalizations have exceptions, or
have the status of a default in the absence of more exact information, or only hold to a degree

For example, although "tomatoes are red" is a useful rule, some tomatoes are green, yellow, or

orange. Similar exceptions can be found to almost all the general statements in this section.
The ability to handle exceptions and uncertain rules is extremely important, but is orthogonal to

the task of understanding the general ontology. For this reason, we will delay the discussion of

exceptions and defaults until Chapter 10, and the more general topic of uncertain information
until Chapter 14,

Representing Categories

The organization of objects into categories is a vital part of knowledgerepresentation. Although

interaction with the world takes place at the level of individual objects, much of reasoning
takes place at the level of categories. For example, a shopper might have the goal of buying a
cantaloupe, rather than a particular cantaloupe such as Cantaloupes7.° Categories also serve to

6 We often use subscripts as a reminder that a constant refers to an individual rather than a collection.
