3.3 System Calls 67

circumstances, the operating system must transfer control to the command
interpreter. The command interpreter then reads the next command. In an
interactive system, the command interpreter simply continues with the next
command; it is assumed that the user will issue an appropriate command to
respond to any error. In a batch system, the command interpreter usually
terminates the entire job and continues with the next job. Some systems allow
control cards to indicate special recovery actions in case an error occurs. If the
program discovers an error in its input and wants to terminate abnormally, it
may also want to define an error level. More severe errors can be indicated
by a higher-level error parameter. It is then possible to combine normal and
abnormal termination by defining a normal termination as error at level 0.
The command interpreter or a following program can use this error level to
determine the next action automatically.

A process or job executing one program may want to load and execute
another program. This feature allows the command interpreter to execute a
program as directed by, for example, a user comman<d, the click of a mouse, or
a batch command. An interesting question is where to return control when
the loaded program terminates. This question is related to the problem of
whether the existing program is lost, saved, or allowed to continue execution
concurrently with the new program.

If control returns to the existing program when the new program termi-
nates, we must save the memory image of the existing program; thus, we have
effectively created a mechanism for one program to call another program. If
both programs continue concurrently, we have created a new job or process to
be multiprogrammed. Often, system calls exists specifically for this purpose
(create process or submit job).

If we create a new job or process, or perhaps even a set of jobs or pro-
cesses, we should be able to control its execution. This control requires the
ability to determine and reset the attributes of a job or process, including the
job’s priority, its maximum allowable execution time, and so on (get. process
attributes and set process attributes). We may also want to termi-
nate a job or process that we created (terminate process) if we find that it is
incorrect or is no longer needed.

Having created new jobs or processes, we may need to wait for them to
finish their execution. We may want to wait for a certain amount of time (wait
time); more likely, we may want to wait for a specific event to occur (wait
event). The jobs or processes should then signal when that event has occurred
(signal event). System calls of this type, dealing with the coordination of
concurrent processes, are discussed in great detail in Chapter 7.

Another set of system calls is helpful in debugging a program. Many
systems provide system calls to dump memory. This provision is useful for
debugging. A program trace lists each instruction as it is executed; it is
provided by fewer systems. Even microprocessors provide a CPU mode known
as single step, in which a trap is executed by the CPU after every instruction.
