1.2 Mainframe Systems 7

user interfaces (GUIs) were added, allowing UNIX to be more convenient for
users while still concentrating on efficiency.

The design of an operating system is a complex task. Designers face many
tradeoffs in the design and implementation, and many people are involved not
only in bringing an operating system to fruition, but also constantly revising
and updating it. How well any given operating system meets its design goals is
open to debate, and is subjective to the different users of the operating system.

To see what operating systems are and what they do, let us consider how
they have developed over the past 45 years. By tracing that evolution, we can
identify the common elements of operating systems, and see how and why
these systems have developed as they have.

Operating systems and computer architecture have influenced each other
a great deal. To facilitate the use of the hardware, researchers developed
operating systems. Users of the operating systems then proposed changes
in hardware design to simplify them. In this short historical review, notice
how identification of operating-system problems led to the introduction of new
hardware features.

1.2 = Mainframe Systems

Mainframe computer systems were the first computers used to tackle many
commercial and scientific applications. In this section, we trace the growth of
mainframe systems from simple batch systems, where the computer runs one
—and only one—application, to time-shared systems, which allow for user
interaction with the computer system.

1.2.1 Batch Systems

Early computers were physically enormous machines run from a console. The
common input devices were card readers and tape drives. The common output
devices were line printers, tape drives, and card punches. The user did not
intéract directly with the computer systems. Rather, the user prepared a job
—which consisted of the program, the data, and some control information
about the nature of the job (control cards)—and submitted it to the computer
operator. The job was usually in the form of punch cards. At some later time
(after minutes, hours, or days), the output appeared. The output consisted of
the result of the program, as well as a dump of the final memory and register
contents for debugging.

The operating system in these early computers was fairly simple. Its
major task was to transfer control automatically from one job to the next. The
operating system was always resident in memory (Figure 1.2).

To speed up processing, operators batched together jobs with similar needs
and ran them through the computer as a group. Thus, the programmers would
