Section 7.10.

Summary 213

 

Kowalski (1979b) further advanced situation calculus by introducing propositions as objects.
The frame problem was pointed out as a major problem for the use of logic in AI by McCarthy
and Hayes (1969). The axiomatization we use in the chapter to avoid the representational frame
problem was proposed by Charles Elkan (1992) and independently by Ray Reiter (1991). The
qualification problem was also pointed out by McCarthy (1977). The inferential frame problem
is discussed at length by Shoham and McDermott (1988).

There are a number of good modern introductory texts on first-order logic. Quine (1982)
is one of the most readable. Enderton (1972) gives a more mathematically oriented perspective.
A highly formal treatment of first-order logic, along with many more advanced topics in logic, is
provided by Bell and Machover (1977). Manna and Waldinger (1985) give a readable introduction
to logic from a computer science perspective. Gallier (1986) provides an extremely rigorous
mathematical exposition of first-order logic, along with a great deal of material on its use in
automated reasoning. Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence (Genesereth and Nilsson,
1987) provides both a solid introduction to logic and the first systematic treatment of logical
agents with percepts and actions. Barwise and Etchemendy (1993) give a modem overview of
logic that includes an interactive graphical logic game called Tarski's World.

 

EXERCISES

71 A logical knowledge base represents the world using a set of sentences with no explicit
structure. An analogicalrepresentation, on the other hand, is one in which the representation has
structure that corresponds directly to the structure of the thing represented. Consider a road map
of your country as an analogical representation of facts about the country. The two-dimensional
structure of the map corresponds to the two-dimensional surface of the area

a. Give five examples of symbols in the map language.
An explicit sentence is one that the creator of the representation actually writes down. An
implicit sentence is one that results from explicit sentences because of properties of the
analogical representation. Give three examples each of implicit and explicit sentences in
the map language

c. Give three examples of facts about the physical structure of your country that cannot be
represented in the map language

d. Give two examples of facts that are much easier to express in the map language than in
first-order logic.

e. Give two other examples of useful analogical representations. What are the advantages
and disadvantages of each of these languages?

72 Represent the following sentences in first-order logic, using a consistent vocabulary (which
you must define):

a. Not all students take both History and Biology.
b. Only one student failed History.

 

 

 
