 

32 Chapter 2 Computer-System Structures

 

device: keyboard

 
      
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

status: idle

device: laser printer request for

status: busy *| laser printer

~ address: 38546

device: mouse length: 1372

status: idle

device: disk unit 1

‘Status: idle

device: disk unit 2

atetuer busy ——+} request for —+— | request for +
disk unit 2 disk unit 2

: file: 0x file: yyy

operation: read operation: write
address: 43046 address: 03458
tength: 20000 length: 500

 

 

 

 

Figure 2.4 Device-status table.

device. Since it is possible for other processes to issue requests to the same
device, the operating system will also maintain a wait queue—a list of waiting
requests— for each I/O device.

An 1/O device interrupts when it needs service. When an interrupt occurs,
the operating system first determines which I/O device caused the interrupt. It
then indexes into the I/O device table to determine the status of that device,
and modifies the table entry to reflect the occurrence of the interrupt. For
most devices, an interrupt signals completion of an I/O request. If there are
additional requests waiting in the queue for this device, the operating system
starts processing the next request.

Finally, control is returned from the I/O interrupt. If a process was waiting
for this request to complete (as recorded in the device-status table), we can now
return control to it. Otherwise, we return to whatever we were doing before
the 1/O interrupt: to the execution of the user program (the program started an
I/O operation and that operation has now finished, but the program has not yet
waited for the operation to complete) or to the wait loop (the program started
two or more I/O operations and is waiting for a particular one to finish, but this
interrupt was from one of the other operations). In a time-sharing system, the
operating system could switch to another ready-to-run process.

The schemes used by specific input devices may vary from this one. Many
interactive systems allow users to type ahead—to enter data before the data are
tequested—on the keyboard. In this case, interrupts may occur, signaling the
arrival of characters from the terminal, while the device-status block indicates
that no program has requested input from this device. If typeahead is to be
allowed, then a buffer must be provided to store the typeahead characters until

 
