222 —cuarreRSEVEN Microprogrammed Control

instruction format

microinstruction
format

forms microoperations with data from AC and DR and places the result in AC.
Note that memory receives its address from AR. Input data written to memory
come from DR, and data read from memory can go only to DR.

‘The computer instruction format is depicted in Fig. 7-5(a). It consists of
three fields: a 1-bit field for indirect addressing symbolized by I, a 4-bit oper-
ation code (opcode), and an 11-bit address field. Figure 7-5(b) lists four of the
16 possible memory-reference instructions. The ADD instruction adds the
content ofthe operand found in the effective address to the content of AC. The
BRANCH instruction causes a branch to the effective address if the operand
in ACis negative The program proceeds with the next consecutive instruction
if AC is not negative. The AC is negative if its sign bit (the bit in the leftmost
position of the register) isa 1. The STORE instruction transfers the content of
AC intothe memory word specified by the effective address. The EXCHANGE
instruction swaps the data between AC and thememory word specified by the
effective address.

It will be shown subsequently that each computer instruction must be
microprogrammed. In order not to complicate the microprogramming exam-
ple, only four instructions are considered here. It should be realized that 12
other instructions can be included and each instruction must be micropro-
grammed by the procedure outlined below.

Microinstruction Format

‘The microinstruction format for the control memory is shown in Fig, 7-6. The
20 bits of the microinstruction are divided into four functional parts. The three
fields Fl, F2, and F3 specify microoperations for the computer. The CD field

  

Figure 7-5 Computer instructions,

Opeode ‘Addcess

(@) Instruction format

Symbol Opcode Description
ADD (0000 AC CAC +M IEA}
BRANCH 001 IF(AC <0) then (PC EA)
STORE 010 M[EA}-AC
EXCHANGE 0011 AC @MIEA), MIEA) — AC
EA is theeffective address

(©) Four computer instructions
