2.5 Hardware Protection 43

2.5.1 Dual-Mode Operation

To ensure proper operation, we must protect the operating system and all
other programs and their data from any malfunctioning program. Protection
is needed for any shared resource. The approach taken by many operating sys-
tems provides hardware support that allows us to differentiate among various
modes of execution.

At the very least, we need two separate modes of operation: user mode
and monitor mode (also called supervisor mode, system mode, or privileged
mode). A bit, called the mode bit, is added to the hardware of the computer to
indicate the current mode: monitor (0) or user (1). With the mode bit, we are
able to distinguish between a task that is executed on behalf of the operating
system, and one that is executed on behalf of the user. As we shall see, this
architectural enhancement is useful for many other aspects of system operation.

At system boot time, the hardware starts in monitor mode. The operating
system is then loaded, and starts user processes in user mode. Whenever a trap
or interrupt occurs, the hardware switches from user mode to monitor mode
(that is, changes the state of the mode bit to 0). Thus, whenever the operating
system gains control of the computer, it is in monitor mode. The system always
switches to user mode (by setting the mode bit to 1) before passing control to a
user program.

The dual mode of operation provides us with the means for protecting the
Operating system from errant users, and errant users from one another. We
accomplish this protection by designating some of the machine instructions that
may cause harm as privileged instructions. The hardware allows privileged
instructions to be executed only in monitor mode. If an attempt is made to
execute a privileged instruction in user mode, the hardware does not execute
the instruction, but rather treats the instruction as illegal and traps it to the
operating system.

The concept of privileged instructions also provides us with the means for
the user to interact with the operating system by asking the system to perform
some designated tasks that only the operating system should do. Each such
request is invoked by the user executing a privileged instruction. Such a request
is known as a system call (also called a monitor call or an operating-system
function call)—as described in Section 2.1.

When a system call is executed, it is treated by the hardware as a software
interrupt. Control passes through the interrupt vector to a service routine in
the operating system, and the mode bit is set to monitor mode. The system-call
service routine is a part of the operating system. The monitor examines the
interrupting instruction to determine what system call has occurred; a param-
eter indicates what type of service the user program is requesting. Additional
information needed for the request may be passed in registers, on the stack, or
in memory (with pointers to the memory locations passed in registers). The
monitor verifies that the parameters are correct and legal, executes the request,
and returns control to the instruction following the system call.
