3.1 System Components 57

3.1.2 Main-Memory Management

As we discussed in Chapter 1, the main memory is central to the operation of
a modern computer system. Main memory is a large array of words or bytes,
ranging in size from hundreds of thousands to billions. Each word or byte
has its own address. Main memory is a repository of quickly accessible data
shared by the CPU and I/O devices. The central processor reads instructions
from main memory during the instruction-fetch cycle, and it both reads and
writes data from main memory during the data-fetch cycle. The I/O operations
implemented via DMA also read and write data in main memory. The main
memory is generally the only large storage device that the CPU is able to address
and access directly. For example, for the CPU to process data from disk, those
data must first be transferred to main memory by CPU-generated I/O calls.
Equivalently, instructions must be in memory for the CPU to execute them.

For a program to be executed, it must be mapped to absolute addresses and
loaded into memory. As the program executes, it accesses program instructions
and data from memory by generating these absolute addresses. Eventually,
the program terminates, its memory space is declared available, and the next
program can be loaded and executed.

To improve both the utilization of the CPU and the speed of the computer’s
response to its users, we must keep several programs in memory. Many
different memory-management schemes are available, and the effectiveness of
the different algorithms depends on the particular situation. Selection of a
memory-management scheme for a specific system depends on many factors
—especially on the hardware design of the system. Each algorithm requires its
own hardware support.

The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with memory management:

¢ Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used and by
whom

« Deciding which processes are to be loaded into memory when memory
space becomes available

¢ Allocating and deallocating memory space as needed

Memory-management techniques will be discussed in Chapters 9 and 10.

3.1.3 File Management

File management is one of the most visible components of an operating system.
Computers can store information on several different types of physical media.
Magnetic tape, magnetic disk, and optical disk are the most common media.
Each of these media has its own characteristics and physical organization. Each
