1.1 What Is an Operating System? 5

some attention paid to performance, and none paid to resource utilization.
Performance is important to the user, but it does not matter if most of the system
is sitting idle, waiting for the slow I/O speed of the user.

Some users sit at a terminal connected to a mainframe or minicomputer.
Other users are accessing the same computer through other terminals. These
users share resources and may exchange information. The operating system
is designed to maximize resource utilization—to assure that all available CPU
time, memory, and I/O are used efficiently, and that no individual user takes
more than her fair share.

Other users sit at workstations, connected to networks of other worksta-
tions and servers. These users have dedicated resources at their disposal, but
they also share resources such as networking and servers—file, compute and
print servers. Therefore, their operating system is designed to compromise
between individual usability and resource utilization.

Recently, many varieties of handheld computers have come into fashion.
These devices are mostly standalone, used singly by individual users. Some are
connected to networks, either directly by wire or (more often) through wireless
modems. Due to power and interface limitations they perform relatively few
remote operations. The operating systems are designed mostly for individual
usability, but performance per amount of battery life is important as well.

Some computers have little or no user view. For example, embedded
computers in home devices and automobiles may have a numeric keypad, and
may turn indicator lights on or off to show status, but mostly they and their
operating systems are designed to run without user intervention.

1.1.2 System View

From the computer’s point of view, the operating system is the program that
is most intimate with the hardware. We can view an operating system as a
resource allocator. A computer system has many resources—hardware and
software—that may be required to solve a problem: CPU time, memory space,
file-storage space, I/O devices, and so on. The operating system acts as the
manager of these resources. Facing numerous and possibly conflicting requests
for resources, the operating system must decide how to allocate them to specific
programs and users so that it can operate the computer system efficiently and
fairly.

A slightly different view of an operating system emphasizes the need to
control the various I/O devices and user programs. An operating system is a
control program. A control program manages the execution of user programs
to prevent errors and improper use of the computer. It is especially concerned
with the operation and control of I/O devices.

In general, however, we have no completely adequate definition of an
operating system. Operating systems exist because they are a reasonable way
to solve the problem of creating a usable computing system. The fundamental
