Nv
dv
o

Chapter 8. Building a Knowledge Base

 

Our discussion of the general-purpose ontology is organized under the following headings,

each of which is really worth a chapter by itself:

0

°

o

>

o

Categories: Rather than being an entirely random collection of objects, the world exhibits
a good deal ofregularity. For example, there are many cases in which several objects have a
number of properties in common. It is usual to define categories that include as members
all objects having certain properties. For example, we might wish to have categories for
tomatoes or ten-dollar bills, for peaches or pound notes, for fruits or monetary instruments.

‘We describe how categories can be objects in their own right, and how they are linked into
a unified taxonomic hierarchy.

Measures: Many useful properties such as mass, age, and price relate objects to quantities
of particular types, which we call measures. We explain how measures are represented in
logic, and how they relate to units of measure.

Composite objects: It is very common for objects to belong to categories by virtue of
their constituent structure. For example, cars have wheels, an engine, and so on, arranged
in particular ways; typical baseball games have nine innings in which each team alternates
pitching and batting. We show how such structures can be represented.

Time, Space, and Change: In order to allow for actions and events that have different
durations and can occur simultaneously, we enlarge our ontology of time. The basic picture
is of a universe that is continuous in both temporal and spatial dimensions. Times, places,
and objects will be parts of this universe.

Events and Processes: Events such as the purchase ofa tomato will also become individ-
uals in our ontology. Like tomatoes, they are usually grouped into categories. Individual
events take place at particular times and places. Processes are events that are continuous
and homogeneous in nature, such as raining or cooking tomatoes.

Physical Objects: We are already familiar with the representation of ordinary objects such
as AND-gates and wumpuses. As things that are extended in both time and space, physical
objects have much in common with events.

Substances: Whereas objects such as tomatoes are relatively easy to pin down, substances
such as tomato juice are a little slippery. Natural language usage seems to provide con-
flicting intuitions. Is there an object called TomatoJuice? Is it a category, or a real physical
object? What is the connection between it and the liter of tomato juice I bought yesterday?
Between it and constituent substances such as Water? We will see that these questions can
be resolved by careful use of the ontology of space, time, and physical objects.

Mental Objects and Beliefs: An agent will often need to reason about its own beliefs,
for example, when trying to decide why it thought that anchovies were on sale. It will
also need to reason about the beliefs of others, for example, in order to decide whom to
ask about the right aisle to find the tomatoes. In our ontology, sentences are explicitly
represented, and are believed by agents.

In this section, we will try to cover the highest levels of the ontology. The top levels of the
hierarchy of categories are shown in Figure 8.2. While the scope of the effort might seem

5 Categories are also called classes, collections, kinds, types, and concepts by other authors. They have little ornothing
to do with the mathematical topic of category theory.
