278 Chapter9 Memory Management

advantage of such a method. Operating systems may help the programmer,
however, by providing library routines to implement dynamic loading.

9.1.4 Dynamic Linking and Shared Libraries

Figure 9.1 also shows dynamically linked libraries. Some operating systems
support only static linking, in which system language libraries are treated
like any other object module and are combined by the loader into the binary
program image. The concept of dynamic linking is similar to that of dynamic
loading. Rather than loading being postponed until execution time, linking is
postponed. This feature is usually used with system libraries, such as language
subroutine libraries. Without this facility, all programs on a system need to
have a copy of their language library (or at least the routines referenced by
the program) included in the executable image. This requirement wastes both
disk space and main memory. With dynamic linking, a stub is included in
the image for each library-routine reference. This stub is a small piece of code
that indicates how to locate the appropriate memory-resident library routine,
or how to load the library if the routine is not already present.

When this stub is executed, it checks to see whether the needed routine is
already in memory. If not, the program loads the routine into memory. Either
way, the stub replaces itself with the address of the routine, and executes the
routine. Thus, the next time that that code segment is reached, the library
routine is executed directly, incurring no cost for dynamic linking. Under this
scheme, all processes that use a language library execute only one copy of the
library code.

This feature can be extended to library updates (such as bug fixes). A
library may be replaced by a new version, and all programs that reference the
library will automatically use the new version. Without dynamic linking, all
such programs would need to be relinked to gain access to the new library.
So that programs will not accidentally execute new, incompatible versions of
libraries, version information is included in both the program and the library.
More than one version of a library may be loaded into memory, and each
program uses its version information to decide which copy of the library to
use. Minor changes retain the same version number, whereas major changes
increment the version number. Thus, only programs that are compiled with the
new library version are affected by the incompatible changes incorporated in it.
Other programs linked before the new library was installed will continue using
the older library. This system is also known as shared libraries.

Unlike dynamic loading, dynamic linking generally requires help from the
operating system. If the processes in memory are protected from one another
(Section 9.3), then the operating system is the only entity that can check to see
whether the needed routine is in another process’ memory space, or that can
allow multiple processes to access the same memory addresses. We elaborate
on this concept when we discuss paging in Section 9.4.5.
