52 Chapter2 Computer-System Structures

sive, but they are fast. As we move down the hierarchy, the cost per bit generally
decreases, whereas the access time generally increases.

The operating system must ensure correct operation of the computer sys-
tem. To prevent user programs from interfering with the proper operation of the
system, the hardware has two modes: user mode and monitor mode. Various
instructions (such as I/O instructions and halt instructions) are privileged, and
can be executed in only monitor mode. The memory in which the operating
system resides must also be protected from modification by the user. A timer
prevents infinite loops. These facilities (dual mode, privileged instructions,
memory protection, timer interrupt) are basic building blocks used by operating
systems to achieve correct operation. Chapter 3 continues this discussion with
details of the facilities that operating systems provide.

LANs and WANs are the two basic types of networks. Usually connected by
expensive twisted-pair or fiber-optic cabling, LANs allow processors distributed
over a small geographical area to communicate. Connected by telephone lines,
leased lines, microwave links, or satellite channels, WANs allow processors
distributed over a larger geographical area to communicate. LANs typically
transmit more than 100 megabits per second, whereas slower WANS transmit
from 1,200 bits per second to more than 1 megabit per second.

= Exercises

2.1 Prefetching is a method of overlapping the 1/O of a job with that job’s own.
computation. The idea is simple. After a read operation completes and the
job is about to start operating on the data, the input device is instructed to
begin the next read immediately. The CPU and input device are then both
busy. With luck, by the time that the job is teady for the next data item,
the input device will have finished reading that data item. The CPU can
then begin processing the newly read data, while the input device starts
to read the following data. A similar idea can be used for output. In this
case, the job creates data that are put into a buffer until an output device
can accept them.

Compare the prefetching scheme with spooling, where the CPU
overlaps the input of one job with the computation and output of other
jobs.

2.2 How does the distinction between monitor mode and user mode function
as a rudimentary form of protection (security) system?

2.3 What are the differences between a trap and an interrupt? What is the use
of each function?

2.4 For what types of operations is DMA useful? Explain your answer.

2.5 Which of the following instructions should be privileged?

 
