clock pulses

SECTION 54 Timing and Control 135,

user. Programs and data must be transferred into memory and results of
computations must be transferred back to the user.

The instructions listed in Table 5-2 constitute a minimum set that provides
allthe capabilities mentioned above. Thereis one arithmetic instruction, ADD,
and two related instructions, complement AC(CMA) and increment AC(INC)
With these three instructions we can add and subtract binary numbers when
negative numbers are in signed-2’s complement representation. The circulate
instructions, CIR and CIL, can be used for arithmetic shifts as well as any other
type of shifts desired Multiplication and division can be performed using
addition, subtraction, and shifting. There are three logic operations: AND,
complement AC(CMA), and clear AC(CLA). The AND and complement
providea NAND operation. It can be shown that with the NAND operation
it is possible to implement all the other logic operations with two variables
(listed in Table 4-6). Moving information from memory to ACis accomplished
with the load AC(LDA) instruction. Storing information from AC into memory
isdone with the store AC(STA) instruction. The branch instructions BUN, BSA,
and ISZ, together with the four skip instructions, provide capabilities for
program control and checking of status conditions. The input (INP) and output
(OUT) instructions cause information to be transferred between the computer
and external devices.

‘Although the set of instructions for the basic computer is complete, itis
not efficient because frequently used operations are not performed rapidly. An
efficient set of instructions will include such instructions as subtract, multiply,
OR, and exclusive-OR. These operations must be programmed in the basic
computer. The programs are presented in Chap. 6 together with other pro-
gramming examples for the basic computer. By using a limited number of
instructions it is possible to show the detailed logic design of the computer.
Amore completeset of instructions would have made the design too complex.
In this way we can demonstrate the basic principles of computer organization
and design without going into excessive complex details. InChap. 8 we present
a complete list of computer instructions that are included in most commercial
computers.

The function of each instruction listed in Table 5-2 and the microopera-
tions needed for their execution are presented in Secs. 5-5 through 5-7. We
delay this discussion because we must first consider the control unit and
understand its internal organization.

5-4 Timing and Control

The timing for all registers in the basic computer is controlled by a master clock
generator. The clock pulses are applied to all flip-flops and registers in the
system, including the flip-flops and registers in the control unit. The clock
pulses do not change the state of a register unless the register is enabled by
