 

INFERENCE IN

FIRST-ORDER LOGIC |

 

 

  

In which we define inference mechanisms that can efficiently answer questions posed
in first-order logic.

Chapter 6 defined the notion of inference, and showed how sound and complete inference can
be achieved for propositional logic. In this chapter, we extend these results to first-order logic.
In Section 9.1 we provide some additional basic inference rules to deal with quantifiers. In
Section 9.2, we show how these inference rules, along with those for propositional logic, can
be chained together to make proofs. By examining these proofs, we can come up with more
powerful inference rules that make proofs much shorter and more intuitive. This makes it
possible to design inference procedures that are sufficiently powerful to be ofuse to a knowledge-
based agent. These rules and procedures are discussed in Sections 9.3 and 9.4. Section 9.5
describes the problem of completeness for first-order inference, and discusses the remarkable
result, obtained by Kurt Gédel, that if we extend first-order logic with additional constructs
to handle mathematical induction, then there is no complete inference procedure; even though
the needle is in the metaphorical haystack, no procedure can guarantee to find it. Section 9.6
describes an inference procedure called resolution that is complete for any set of sentences in
first-order logic, and Section 9.7 proves that it is complete

 

 

 

 

r

RS

 

9.1 INFERENCE RULES INVOLVING QUANTIF!

In Section 6.4, we saw the inference rules for propositional logic: Modus Ponens, And-
Elimination, And-Introduction, Or-Introduction, and Resolution. These rules hold for first-order
logic as well. But we will need additional inference rules to handle first-order logic sentences
with quantifiers. The three additional rules we introduce here are more complex than previous
ones, because we have to talk about substituting particular individuals for the variables. We will
use the notation SUBST(@, a) to denote the result of applying the substitution (or binding list) 6
to the sentence a. For example:

SuBstT({x/Sam,y/Pam}, Likes(x,y)) = Likes(Sam, Pam)

265
