16  Chapter1 Introduction

for “personal” use and were generally considered standalone computers. With
the beginning of widespread public use of the Internet in the 1980s for electronic
mail, ftp, and gopher, many PCs became connected to computer networks. With
the introduction of the Web in the mid-1990s, network connectivity became an
essential component of a computer system.

Virtually all modern PCs and workstations are capable of running a web
browser for accessing hypertext documents on the Web. Operating systems
(such as Windows, OS/2, MacOs, and UNIX) now also include the system
software (such as TCP/IP and PPP) that enables a computer to access the Internet
via a local-area network or telephone connection. Several include the web
browser itself, as well as electronic mail, remote login, and file-transfer clients
and servers.

In contrast to the tightly coupled systems discussed in Section 1.4, the com-
puter networks used in these applications consist of a collection of processors
that do not share memory or a clock. Instead, each processor has its own local
memory. The processors communicate with one another through various com-
munication lines, such as high-speed buses or telephone lines. These systems
are usually referred to as loosely coupled systems (or distributed systems).

Some operating systems have taken the concept of networks and dis-
tributed systems further than the notion of providing network connectivity. A
network operating system is an operating system that provides features such
as file sharing across the network, and that includes a communication scheme
that allows different processes on different computers to exchange messages.
A computer running a network operating system acts autonomously from all
other computers on the network, although it is aware of the network and is
able to communicate with other networked computers. A distributed operat-
ing system is a less autonomous environment: The different operating systems
communicate closely enough to provide the illusion that only a single operating
system controls the network. We cover computer networks and distributed
systems in Chapters 15 through 17.

1.6 = Clustered Systems

Like parallel systems, clustered systems gather together multiple CPUs to
accomplish computational work. Clustered systems differ from parallel sys-
tems, however, in that they are composed of two or more individual systems
coupled together. The definition of the term clustered is not concrete; many
commercial packages wrestle with what a clustered system is, and why one
form is better than another. The generally accepted definition is that clustered
computers share storage and are closely linked via LAN networking.
Clustering is usually performed to provide high availability. A layer of
cluster software runs on the cluster nodes. Each node can monitor one or more
of the others (over the LAN). If the monitored machine fails, the monitoring
