284

CHAPTER EGHT Central Processing Unit

3. A large variety of addressing modes—typically from 5 to 20 different
modes

4. Variable-length instruction formats

5. Instructions that manipulate operands in memory

RISC Characteristics

The concept of RISC architecture involvesan attempt to reduce execution time
by simplifying the instruction set of the computer. The major characteristics
of a RISC processor are:

1. Relatively few instructions

2. Relatively few addressing modes

3. Memory access limited to load and store instructions
4. All operations done within the registers of the CPU
5. Fixed-length, easily decoded instruction format

6. Single-cycle instruction execution

7. Hardwired rather than microprogrammed control

The small set of instructions of a typical RISC processor consists mostly
of register-to-register operations, with only simple load and store operations
formemory access. Thus each operand isbroughtintoa processorregister with
aload instruction. All computations are done among the data stored in proces-
sor registers. Resultsare transferred tomemory by meansof store instructions.
This architectural feature simplifies the instruction set and encourages the
optimization of register manipulation. The use of only a few addressing modes
results from the fact that almost all instructions have simple register address-
ing. Other addressing modes may be included, such as immediate operands
and relative mode.

By using arelatively simple instruction format, the instructionlength can
be fixedand alignedon word boundaries. An important aspect of RISC instruc-
tion format is that it is easy to decode. Thus the operation code and register
fields of the instruction code can be accessed simultaneously by the control.
By simplifying the instructions and their format, it is possible to simplify the
control logic. For faster operations, a hardwired control is preferable over a
microprogrammed control. An example of hardwired control is presented in
Chap. 5 in conjunction with the control unit of the basic computer. Examples
of microprogrammed control are presented in Chap. 7.

‘A characteristic of RISC processors is their ability to execute one instruc-
tion per clock cycle. This is done by overlapping the fetch, decode, and execute
phases of two or three instructions by using a procedure referred toas pipelin-
ing. A load or store instruction may require two clock cycles because access to
