116

Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

of A* were corrected in a later paper (Hart ef al., 1972). An excellent summary of early work in
search is provided by Nilsson (1971).

The original A* paper introduced a property of heuristics called "consistency." The
monotonicity property of heuristics was introduced by Pohl (1977) as a simpler replacement for
the consistency property. Pearl (1984) showed that consistency and monotonicity were equivalent
properties. The pathmax equation was first used in A* search by Mero (1984).

Pohl (1970; 1977) pioneered the study of the relationship between the error in A*'s heuristic
function and the time complexity of A*, The proof that A* runs in linear time if the error in the
heuristic function is bounded by a constant can be found in Pohl (1977) and in Gaschnig (1979).
Pearl (1984) strengthened this result to allow a logarithmic growth in the error. The "effective
branching factor" measure of the efficiency of heuristic search was proposed by Nilsson (1971).

A* and other state-space search algorithms are closely related to the branch-and-bound
techniques that are widely used in operations research. An early survey of branch-and-bound
techniques is given by Lawler and Wood (1966). The seminal paper by Held and Karp (1970)
considers the use of the minimum-spanning-tree heuristic (see Exercise 4.11) for the travelling
salesperson problem, showing how such admissible heuristics can be derived by examining
relaxed problems. Generation of effective new heuristics by problem relaxation was successfully
implemented by Prieditis (1993), building on earlier work with Jack Mostow (Mostow and
Prieditis, 1989). The probabilistic interpretation of heuristics was investigated in depth by
Hansson and Mayer (1989).

The relationships between state-space search and branch-and-bound have been investigated
in depth by Dana Nau, Laveen Kanal, and Vipin Kumar (Kumar and Kanal, 1983; Nau et al., 1984;
Kumar ef al., 1988). Martelli and Montanari (1978) demonstrate a connection between dynamic
programming (see Chapter 17) and certain types of state-space search. Kumar and Kanal (1988)
attempt a "grand unification" of heuristic search, dynamic programming, and branch-and-bound
techniques under the name of CDP—the "composite decision process." More material along
these lines is found in Kumar (1991).

There are a large number of minor and major variations on the A* algorithm. Pohl (1973)
proposed the use of dynamic weighting, which uses a weighted sum f(r) = w,g(n)+ wah(n) of
the current path length and the heuristic function as an evaluation function, rather than the simple
sum f(n) = g(a) + h(n) used in A*, and dynamically adjusts the weights w, and #, according
to certain criteria as the search progresses. Dynamic weighting usually cannot guarantee that
optimal solutions will be found, as A* can, but under certain circumstances dynamic weighting
can find solutions much more efficiently than A*

The most-constrained-variable heuristic was introduced by Bitner and Reingold (1975), and
further investigated by Purdom (1983). Empirical results on the n-queens problem were obtained
by Stone and Stone (1986). Brelaz (1979) used the most-constraining-variable heuristic as a tie-
breaker after applying the most-constrained-variable heuristic. The resulting algorithm, despite
its simplicity, is still the best method for k-coloring arbitrary graphs. The least-constraining-value
heuristic was developed and analyzed in Haralick and Elliot (1980). The min-conflicts heuristic
was first proposed by Gu (1989), and was developed independently by Steve Minton (Minton et
al., 1992). Minton explains the remarkable performance of min-conflicts by modelling the search
process as a random walk that is biased to move toward solutions. The effectiveness of algorithms
such as min-conflicts and the related GSAT algorithm (see Exercise 6.15) in solving randomly
