224 Chapter7 Process Synchronization

containing threads blocked on a lock. For example, if one thread currently
owns the lock for a synchronized object, all other threads trying to acquire
the lock will block and enter the turnstile for that lock. When the lock is
released, the kernel selects a thread from the turnstile as the next owner of
the lock. Each synchronized object with at least one thread blocked on the
object’s lock requires a separate turnstile. However, rather than associating
a turnstile with each synchronized object, Solaris 2 gives each kernel thread
its own turnstile. The turnstile for the first thread to block on a synchronized
object becomes the turnstile for the object itself. Subsequent threads blocking
on the lock will be added to this turnstile. When the initial thread ultimately
releases the lock, it gains a new turnstile from a list of free turnstiles the kernel
maintains. To prevent a priority inversion, turnstiles are organized according
to a priority inheritance protocol (Section 6.5). This means that if a lower-
priority thread currently holds a lock that a higher-priority thread is blocked
on, the thread with the lower priority will temporarily inherit the priority of
the higher-priority thread. Upon releasing the lock, the thread will revert to its
original priority.

Note that the locking mechanisms used by the kernel are implemented
for user-level threads as well, so the same types of locks are available inside
and outside the kernel. A crucial implementation difference is the priority-
inheritance protocol. Kernel-locking routines adhere to the kernel priority-
inheritance methods used by the scheduler, as described in Section 6.5; user-
level thread-locking mechanisms do not provide this functionality.

Because locks are used frequently, and typically are used for crucial kernel
functions, fine-tuning their implementation and use can provide great perfor-
mance gains. To optimize Solaris 2 performance, developers continually refine
the locking methods.

7.8.2 Synchronization in Windows 2000

The Windows 2000 operating system is a multithreaded kernel that also pro-
vides support for real-time applications and multiple processors. When the
Windows 2000 kernel accesses a global resource on a uniprocessor system, it
temporarily masks interrupts for all interrupt handlers that may also access
the global resource. On a multiprocessor system, Windows 2000 protects access
to global resources using spinlocks. Just as in Solaris 2, the kernel only uses
spinlocks only to protect short code segments. Furthermore, for reasons of effi-
ciency, the kernel ensures that a thread will never be preempted while holding
aspinlock. For thread synchronization outside of the kernel, Windows 2000 pro-
vides dispatcher objects. Using a dispatcher object, a thread can synchronize
according to several different mechanisms including mutexes, semaphores, and
events. Shared data can be protected by requiring a thread to gain ownership of
a mutex to access the data and to release ownership when it is finished. Events
are a synchronization mechanism that may be used much as are condition
