fey
bo

Chapter 1. Introduction

 

WEAK METHODS

EXPERT SYSTEMS

Knowledge-based systems: The key to power? (1969-1979)

The picture of problem solving that had arisen during the first decade of AI research was of a
general-purpose search mechanism trying to string together elementary reasoning steps to find
complete solutions. Such approaches have been called weak methods, because they use weak
information about the domain. For many complex domains, it turns out that their performance is
also weak. The only way around this is to use knowledge more suited to making larger reasoning
steps and to solving typically occurring cases in narrow areas of expertise. One might say that to
solve a hard problem, you almost have to know the answer already.

The DENDRAL program (Buchanan et al., 1969) was an early example of this approach. It
was developed at Stanford, where Ed Feigenbaum (a former student of Herbert Simon), Bruce
Buchanan (a philosopher turned computer scientist), and Joshua Lederberg (a Nobel laureate
geneticist) teamed up to solve the problem of inferring molecular structure from the information
provided by a mass spectrometer. The input to the program consists of the elementary formula of
the molecule (e.g., CsHi3NOz), and the mass spectrum giving the masses ofthe various fragments
of the molecule generated when it is bombarded by an electron beam. For example, the mass
spectrum might contain a peak at # — 15 corresponding to the mass ofa methyl (CH;) fragment

The naive version of the program generated all possible structures consistent with the
formula, and then predicted what mass spectrum would be observed for each, comparing this
with the actual spectrum. As one might expect, this rapidly became intractable for decent-sized
molecules. The DENDRAL researchers consulted analytical chemists and found that they worked
by looking for well-known patterns ofpeaks in the spectrum that suggested common substructures
in the molecule. For example, the following rule is used to recognize a ketone (C=O) subgroup:

if there are two peaks at.v; and.t> such that

(a) x\ +15 =.M+ 28 (AM is the mass of the whole molecule);
(b) x) — 28 is ahigh peak;

(c) x» — 28 is a high peak;

(d) At least one of.x; and.y> is high.

then there is a ketone subgroup

Having recognized that the molecule contains a particular substructure, the number of possible
candidates is enormously reduced. The DENDRAL team concluded that the new system was
powerful because

All the relevant theoretical knowledge to solve these problems has been mapped over from its
general form in the [spectrum prediction component] ("first principles") to efficient special
forms ("cookbook recipes"). (Feigenbaumeral., 1971)

The significance of DENDRAL was that it was arguably the first successful knowledge-intensive
system: its expertise derived from large numbers of special-purpose rules. Later systems also
incorporated the main theme of McCarthy's Advice Taker approach— the clean separation of the
knowledge (in the form of rules) and the reasoning component.

With this lesson in mind, Feigenbaum and others at Stanford began the Heuristic Program-
ming Project (HPP), to investigate the extent to which the new methodology of expert systems
could be applied to other areas of human expertise. The next major effort was in the area of
medical diagnosis. Feigenbaum, Buchanan, and Dr. Edward Shortliffe developed Mycin to
diagnose blood infections. With about 450 rules, MYCIN was able to perform as well as some
