58 Chapter3 Operating-System Structures

medium is controlled by a device, such as a disk drive or tape drive, that also
has unique characteristics. These properties include access speed, capacity,
data-transfer rate, and access method (sequential or random).

For convenient use of the computer system, the operating system provides
a uniform logical view of information storage. The operating system abstracts
from the physical properties of its storage devices to define a logical storage
unit, the file. The operating system maps files onto physical media, and accesses
these files via the storage devices.

A file is a collection of related information defined by its creator. Com-
monly, files represent programs (both source and object forms) and data. Data
files may be numeric, alphabetic, or alphanumeric. Files may be free-form (for
example, text files), or may be formatted rigidly (for example, fixed fields). A
file consists of a sequence of bits, bytes, lines, or records whose meanings are
defined by their creators. The concept of a file is an extremely general one.

The operating system implements the abstract concept of a file by managing
mass storage media, such as disks and tapes, and the devices that control them.
Also, files are normally organized into directories to ease their use. Finally,
when multiple users have access to files, we may want to control by whom and
in what ways (for example, read, write, append) files may be accessed.

The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connec-
tion with file management:

© Creating and deleting files

Creating and deleting directories

« Supporting primitives for manipulating files and directories
« Mapping files onto secondary storage

¢ Backing up files on stable (nonvolatile) storage media

File-management techniques will be discussed in Chapters 11 and 12.

3.14 I/O-System Management

One of the purposes of an operating system is to hide the peculiarities of specific
hardware devices from the user. For example, in UNIX, the peculiarities of
1/O devices are hidden from the bulk of the operating system itself by the /O
subsystem. The I/O subsystem consists of

« A memory-management component that includes buffering, caching, and
spooling
e A general device-driver interface

e Drivers for specific hardware devices
