11.1 File Concept 375

to the entry in the open-file table. This pointer, not the actual file name, is
used in all I/O operations, avoiding any further searching and simplifying the
system-call interface.

The implementation of the open and close operations in a multiuser
environment, such as UNIX, is more complicated. In such a system, several
users may open the file at the same time. Typically, the operating system uses
two levels of internal tables: a per-process table and a system-wide table. The
per-process table tracks all files that a process has open. Stored in this table is
information regarding the use of the file by the process. For instance, the current
file pointer for each file is found here, indicating the location in the file that the
next read or write call will affect. Access rights to the file and accounting
information can also be included.

Each entry in the per-process table in turn points to a system-wide open-file
table. The system-wide table contains process-independent information, such
as the location of the file on disk, access dates, and file size. Once a file is opened
by one process, another process executing an open call simply results in a new
entry being added to the process’ open-file table, pointing to the appropriate
entry in the system-wide table. Typically, the open-file table also has an open
count associated with each file, indicating the number of processes that have
the file open. Each close decreases this count, and when the open count reaches
zero, the file is no longer in use, and the file’s entry is removed from the open
file table. In summary, several pieces of information are associated with an open
file.

File pointer: On systems that do not include a file offset as part of the read
and write system calls, the system must track the last read-write location
as a current-file-position pointer. This pointer is unique to each process
operating on the file, and therefore must be kept separate from the on-disk
file attributes.

File open count: As files are closed, the operating system must reuse its
open-file table entries, or it could run out of space in the table. Because
multiple processes may open a file, the system must wait for the last file
to close before removing the open-file table entry. This counter tracks the
number of opens and closes and reaches zero on the last close. The system
can then remove the entry.

© Disk location of the file: Most file operations require the system to modify
data within the file. The information needed to locate the file on disk is kept
in memory to avoid having to read it from disk for each operation.

Access rights: Each process opens a file in an access mode. This informa-
tion is stored on the per-process table so the operating system can allow or
deny subsequent I/O requests.

 
