10.6 Thrashing 349

faulting processes must use the paging device to swap pages in and out. As
they queue up for the paging device, the ready queue empties. As processes
wait for the paging device, CPU utilization decreases.

The CPU scheduler sees the decreasing CPU utilization, and increases the
degree of multiprogramming as a result. The new process tries to get started by
taking frames from running processes, causing more page faults, and a longer
queue for the paging device. As a result, CPU utilization drops even further,
and the CPU scheduler tries to increase the degree of multiprogramming even
more. Thrashing has occurred and system throughput plunges. The page-
fault rate increases tremendously. As a result, the effective memory access time
increases. No work is getting done, because the processes are spending all their
time paging.

This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 10.15, in which CPU utilization
is plotted against the degree of multiprogramming. As the degree of multi-
programming increases, CPU utilization also increases, although more slowly,
until a maximum is reached. If the degree of multiprogramming is increased
even further, thrashing sets in and CPU utilization drops sharply. At this point,
to increase CPU utilization and stop thrashing, we must decrease the degree of
multiprogramming.

We can limit the effects of thrashing by using a local replacement algorithm
(or priority replacement algorightm). With local replacement, if one process
starts thrashing, it cannot steal frames from another process and cause the latter
to thrash also. Pages are replaced with regard to the process of which they
are a part. However, if processes are thrashing, they will be in the queue for
the paging device most of the time. The average service time for a page fault
will increase, due to the longer average queue for the paging device. Thus, the
effective access time will increase even for a process that is not thrashing.

4

‘thrashing

 

degree of multiprogramming

Figure 10.15 Thrashing.
