Section 7.3.

Using First-Order Logic 199

 

with three sides and as a polygon with three angles. Many predicates will have no complete
definition of this kind, because we do not know enough to fully characterize them. For example,
how would you complete the sentence:

Vx Person(x)

Fortunately, first-order logic allows us to make use of the Person predicate without completely
defining it. Instead we can write partial specifications of properties that every person has and
properties that make something a person:

Vx Person(x) =>
Vx... => Person(x)

The domain of sets

The domain of mathematical sets is somewhat more abstract than cats or kings, but nevertheless
forms a coherent body of knowledge that we would like to be able to represent. We want to be
able to represent individual sets, including the empty set. We need a way to build up sets by
adding an element to a set or taking the union or intersection of two sets. We will want to know
ifan element is a member of a set, and to be able to distinguish sets from objects that are not sets

We will use the normal vocabulary of set theory: EmprySert is a constant; Member and
Subset are predicates; and Intersection, Union, and Adjoin are functions. (Adjoin is the function
that adds one element to a set.) Set is a predicate that is true only of sets. The following eight
axioms provide this:

1. The only sets are the empty set and those made by adjoining something to a set.
Vs Set(s) <$ (s =EmptySet) V (Ax,s2 Set(sz) A s = Adjoin(x, s2))

2. The empty set has no elements adjoined into it. (In other words, there is no way to
decompose EmptySet into a smaller set and an element.)

s]x,5 Adjoin(x,s) - EmptySet
3. Adjoining an element already in the set has no effect:
Vx,5 Member(x,s)  s=Adjoin(x,s)

4. The only members of a set are the elements that were adjoined into it. We express this
recursively, saying that is a member of if and only if 5 is equal to some set 52 adjoined
with some element y, where either y is the same as x or x is a member of.

Vx,s Member(x,s) @
3y, 82 (8 =Adjoin(y.s2) A (x =y V Member(x,52)))

5. A set is a subset of another if and only if all of the first set's members are members of the
second set.

Vs1,s2 Subset(s\,s2) <> (Wx Member(x,s,) = Member(x,s2))
6. Two sets are equal if and only if each is a subset of the other.
Vsi.82 (81 =52) <> (Subset(s),82)\ Subset(s2.81))

 
