38  Chapter2 Computer-System Structures

A disk drive is attached to a computer by a set of wires called an 1/0
bus. Several kinds of buses are available, including enhanced integrated drive
electronics (EIDE), advanced technology attachment (ATA), and SCSI buses.
The data transfers on a bus are carried out by special electronic processors
called controllers. The host controller is the controller at the computer end
of the bus. A disk controller is built into each disk drive. To perform a
disk I/O operation, the computer places a command into the host controller,
typically using memory-mapped I/O ports, as described in Section 2.3.1. The
host controller then sends the command via messages to the disk controller, and
the disk controller operates the disk-drive hardware to carry out the command.
Disk controllers usually have a built-in cache. Data transfer at the disk drive
happens between the cache and the disk surface, and data transfer to the host,
at fast electronic speeds, occurs between the cache and the host controller.

2.3.3 Magnetic Tapes

Magnetic tape was used as an early secondary-storage medium. Although it
is relatively permanent and can hold large quantities of data, its access time
is slow in comparison to that of main memory. In addition, random access to
magnetic tape is about a thousand times slower than random access to magnetic
disk, so tapes are not very useful for secondary storage. Tapes are used mainly
for backup, for storage of infrequently used information, and as a medium for
transferring information from one system to another.

A tape is kept in a spool, and is wound or rewound past a read—write head.
Moving to the correct spot on a tape can take minutes, but once positioned, tape
drives can write data at speeds comparable to disk drives. Tape capacities vary
greatly, depending on the particular kind of tape drive. Some tapes hold 2 to 3
times more data than does a large disk drive. Tapes and their drivers are usually
categorized by width, including 4, 8, and 19 millimeters, 1/4 and 1/2 inch.

2.4 m Storage Hierarchy

The wide variety of storage systems in a computer system can be organized
in a hierarchy (Figure 2.6) according to speed and cost. The higher levels
are expensive, but they are fast. As we move down the hierarchy, the cost
per bit generally decreases, whereas the access time generally increases. This
tradeoff is reasonable; if a given storage system were both faster and less
expensive than another—other properties being the same—then there would
be no reason to use the slower, more expensive memory. In fact, many early
storage devices, including paper tape and core memories, are relegated to
museums now that magnetic tape and semiconductor memory have become
faster and cheaper. The top three levels of memory in Figure 2.6 may be
constructed using semiconductor memory.

 

 
