Section 8.5 The Grocery Shopping World 247

 

Actually, it would be more consistent to have Believes be an event fluent just as Flies is. Then
we could say that it will be true tomorrow that Lois knew that Superman could fly yesterday:

T(Believes(Lois,Flies(Superman), Yesterday), Tomorrow)

We can even say that it is true now that Jimmy knows today that Lois believes that Superman
could fly yesterday:

T(Knows(Jimmy, Believes(Lois, Flies(Superman), Yesterday), Today), Now)

Knowledge and action

We have been so busy trying to represent knowledge that there is a danger of losing track of what
knowledge is/or. Recall that we are interested in building agents that perform well. That means
that the only way knowledge can help is if it allows the agent to do some action it could not
have done before, or if it allows the agent to choose a better action than it would otherwise have
chosen. For example, if the agent has the goal of speaking to Bob, then knowing Bob's phone
number can be a great help. It enables the agent to perform a dialing action and have a much
better chance of reaching Bob than ifthe agent did not know the number and dialed randomly.

KNOWLEDGE One way of looking at this is to say that actions have knowledge preconditions and
RIOWLEDGE knowledge effects. For example, the action of dialing a person's number has the precondition of

knowing the number, and the action of calling directory assistance sometimes has the effect of
knowing the number.

Note that each action has its own requirements on the form of the knowledge, just as each
question to KnowsWhat had its own requirements. Suppose I am in China, and the telephone
there has Chinese numerals on the buttons.'* Then knowing what Bob's number is as a digit
string is not enough—I need to know it as a string of Chinese digits. Similarly, the question
of whether I know where Bob lives has a different answer depending on how I want to use the
information. IfI'm planning to go there by taxi, all I need is an address; if I'm driving myself, I
need directions; if I'm parachuting in, I need exact longitude and latitude

 

8.5 __THE GROCERY SHOPPING WORLD

 

 

 

In this section, all our hard work in defining a general ontology pays off: we will be able to
define the knowledge that an agent needs to shop for a meal in a market. To demonstrate that
the knowledge is sufficient, we will run a knowledge-based agent in our environment simulator.
That means providing a simulated shopping world, which will by necessity be simpler than the
real world. But much of the knowledge shown here is the same for simulated or real worlds. The
big differences are in the complexity of vision, motion, and tactile manipulation. (These topics
will be covered in Chapters 24 and 25.)

'2 Actually, Chinese phones have Arabic numerals, but bear with the example

 
