2.7 Summary 51

megabits per second over a leased line. For sites requiring faster Internet
access, T1s are collected into multiple-T1 units that work in parallel to provide
more throughput. For instance, a T3 is composed of 28 T1 connections and
has a transfer rate of 45 megabits per second. The routers control the path
each message takes through the net. This routing may be either dynamic, to
increase communications efficiency, or static, to reduce security risks or to allow
communications charges to be computed.

Other WANs in operation use standard telephone lines as their primary
means of communication. Modems are devices that accept digital data from
the computer side and convert it to the analog signals that the telephone system
uses. A modem at the destination site converts the analog signal back to digital
and the destination receives the data. The UNIX news network, UUCP, allows
systems to communicate with each other at predetermined times, via modems,
to exchange messages. The messages are then routed to other nearby systems
and in this way either are propagated to all hosts on the network (public
messages) or are transferred to their destination (private messages). WANs
are generally slower than LANs; their transmission rates range from 1,200 bits
per second to over 1 megabit per second. UUCP has been superseded by PPP,
the Point-to-Point Protocol. PPP functions over modem connections, allowing
home computers to be fully connected to the Internet.

2.7 = Summary

Multiprogramming and time-sharing systems improve performance by over-
lapping CPU and I/O operations on a single machine. Such an overlap requires
that data transfer between the CPU and an I/O device be handled either by
polled or interrupt-driven access to an I/O port, or by a DMA data transfer.

For a computer to do its job of executing programs, the programs must
be in main memory. Main memory is the only large storage area that the
processor can access directly. It is an array of words or bytes, ranging in size
from hundreds of thousands to hundreds of millions. Each word has its own
address. The main memory is a volatile storage device that loses its contents
when power is turned off or lost. Most computer systems provide secondary
storage as an extension of main memory. The main requirement of secondary
storage is to be able to hold large quantities of data permanently. The most
common secondary-storage device is a magnetic disk, which provides storage
of both programs and data. A magnetic disk is a nonvolatile storage device
that also provides random access. Magnetic tapes are used mainly for backup,
for storage of infrequently used information, and as a medium for transferring
information from one system to another.

The wide variety of storage systems in a computer system can be organized
in a hierarchy according to their speed and cost. The higher levels are expen-

 
