368

10.16

10.17

10.18

Chapter 10 Virtual Memory

A page-replacement algorithm should minimize the number of page
faults. We can do this minimization by distributing heavily used pages
evenly over all of memory, rather than having them compete for a small
number of page frames. We can associate with each page frame a counter
of the number of pages that are associated with that frame. Then, to
replace a page, we search for the page frame with the smallest counter.

a. Define a page-replacement algorithm using this basic idea. Specifi-
cally address the problems of:
i. what the initial value of the counters is,
ii. when counters are increased,
iii. when counters are decreased,
iv. how the page to be replaced is selected.

b. How many page faults occur for your algorithm for the following
reference string, for four page frames?

1, 2,3, 4,5, 3,4, 1, 6, 7, 8, 7,8, 9, 7, 8, 9,5, 4,5, 4, 2.

c. What is the minimum number of page faults for an optimal page-
replacement strategy for the reference string in part b with four
page frames?

Consider a demand-paging system with a paging disk that has an aver-
age access and transfer time of 20 milliseconds. Addresses are translated
through a page table in main memory, with an access time of 1 microsec-
ond per memory access. Thus, each memory reference through the page
table takes two accesses. To improve this time, we have added an asso-
ciative memory that reduces access time to one memory reference, if the
page-table entry is in the associative memory.

Assume that 80 percent of the accesses are in the associative memory,
and that, of the remaining, 10 percent (or 2 percent of the total) cause
page faults. What is the effective memory access time?

Consider a demand-paged computer system where the degree of multi-
programming is currently fixed at four. The system was recently mea-
sured to determine utilization of CPU and the paging disk. The results
are one of the following alternatives. For each case, what is happening?
Can you increase the degree of multiprogramming to increase the CPU
utilization? Is the paging helping in improving performance?

a. CPU utilization, 13 percent; disk utilization, 97 percent
b. CPU utilization, 87 percent; disk utilization, 3 percent

c. CPU utilization, 13 percent; disk utilization, 3 percent
