program counter (PC)

mode field

SECTION #5 Addressing Modes 261

computer. The control unit ofa computeris designed togothrough an instruc-
tion cycle that is divided into three major phases:

1. Fetch the instruction from memory.
2. Decode the instruction.
3. Execute the instruction,

There is one register in the computer called the program counter or PC that
keeps track of the instructions in the program stored in memory. PC holds the
address of the instruction to be executed next and is incremented each time an
instruction is fetched from memory. The decoding done in step 2 determines
the operation to be performed, the addressing mode ofthe instruction, andthe
location of the operands. The computer then executes the instruction and
returns to step 1 to fetch the next instruction in sequence.

In some computers the addressing mode of the instruction is specified
with a distinct binary code, just like the operation code is specified. Other
computers use a single binary code that designates both the operation and the
mode of the instruction. Instructions may be defined with a variety of address-
ing modes, and sometimes, two or more addressing modes are combined in
one instruction.

Anexample of aninstruction format with adistinct addressing mode field
is shown in Fig. 8-6. The operation code specifies the operation to be per-
formed. The mode field is used to locate the operands needed for the opera-
tion. There may or may not be an address field in the instruction. If there is
an address field, it may designate a memory address or a processor register.
Moreover, as discussed in the preceding section, the instruction may have
more than one address field, and each address field may be associated with
its own particular addressing mode.

Although most addressing modes modify the address field of the instruc-
tion, there are two modes that need no address field at all. These are the
implied and immediate modes.

 

Implied Mode: In this mode the operands are specified implicitly in the
definition of the instruction. For example, the instruction “complement accu-
mulator” is an implied-mode instruction because the operand in the accumu-
lator register is implied in the definition of the instruction. In fact, all register
reference instructions that use an accumulator are implied-mode instructions.

 

Figure 8-6 Instruction format with mode field

 

 

 

 

‘Opeode ‘Mode “Address

 
