264

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

index register is a special CPU register that contains an index value. The
address field of the instruction defines the beginning address of a data array
in memory. Each operand in the array is stored in memory relative to the
beginning address. The distance between the beginning address and the
address of the operand is the index value stored in the index register. Any
operand in the array can be accessed with the same instruction provided that
the index register contains the correct index value. The index register can be
incremented to facilitate access to consecutive operands. Note that if an index-
type instruction does not include an address field in its format, the instruction
converts to the register indirect mode of operation.

Some computersdedicate one CPU register to function solely as an index
register. This register is involved implicitly when the index-mode instruction
is used. In computers with many processor registers, any one of the CPU
registers can contain the index number. In such a case the register must be
specified explicitly in a register field within the instruction format.

Base Register Addressing Mode: In this mode the content of a base register
is added to the address part of the instruction to obtain the effective address.
This is similar to the indexed addressing mode except that the register is now
called a base registerinstead of an index register. The difference between the
two modes is in the way they are used rather than in the way that they are
computed. An index register is assumed to hold an index number that is
relative to the address part of the instruction. A base register is assumed to hold
a base address and the address field of the instruction gives a displacement
rélative to this base address. The base register addressing mode is used in
computers to facilitate the relocation of programs in memory. When programs
and data are moved from one segment of memory to another, as required in
multiprogramming systems, the address values of instructions must reflect
this change of position. With a base register, the displacement values of
instructions do not have to change. Only the value of the base register requires
updating to reflect the beginning of a new memory segment

Numerical Example

To show the differences between the various modes, we will show the effect
of the addressing modes on the instruction defined in Fig. 8-7. The two-word
instruction at address 200and 201 is a “load to AC” instruction with an address
field equal to 500. The first word of the instruction specifies the operation code
and mode, and the second word specifies the address part. PC has the value
200 for fetching this instruction. The content of processor register R1 is 400,
and the content of an index register XR is 100. AC receives the operand after
the instruction is executed. The figure lists a few pertinent addresses and
shows the memory content at each of these addresses.
