118 Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

 

EXERCISES

41 Suppose that we run a greedy search algorithm with h(n) = —g(n). What sort of search will
the greedy search emulate? .

42 Come up with heuristics for the following problems. Explain whether they are admissible,
and whether the state spaces contain local maxima with your heuristic:

a. The general case of the chain problem (i.e., with an arbitrary goal state) from Exercise 3.15.
b. Algebraic equation solving (e.g., "solve x?y° = 3 — xy for x”).

c. Path planning in the plane with rectangular obstacles (see also Exercise 4.13).

d. Maze problems, as defined in Chapter 3.

43 Consider the problem of constructing crossword puzzles: fitting words into a grid of
intersecting horizontal and vertical squares. Assume that a list of words (ie., a dictionary) is
provided, and that the task is to fill in the squares using any subset of this list. Go through a
complete goal and problem formulation for this domain, and choose a search strategy to solve it.
Specify the heuristic function, if you think one is needed.

44 Sometimes there is no good evaluation function for a problem, but there is a good comparison
method: a way to tell if one node is better than another, without assigning numerical values to
either. Show that this is enough to do a best-first search. What properties of best-first search do
we give up ifwe only have a comparison method?

4.5 We saw on page 95 that the straight-line distance heuristic is misleading on the problem of
going from Iasi to Fagaras. However, the heuristic is perfect on the opposite problem: going from
Fagaras to Iasi. Are there problems for which the heuristic is misleading in both directions?

46 Invent a heuristic function for the 8-puzzle that sometimes overestimates, and show how it
can lead to a suboptimal solution on a particular problem.

4.7 Prove that ifthe heuristic function 4 obeys the triangle inequality, then the f-cost along any
path in the search tree is nondecreasing. (The triangle inequality says that the sum of the costs
from A to B and B to C must not be less than the cost from A to C directly.)

48 We showed in the chapter that an admissible heuristic heuristic (when combined with
pathmax) leads to monotonically nondecreasing f values along any path (i.e., f(successor(n))>
f(n)). Does the implication go the other way? That is, does monotonicity inf imply admissibility
of the associated A?

49 We gave two simple heuristics for the 8-puzzle: Manhattan distance and misplaced tiles.
Several heuristics in the literature purport to be better than either ofthese. (See, for example, Nils-
son (1971) for additional improvements on Manhattan distance, and Mostow and Prieditis (1989)
for heuristics derived by semimechanical methods.) Test these claims by implementing the
heuristics and comparing the performance of the resulting algorithms.

410 Would a bidirectional A* search be a good idea? Under what conditions would it be
applicable? Describe how the algorithm would work

 
