322

CHAPTER NINE Pipeline and Vector Processing

loop. It allows operations to be specified witha single vector instruction of the
form

(1: 100) = A(1: 100) + BQ : 100)

The vector instruction includes the initial address of the operands, the length
ofthe vectors, and the operation to be performed, all in one composite instruc-
tion The addition is done with a pipelined floating-point adder similar to the
cone shown in Fig. 9-6.

‘A possible instruction format fora vectorinstructionis shown in Fig. 9-11.
This is essentially a three-address instruction with three fields specifying the
base address of the operands and an additional field that gives the length of
the data items in the vectors. This assumes that the vector operands reside in
memary. It is also possible to design the processor with a large number of
registers and storeall operands in registers prior to the addition operation. In
that case the base address and length in the vector instruction specify a group
of CPU registers.

Matrix Multiplication

Matrix multiplication is one of the most computational intensive operations
performed in computers with vector processors. The multiplication of two
1X n matrices consists of n? inner products or n° multiply-add operations. An
1X m matrix of numbers has n rows and m columns and may be considered
as constituting a set of n row vectors or a set of m column vectors. Consider,
for example, the multiplication of two 3 x 3 matrices A and B.

My a2 a3) [bx ba bis) [en cz cy
% Ax x) X}bx bx bal =len Ca Cs
As Ay Ass, by ba bys. fn Ca Cx.

The product matrix C is a 3x 3 matrix whose elements are related to the
elements of A and B by the inner product:

Gj = Dain X by

For example, the number in the first row and first column of matrix C is
calculated by letting i = 1,j = 1, toobtain

Cn = Anbu + dba + as

 

Figure 9-11 Instruction formatfor vector processor.

 

 

 

Operation Base address Base address Base address Vector
code source | source 2 destination length

 

 
