452

(CHAPTER TWELVE Memory Organization

subdivided into groups of four bits each so that each group can be represented
with a hexadecimal digit. The first hexadecimal digit represents lines 13 to 16
and is always 0. The next hexadecimal digit represents lines 9 to 12, but lines
11 and 12 are always 0. The range of hexadecimal addresses for each compo-
nentis determined from the x's associated with it. These x’s represent abinary
number that can range from an all-0's to an all-I's value.

Memory Connection to CPU

RAM and ROM chips are connected to a CPU through the data and address
buses. The low-order lines in the address bus select the byte within the chips
and other linesin the address bus select a particular chip through its chip select
inputs. The connection of memory chips to the CPU is shown in Fig. 12-4. This
configuration gives a memory capacity of 512 bytes of RAM and 512 bytes of
ROM. It implements the memory map of Table 12-1. Each RAM receives the
seven low-order bits of the address bus to select one of 128 possible bytes. The
particular RAM chip selected is determined from lines 8 and 9 in the address
bus. This is done through a2 x 4 decoder whose outputs go to the CS1 inputs
in each RAM chip. Thus, when address lines 8 and 9 are equal to 00, the first
RAM chip is selected. When 01, the second RAM chip is selected, and so on.
The RD and WRoutputs from the microprocessor are applied to the inputs of
each RAM chip.

The selection between RAM and ROM is achieved through bus line 10.
The RAMs are selected when the bitin this line is 0, and the ROM when the
bitis 1. The other chip select input in the ROM is connected to the RD control
line for the ROM chip to be enabled only during a read operation. Address bus
lines 1 to 9 are applied to the input address of ROM without going through the
decoder. This assigns addresses 0 to511 to RAM and 512 to 1023 to ROM. The
data bus of the ROM has only an output capability, whereas the data bus
connected to the RAMs can transfer information in both directions.

‘The example just shown gives an indication of the interconnection com-
plexity that can exist between memory chips and the CPU. The more chips that
are connected, the more external decoders are required for selection among the
chips. The designer must establish a memory map that assigns addresses to
the various chips from which the required connections are determined.

12-3 Auxiliary Memory

The most common auxiliary memory devices used in computer systems are
magnetic disks and tapes. Other components used, but not as frequently, are
magnetic drums, magnetic bubble memory, and optical disks. To understand
fully the physical mechanism of auxiliary memory devices one must have a
knowledge of magnetics, electronics, and electromechanical systems. Al-
