SECTION 55 Instruction Cycle 139

until the memory word is available. To facilitate the presentation, we will
assume that a wait period is not necessary in the basic computer.

To fully comprehend the operation of the computer, itis crucial that one
understands the timing relationship between the clock transition and the
timing signals. For example, the register transfer statement

Tg AR < PC

specifies a transfer of the content of PC into AR if timing signal To is active. Ty
is active during an entire clock cycle interval. During this time the content of
PC is placed onto the bus (with ยง,5,5 = 010) and the LD (load) input of AR
is enabled. The actual transfer does not occur until the end of the clock cycle
when the clock goes through a positive transition. This same positive clock
transition increments the sequence counter SC from 0000 to 0001. The next
lock cycle has T; active and Ty inactive.

5-5 Instruction Cycle

A programresiding in the memory unit of the computer consists of a sequence
of instructions. The program is executed in the computer by going through a
cycle for each instruction. Each instruction cycle in turn is subdivided into a
sequence of subcycles or phases. In the basic computer each instruction cycle
consists of the following phases:

1. Fetch an instruction from memory.
. Decode the instruction.

3. Read the effective address from memory if the instruction has an indi-
rect address.

4, Execute the instruction.

x

Upon the completion of step 4, the control goes back to step 1 to fetch, decode,
and execute the next instruction. This process continues indefinitely unless a
HALT instruction is encountered.

Fetch and Decode

Initially, the program counter PC is loaded with the address of the first instruc-
tion in the program. The sequence counter SC is cleared to 0, providing a
decoded timing signal Ty. After each clock pulse, SC is incremented by one,
so that the timing signals go through a sequence Ts, T;, Tz, and so on. The
microoperations for the feich and decode phases can be specified by the
following register transfer statements.
