14,13

14,14

14,15
14.16

14.17

Exercises 531

Why is it important to balance file system I/O among the disks and
controllers on a system in a multitasking environment?

What are the tradeoffs involved in rereading code pages from the file
system, versus using swap space to store them?

Is there any way to implement truly stable storage? Explain your answer.

The reliability of a hard-disk drive is typically described in terms of a
quantity called mean time between failures (MTBF). Although this quantity
is called a “time,” the MTBF actually is measured in drive-hours per
failure.

a. If a system contains 1,000 disk drives, each of which has a 750,000
hour MTBF, which of the following best describes how often a drive
failure will occur in that disk farm: once per thousand years, once
per century, once per decade, once per year, once per month, once
per week, once per day, once per hour, once per minute, or once per
second?

b. Mortality statistics indicate that, on the average, a U.S. resident has
about 1:1,000 chance of dying between ages 20 and 21 years. Deduce
the MTBF hours for 20 year olds. Convert this figure from hours to
years. What does this MTBF tell you about the expected lifetime of
a 20 year old?

c. The manufacturer guarantees a 1-million hour MTBF for a certain
model of disk drive. What can you conclude about the number of
years for which one of these drives is under warranty?

The term fast wide SCSI-II denotes a SCSI bus that operates at a data rate of
20 MB per second when it moves a packet of bytes between the host and
a device. Suppose that a fast wide SCSI-II disk drive spins at 7,200 RPM,
has a sector size of 512 bytes, and holds 160 sectors per track.

a. Estimate the sustained transfer rate of this drive in megabytes per
second.

b. Suppose that the drive has 7,000 cylinders, 20 tracks per cylinder, a
head-switch time (from one platter to another) of 0.5 milliseconds,
and an adjacent-cylinder seek time of 2 milliseconds. Use this
additional information to give an accurate estimate of the sustained
transfer rate for a huge transfer.

c. Suppose that the average seek time for the drive is 8 milliseconds.
Estimate the I/Os per second and the effective transfer rate for
a random-access workload that reads individual sectors scattered
across the disk.
