SECTION 107 Decimal Arithmetic Operations 373

 

 

a B. | | 10 | 102 | 108 | 10° sc

er

 

 

 

 

 

 

& t

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|] Arr p>] fefepo] fe
a a
a Increment
Decent

Figure 10-21 Registers for decimal arithmetic multiplication and division.

 

Registers A and B have four more bits designated by A, and B, that providean
extension of one more digit to the registers. The BCD arithmetic unit adds the
five digits in parallel and places the sum in the five-digit A register. The
end-carry goes to flip-flop E. The purpose of digit A, is to accommmodat
overflow while adding the multiplicand to the partial productduring multipli-
cation. The purpose of digit B, is to form the 9's complement of the divisor
when subtracted from the partial remainder during the division operation. The
least significant digit in register Q is denoted by Q,. This digit can be incre-
mented or decremented.

‘Adecimal operand coming from memory consists of 17 bits. One bit (the
sign) is transferred to B, and the magnitude of the operand is placed in the
lower 16 bits of B. Both B, and A, are cleared initially. The result of the operation
is also 17 bits long and does not use the A, part of the A register.

The decimal multiplication algorithm is shown in Fig. 10-22. Initially, the
entire A register and B, are cleared and the sequence counter SC is set to a
number k equal to the number of digits in the multiplier. The low-order digit
of the multiplier in Q: is checked. If it is not equal to 0, the multiplicand in B
is added to the partial product in A once and Q, is decremented. Q, is checked
again and the process is repeated until it is equal to 0. In this way, the
multiplicand in B is added to the partial product a number of times equal to
the multiplier digit Any temporary overflow digit will reside in A, and can
range in value from 0 to 9.

‘Next, the partial product and the multiplier are shifted once to the right.
This places zero in A, and transfers the next multiplier quotient into Q,. The
process is then repeated k times to form a double-length product in AQ.

 

 

 
