 

518  Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

require fast random access. Tapes are commonly used to hold backup copies
of disk data. They are also used in large supercomputer centers to hold the
enormous volumes of data used in scientific research and by large commercial
enterprises.

Some tapes can hold much more data than can a disk drive; the surface area
of a tape is much larger than the surface area of a disk. The storage capacity of
tapes could improve even further, because at present the areal density (or bits
per square inch) of tape technology is much less than that for magnetic disks.

Large tape installations typically use robotic tape changers that move tapes
between tape drives and storage slots in a tape library. These mechanisms give
the computer automated access to a large number of tape cartridges.

A robotic tape library can lower the overall cost of data storage. A disk-
resident file that will not be needed for a while can be archived to tape,
where the cost per gigabyte can be lower; if the file is needed in the future,
the computer can stage it back into disk storage for active use. A robotic
tape library is sometimes called near-line storage, since it is between the high
performance of on-line magnetic disks and the low cost of off-line tapes sitting
on shelves in a storage room.

14.8.1.3 Future Technology

In the future, other storage technologies may become important. One promis-
ing storage technology, holographic storage, uses laser light to record holo-
graphic photographs on special media. We can think of a black-and-white
photograph as a two-dimensional array of pixels. Each pixel represents one
bit: 0 for black, or 1 for white. A sharp photograph can hold millions of bits of
data. And all the pixels in a hologram are transferred in one flash of laser light,
so the data rate is extremely high. With continued development, holographic
storage may become commercially viable.

Another storage technology under active research is based on micro-
electronic mechanical systems (MEMS). The idea is to apply the fabrication
technologies that produce electronic chips in order to manufacture small data
storage machines. One proposal calls for the fabrication of an array of 10,000
tiny disk heads, with a square centimeter of magnetic storage material sus-
pended above the array. When the storage material is moved lengthwise over
the heads, each head accesses its own linear track of data on the material. The
storage material can be shifted sideways slightly to enable all the heads to
access their next track. Although it remains to be seen whether this technology
can be successful, it may provide a nonvolatile data storage technology that is
faster than magnetic disk and cheaper than semiconductor DRAM.

Whether the storage medium is a removable magnetic disk, a DVD, or a
magnetic tape, the operating system needs to provide several capabilities to use
removable media for data storage. These capabilities are discussed in Section
14.8.2.
