SECTION 135 Cache Coherence 509

The semaphore is tested by transferring its value to a processor register R and
then it is set to 1 The value in R determines what to do next. If the processor
finds that R = 1, itknows that the semaphore was originally set. (The fact that
itis set again does not change the semaphore value.) That means that another
processor is executing a critical section, so the processor that checked the
semaphore does not access the shared memory. If R = 0, it means that the
common memory (or the shared resource that the semaphore represents) is
available. The semaphoreis set to 1 to prevent other processors from accessing
memory. The processor can now execute the critical section. The last instruc-
tion in the program must clear location SEM to zero to release the shared
resource to other processors.

Note that the lock signal must be active during the execution of the
test-and-setinstruction. It does nothave tobeactive once the semaphoreis set.
Thus the lock mechanism prevents other processors from accessing memory
while the semaphore is being set. The semaphore itself, when set, prevents
other processors from accessing shared memory while one processor is execut-
ing a critical section.

13-5 Cache Coherence

The operation of cache memory is explained in Sec. 12-6. The primary advan-
tage of cache is its ability to reduce the average access time in uniprocessors.
When the processor finds a word in cache during a read operation, the main
memory is not involved in the transfer. If the operation is to write, there are
two commonly used procedures to update memory. In the write-through policy,
both cache and main memory are updated with every write operation. In the
‘write-back policy, only the cache is updated and the location is marked so that
it can be copied later into main memory.

Ina shared memory multiprocessor system, all the processors share a
common memory. In addition, each processor may have a local memory, part
or all of which may be a cache. The compelling reason for having separate
caches foreach processoris to reduce the average access time in each processor.
The same information may reside in a number of copies in some caches and
main memory. To ensure the ability of the system to execute memory opera-
tions correctly, the multiple copies must be kept identical. This requirement
imposes a cache coherence problem. A memory scheme is coherent if the value
returned on a load instruction is always the value given by the latest store
instruction with the same address. Without a proper solution to the cache
coherence problem, caching cannot be used in bus-oriented multiprocessors
with two or more processors.

Conditions for Incoherence
Cache coherence problems exist in multiprocessors with private caches be-
cause of the need to share writable data Read-only datacan safely be replicated
