SECTION 10-5 Floating-Point Arithmetic Operations 357

to 99. Positive exponents in registers have the range of numbers from 99 to 50.
The subtraction 050 gives the positive values from 4900. Negative exponents
are represented in registers in the range from 49 to 00. The subtraction of 50
gives the negative values in the range of -1 to -50.

The advantage of biased exponents is that they contain only positive
numbers Itis then simpler to compare their relative magnitude without being
concerned withtheir signs. Asa consequence, a magnitude comparator can be
used to compare their relative magnitude during the alignment of the man-
tissa. Anotheradvantageis that the smallest possible biased exponent contains
all zeros. The floating-point representation of zero is then a zero mantissa and
the smallest possible exponent.

In the examples above, we used decimal numbers to demonstrate some
of the concepts that must be understood when dealing with floating-point
numbers. Obviously, the same concepts apply to binary numbers as well. The
algorithmsdevelopedin this sectionareforbinary numbers. Decimal computer
arithmetic is discussed in the next section.

Register Configuration

The register configuration for floating-point operations is quite similar to the
layout for fixed-point operations. As a general rule, the same registers and
adder used for fixed-point arithmetic are used for processing the mantissas.
The difference lies in the way the exponents are handled.

The register organization for floating-point operations is shown in Fig.
10-14. There are three registers, BR, AC, and QR. Each register is subdivided
into two parts. The mantissa part has the same uppercase letter symbols as in
fixed-point representation. The exponent part uses the corresponding lower-
case letter symbol.

It is assumed that each floating-point number has a mantissa in signed-
magnitude representation and a biased exponent. Thus the AC has a mantissa

Figure 10-14 Registers for floating-point arithmetic operations

 

 

 

 

2, a ° BR
Paralletadder
E Paralleladder and comparator

 

 

 

 

 

o 2 @ oR

 

 

 

 

 

 
