voter

SECTION 1-4 Map Simplification 11

The complement expression is obtained by interchanging AND and OR oper-
ations and complementing each individual variable. Note that the complement
of C’ is C.

1-4 Map Simplification

The complexity of the logic diagram that implements a Boolean function is
rdated directly to the complexity of the algebraic expression from which the
function is implemented. The truth table representation of a function isunique,
but the function can appear in many different forms when expressed alge-
braically. The expression may be simplified using the basic relations of Boolean
algebra. However, this procedureis sometimes difficult becauseit lacks specific
rules for predicting each succeeding step in the manipulative process. The map
method provides a simple, straightforward procedure for simplifying Boolean
expressions. This method may be regarded as a pictorial arrangement of the
truth table which allows an easy interpretation for choosing the minimum
number of terms needed to express the function algebraically. The map
method is also known as the Karnaugh map or K-map.

Each combination of the variables in a truth table is called a minterm. For
example, the truth table of Fig. 1-3 contains eight minterms. When expressed
ina truth table a function of n variables will have 2° minterms, equivalent to
the 2" binary numbers obtained from m bits. A Boolean function is equal to 1
for some minterms and to 0 for others. The information contained in a truth
table may be expressed in compact form by listing the decimal equivalent of
those minterms that produce a 1 for the function. For example, the truth table
of Fig. 1-3 can be expressed as follows:

Fxy,2) = % (4,5,6,7)

The letters in parentheses list the binary variables in the order that they appear
inthe truth table. The symbol & stands for the sum of the minterms that follow
in parentheses. The minterms that produce 1 for the function are listed in their
decimal equivalent. The minterms missing from the list are the ones that
produce 0 for the function.

The mapis a diagram made up of squares, with each square representing
one minterm. The squares corresponding to minterms that produce 1 for the
function are marked by a1 and the others are marked by a0 or are left empty.
By recognizing various patterns and combining squares marked by 1's in the
map, it is possible to derive alternative algebraic expressions for the function,
from which the most convenient may be selected.

Themaps for functionsof two, three, and four variables are shown in Fig.
1-7. The number of squares in a map of n variables is 2". The 2" minterms are
listed by an equivalent decimal number for easy reference. The minterm
