 

14.23

14.24

14.25

14.26

Exercises 533

What would be the effects on cost and performance if tape storage had
the same areal density as disk storage?

If magnetic hard disks eventually have the same cost per gigabyte as do
tapes, will tapes become obsolete, or will they still be needed? Explain
your answer.

You can use simple estimates to compare the cost and performance
of a terabyte storage system made entirely from disks with one that
incorporates tertiary storage. Suppose that magnetic disks each hold 10
GB, cost $1,000, transfer 5 MB per second, and have an average access
latency of 15 milliseconds. Suppose that a tape library costs $10 per
gigabyte, transfers 10 MB per second, and has an average access latency
of 20 seconds. Compute the total cost, the maximum total data rate,
and the average waiting time for a pure disk system. If you make
any assumptions about the workload, describe and justify them. Now,
suppose that 5 percent of the data are frequently used, so they must
reside on disk, but the other 95 percent are archived in the tape library.
Further suppose that the disk system handles 95 percent of the requests,
and the library handles the other 5 percent. What are the total cost,
the maximum total data rate, and the average waiting time for this
hierarchical storage system?

It is sometimes said that tape is a sequential-access medium, whereas
magnetic disk is a random-access medium. In fact, the suitability of
a storage device for random access depends on the transfer size. The
term streaming transfer rate denotes the data rate for a transfer underway,
excluding the effect of access latency. By contrast, the effective transfer rate
is the ratio of total bytes per total seconds, including overhead time such
as the access latency.

Suppose that, in a computer, the level-2 cache has an access latency
of 8 nanoseconds and a streaming transfer rate of 800 MB per second, the
main memory has an access latency of 60 nanoseconds and a streaming
transfer rate of 80 MB per second, the magnetic disk has an access latency
of 15 millisecond and a streaming transfer rate of 5 MB per second, and
a tape drive has an access latency of 60 seconds and a streaming transfer
rate of 2 MB per second.

a. Random access causes the effective transfer rate of a device to
decrease, because no data are transferred during the access time.
For the disk described, what is the effective transfer rate if a stream-
ing transfer of 512 bytes, 8 KB, 1 MB, and 16 MB follows an average
access?

b. The utilization of a device is the ratio of effective transfer rate to
streaming transfer rate. Calculate the utilization of the disk drive
