priority interrupt

polling

SECTION 11-5 Priority Interrupt 407

Software control of input-output equipment is a complex undertaking.
For this reason /O routines for standard peripherals are provided by the
manufacturer as part of the computer system. They are usually included within
the operating system. Most operating systems are supplied with a variety of
VO programs to support the particular line of peripherals offered for the
computer. /O routines are usually available as operating system procedures
and the user refers to the established routines to specify the type of transfer
required without going into detailed machine language programs.

11-5 Priority Interrupt

Data transfer between the CPU and an I/O device is initiated by the CPU.
However, the CPU cannot start the transfer unless the device is ready to
communicate with the CPU. The readiness of the device can be determined
froman interrupt signal. The CPU responds to the interrupt request by storing
the return address from PC into a memory stack and then the program
branches toa service routine that processes the required transfer. As discussed
in Sec. 8-7, some processors also push the current PSW (programstatus word)
onto the stack and load anew PSW for the service routine. We neglect the PSW
here in order not to complicate the discussion of UO interrupts.

In a typical application a number of I/O devices are attached to the
computer, with each device being able to originate an interrupt request. The
first task of the interrupt system is to identify the source of the interrupt. There
is also the possibility that several sources will request service simultaneously.
In this case the system must also decide which device to service first.

Apriorityinterrupt isa system that establishes a priority over the various
sources to determine which condition is to be serviced first when two or more
requests arrive simultaneously. The system may also determine which condi-
tions are permitted to interrupt the computer while another interrupt is being
serviced. Higher-priority interrupt levels are assigned to requests which, if
delayed or interrupted, could have serious consequences. Devices with high-
speed transfers such as magnetic disks are given high priority, and slow
devices such as keyboards receive low priority. When two devices interrupt the
computer at the same time, the computer services the device, with the higher
Priority first.

Establishing the priority of simultaneous interrupts can be done by soft-
ware or hardware. A polling procedure is used to identify the highest-priority
source by software means. In this method there is one common branch address
forall interrupts. The program that takes care of interrupts beginsat the branch
address and polls the interrupt sources in sequence. The order in which they
are tested determines the priority of each interrupt. The highest-priority source
is tested first, and if its interrupt signal is on, control branches to a service
routine forthis source. Otherwise, the next-lower-priority sourceis tested, and
