restoring method

comparison and
nonrestoring method

SECTION 10-4 Division Algorithms 353

words of n bits, Since an operand must be stored with its sign, one bit of the
word will be occupied by the sign and the magnitude will consist of n-1 bits.

‘A divide-overflow condition is tested by subtracting the divisor in B from
half of the bits of the dividend stored in A. If A = B, the divide-overflow
flip-flop DVF is set and the operation is terminated prematurely. If A < B,
no divide overflow occurs so the value of the dividend is restored by adding
BtoA.

The division of the magnitudes starts by shifting the dividend in AQ to
the left with the high-order bit shifted into E If the bit shifted into E is 1, we
know that EA > B because EA consists of a 1 followed by n~1 bits while B
consists of only n—1 bits. In this case, B must be subtracted from EA and 1
inserted into Q, for the quotient bit. Since register A is missing the high-order
bit of the dividend (which isin B), its value is EA — 2°. Adding to this value
the 2's complement of B results in

 

(EA - 27) + (2 - B= EA-B

The carry from this addition is not transferred to E if we want E to remain
al.

If the shift-left operation inserts a 0 into E, the divisor is subtracted by
adding its 2’s complement value and the carry is transferred into E. If E = 1,
it signifies that A > B; therefore, Q,is set to 1. If E = 0, it signifies that A < B
and the original number is restored by adding B to A. In thelatter case weleave
a0 in Q, (0 was inserted during the shift).

This process is repeated again with register A holding the partial remain-
der. Aftern ~ 1 times, the quotient magnitude is formed in register Qand the
remainder is found in register A. The quotient sign is in Q, and the sign of the
remainder in A, is the same as the original sign of the dividend.

Other Algorithms

The hardware method just described is called the restoring method. The reason
for this name is that the partial remainder is restored by adding the divisor to
the negative difference. Two other methods are available fordividingnumbers,
thecomparison method andthe nonrestoring method. In the comparison method
‘A and B are compared prior to the subtraction operation. Then if A > B, Bis
subtracted from A. If A < B nothing is done. The partial remainders shifted
left and the numbers are compared again. The comparison can be determined
prior to the subtraction by inspecting the end-carry out of the parallel-adder
prior to its transfer to register E.

In the nonrestoring method, B is not added if the difference is negative
but instead, the negative difference is shifted left and then B is added. To see
why this is possible consider the case when A < B. From the flowchart in Fig.
9-11 we note that the operations performed are A — B + B; that is, Bis sub-

 
