462 Chapter13  1/O Systems

handler to search all possible sources of interrupts to determine which one
needs service. In practice, however, computers have more devices (and hence,
interrupt handlers) than they have address elements in the interrupt vector.
A common way to solve this problem is to use the technique of interrupt
chaining, in which each element in the interrupt vector points to the head of
a list of interrupt handlers. When an interrupt is raised, the handlers on the
corresponding list are called one by one, until one is found that can service
the request. This structure is a compromise between the overhead of a huge
interrupt table and the inefficiency of a dispatching to a single interrupt handler.

Figure 13.4 illustrates the design of the interrupt vector for the Intel Pen-
tium processor. The events from 0 to 31, which are nonmaskable, are used to
signal various error conditions. The events from 32 to 255, which are maskable,
are used for purposes such as device-generated interrupts.

The interrupt mechanism also implements a system. of interrupt priority
levels. This mechanism enables the CPU to defer the handling of low-priority
interrupts without masking off all interrupts, and makes it possible for a high-
priority interrupt to preempt the execution of a low-priority interrupt.

A modern operating system interacts with the interrupt mechanism in
several ways. At boot time, the operating system probes the hardware buses
to determine what devices are present, and installs the corresponding interrupt
handlers into the interrupt vector. During 1/O, the various device controllers

 

 

vector number description
0 divide error
1 debug exception
2 null interrupt
3 breakpoint
4 INTO-detected overflow
5 bound range exception
6 invalid opcode
7 device not available
8 double fault
9 coprocessor segment overrun (reserved)
10 invalid task state segment
"1 segment not present
12 stack fault
13 general protection
14 page fault
15 (Intel reserved, do not use)
16 floating-point error
17 alignment check
18 machine check
19-31 (Intel reserved, do not use)
32-255 maskable interrupts

 

 

 

 

Figure 13.4 Intel Pentium processor event-vector table.
