SECTION 10 Decimal Arithmetic Unit 363

3. Align the dividend.
4, Subtract the exponents.
5. Divide the mantissas.

The flowchart for floating-point division is shown in Fig. 10-17. The two
operands are checked for zero. If the divisor is zero, it indicates an attempt to
divide by zero, which is an illegal operation. The operation is terminated with
an error message. Analternative procedure would be to set the quotient in QR
tothe most positive number possible (if the dividend is positive) or to the most
negative possible (if the dividend is negative). If the dividend in AC is zero, the
quotient in QR is made zero and the operation terminates.

If the operands are not zero, we proceed to determine the sign of the
quotient and store it in Q,. The sign of the dividend in A, is left unchanged to
be the sign of the remainder. The Q registeris cleared and the sequence counter
SC is set to a number equal to the number of bits in the quotient.

The dividend alignment is similar to the divide-overflow check in the
fixed-point operation. The proper alignment requires that the fraction dit
dend be smaller than the divisor. The two fractions are compared by a subtrac-
tion test. The carry in E determines their relative magnitude. The dividend
fraction is restored to its original value by adding the divisor. If A = B, it is
necessary to shift A once to the right and increment the dividend exponent.
Since both operands are normalized, this alignment ensures that A < B.

Next, the divisor exponent is subtracted from the dividend exponent.
Since both exponents were originally biased, the subtraction operation gives
the difference without the bias. The bias is then added and the result trans-
ferred into q because the quotient is formed in QR.

The magnitudes of the mantissas are divided as in the fixed-point case.
After the operation, the mantissa quotient resides in Q and the remainder in
A. The floating-point quotient is already normalized and resides in QR. The
exponent of the remainder should be the sameas the exponent of the dividend.
The binary point for the remainder mantissa lies (n — 1) positions to the left
of A,. The remainder can be converted to a normalized fraction by subtracting
n ~ 1 from the dividend exponent and by shift and decrement until the bit in
A; is equal to 1 This is not shown in the flow chart and is left as an exercise.

 

10-6 Decimal Arithmetic Unit

The user of a computer prepares data with decimal numbers and receives
results in decimal form. A CPU with an arithmetic logic unit can perform
arithmetic microoperations with binary data. To perform arithmetic operations
with decimal data, it is necessary to convert the input decimal numbers to
binary, to perform all calculations with binary numbers, and to convert the
results into decimal. This may be an efficient method in applications requiring
a large number of calculations and a relatively smaller amount of input and
