306 — cuarrernme Pipeline and Vector Processing

‘As the number of tasks increases, n becomes much larger than k ~ 1, and
k + n—1 approaches the value of n. Under this condition, the speedup
becomes

 

If we assume that the time it takes to process a task is the same in the pipeline
and nonpipeline circuits, we will have t, = kt,, Including this assumption, the
speedup reduces to

=k

 

This shows that the theoretical maximum speedup thata pipeline can provide
is k, where k is the number of segments in the pipeline.

To clarify the meaning of the speedup ratio, consider the following
numerical example. Let the time it takes to process a suboperation in each
segment be equal to t, = 20 ns. Assume that the pipeline has k = 4 seg-
ments and executes n = 100 tasks in sequence. The pipeline system will take
(k + = 1)f, = 4 + 99) x 20 = 2060 ns to complete. Assuming that f=
it, = 4 x 20 = 80ns,anonpipelinesystem requires nit, = 100 x 80 = 8000ns
to complete the 100 tasks. The speedup ratio is equal to 8000/2060 = 3.88. As
the number of tasks increases, the speedup will approach 4, which is equal to
the number of segments in the pipeline If we assume that t, = 60 ns, the
speedup becomes 60/20 = 3.

To duplicate the theoretical speed advantage of a pipeline process by
means of multiple functional units, itis necessary to construct k identical units
that will be operating in parallel. The implication is that a k-segment pipeline
processor can be expected to equal the performance of k copies of an equivalent
nonpipeline circuit under equal operating conditions. This is illustrated in
Fig. 9-5, where four identical circuits are connected in parallel. Each P circuit
performs the same task of an equivalent pipeline circuit. Instead of operating
with the input data in sequence as in a pipeline, the parallel circuits acceptfour
input data items simultaneously and perform four tasks at the same time.
‘As far as the speed of operation is concerned, this is equivalent to a four
segment pipeline. Note that the four-unit circuit of Fig 9-5 constitutes a
single-instruction multiple-data GIMD) organization since the same instruc-
tion is used to operate on multiple data in parallel.

There are various reasons why the pipeline cannot operate at its maxi-
mum theoretical rate. Different segments may take differenttimes to complete
their suboperation. The clock cycle must be chosen to equal the time delay of
the segment with the maximum propagation time. This causes all other seg-
ments to wastetime while waiting for the next clock. Moreover, itisnotalways
