314

Chapter 10. Logical Reasoning Systems

 

of an agent—on each cycle, we add the percepts to the knowledge base and run the forward
chainer, which chooses an action to perform according to a set of condition-action rules.

Theoretically, we could implement a production system with a theorem prover, using
resolution to do forward chaining over a full first-order knowledge base. A more restricted
language, on the other hand, can provide greater efficiency because the branching factor is
reduced. The typical production system has these features:

The system maintains a knowledge base called the working memory. This contains a set
of positive literals with no variables

The system also maintains a separate rule memory. This contains a set of inference rules,
each of the formp,; Ap) *** => act, Aacty** +, where the p; are literals, and the act; are
actions to take when the p; are all satisfied. Allowable actions are adding and deleting
elements from the working memory, and possibly other actions (such as printing a value).

In each cycle, the system computes the subset of rules whose left-hand side is satisfied by
the current contents of the working memory. This is called the match phase.

The system then decides which of the rules should be executed. This is called the conflict
resolution phase.

The final step in each cycle is to execute the action(s) in the chosen rule(s). This is called
the act phase.

Match phase

Unification addresses the problem of matching a pair of literals, where either literal can contain
variables. We can use unification in a straightforward way to implement a forward-chaining
production system, but this is very inefficient. If there are w elements in working memory and
rtules each with n elements in the left-hand side, and solving a problem requires c cycles, then
the naive match algorithm must perform wrnc unifications. A simple expert system might have
w= 100,r = 200, n = 5,c = 1000, so this is a hundred million unifications. The rete algorithm*
used in the OPS-5 production system was the first to seriously address this problem. The rete
algorithm is best explained by example. Suppose we have the following rule memory:

AQ) A BAYA Cy) = add Dix)
A(x) A BOO A D(x} = add EQ)
A(x) A B(x) A E(x} = delete A(x)
and the following working memory:
{A(1), A(2), B(2), B(3), B(4), C(5)}

The rete algorithm first compiles the rule memory into the network shown in Figure 10.6. In
this diagram, the circular nodes represent fetches (not unifications) to working memory. Under
node A, the working memory elements A(1) and A(2) are fetched and stored. The square nodes
indicate unifications. Of the six possible. 4 x B combinations at the 4 =B node, only A(2) and
B(2) satisfy the unification. Finally, rectangular boxes indicate actions. With the initial working

+ Rete is Latin for net. It rhymes with treaty,
