Section 11.4.

Basic Representations for Planning 347

 

PLAN

‘CAUSAL LINKS

In this chapter, we will use a representation for plans that allows for deferred commitments
about ordering and variable binding. A plan is formally defined as a data structure consisting of
the following four components:

+ A set ofplan steps. Each step is one of the operators for the problem.

+ A set of step ordering constraints. Each ordering constraint is of the form S$; ~ Sj, which is
read as “S; before S;"and means that step 5; must occur sometime before step Sj (but not
necessarily immediately before).4

+ A set of variable binding constraints. Each variable constraint is of the form v
is a variable in some step, and x is either a constant or another variable.

+ A set of causal links.> A causal link is written as S; ©. S; and read as “S, achieves c for

Sj" Causal links serve to record the purpose(s) of steps in the plan: here a purpose of $; is
to achieve the precondition c of Sj.

 

x, where v

The initial plan, before any refinements have taken place, simply describes the unsolved problem.
It consists of two steps, called Start and Finish, with the ordering constraint Start X Finish. Both
Start and Finish have null actions associated with them, so when it is time to execute the plan,
they are ignored. The Start step has no preconditions, and its effect is to add all the propositions
that are true in the initial state. The Finish step has the goal state as its precondition, and no
effects. By defining a problem this way, ourplanners can start with the initial plan and manipulate
it until they come up with a plan that is a solution. The shoes-and-socks problem is defined by
the four operators given earlier and an initial plan that we write as follows:

Plan(Steps:{ 51: Op(ACTION:Start),
S22 Op( ACTION: Finish,
:RightShoeOn A LeftShoeOn)},

  
 

ORDERINGS: {51 < 52},
BINDINGS: {},
LINKS: {})

As with individual operators, we will use a graphical notation to describe plans (Figure 11.4(a)).
The initial plan for the shoes-and-socks problem is shown in Figure 11.4(b). Later in the chapter
we will see how this notation is extended to deal with more complex plans.

Figure 11.5 shows a partial-order plan that is a solution to the shoes-and-socks problem,
and six linearizations of the plan. This example shows that the partial-order plan representation
is powerful because it allows a planner to ignore ordering choices that have no effect on the
correctness of the plan. As the number of steps grows, the number of possible ordering choices
grows exponentially. For example, if we added a hat and a coat to the problem, which interact
neither with each other nor with the shoes and socks, then there would still be one partial
plan that represents all the solutions, but there would be 180 linearizations of that partial plan.
(Exercise 11.1 asks you to derive this number).

4 We use the notation d < B = C to mean (4 X B) A (BX C)
5 Some authors call causal links protection intervals.

 
