SECTION 103 Multiplication Algorithms 347

at once. This is a fast way of multiplying two numbers since all it takes is the
time for the signals to propagate through the gates that form the multiplication
array. However, an array multiplier requires a large number of gates, and for
this reason it was not economical until the development of integrated circuits.

Tosee how an array multipliercan be implemented with acombinational
circuit, consider the multiplication of two 2-bit numbers as shown in Fig. 10-9.
The multiplicand bits are b, and by, the multiplier bits are a, and ao, and the
product iscs¢2cicy The first partial product is formed by multiplying a by b; bs
The multiplication of two bits such as a) and by produces a 1 if bothbitsare 1;
otherwise, it produces a 0. This is identical to an AND operation and canbe
implemented with an AND gate. As shown in the diagram, the first partial
product is formed by means of two AND gates. The second partial product is
formed by multiplying a, by b; by and is shifted one position to theleft. The two
partial products are added with twohalf-adder (HA) circuits. Usually, thereare
more bits in the partial products and it will be necessary to use full-adders to
produce thesum. Note that the least significant bit of the product does not have
to go through an adder since itis formed by the output of the first AND gate.

‘A combinational circuit binary multiplier with more bits can be con-
structed in a similar fashion. A bit of the multiplier is ANDed with each bit of
the multiplicandin as many levels as there are bitsin the multiplier. The binary
output in each level of AND gates is added in parallel with the partial product
of the previous level to form a new partial product. The last level produces the
product. For multiplier bits and k multiplicand bits we need j x k AND gates
and (j — 1) k-bit adders to produce a product of j + k bits.

‘Asa second example, considera multiplier circuit that multiplies a binary
number of four bits with a number of three bits. Let the multiplicand be

Figure 10-9. 2-bit by 2-bit array multiplier.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ee 1 e
