Section 5.3

Imperfect Decisions 127

 

wren. VALUE

Evaluation functions

An evaluation function returns an estimate of the expected utility of the game from a given
position. The idea was not new when Shannon proposed it. For centuries, chess players (and, of
course, aficionados of other games) have developed ways ofjudging the winning chances ofeach
side based on easily calculated features ofa position. For example, introductory chess books
give an approximate material value for each piece: each pawn is worth 1, a knight or bishop
is worth 3, a rook 5, and the queen 9. Other features such as "good pawn structure" and "king
safety" might be worth half a pawn, say. All other things being equal, a side that has a secure
material advantage of a pawn or more will probably win the game, and a 3-point advantage is
sufficient for near-certain victory. Figure 5.4 shows four positions with their evaluations.

It should be clear that the performance of a game-playing program is extremely dependent
on the quality of its evaluation function. Ifit is inaccurate, then it will guide the program toward
positions that are apparently "good," but in fact disastrous. How exactly do we measure quality?

First, the evaluation function must agree with the utility function on terminal states. Second,
it must not take too long! (As mentioned in Chapter 4, if we did not limit its complexity, then it
could call minimax as a subroutine and calculate the exact value of the position.) Hence, there is
a trade-offbetween the accuracy of the evaluation function and its time cost. Third, an evaluation
function should accurately reflect the actual chances of winning

One might well wonder about the phrase "chances of winning." After all, chess is not a
game of chance. But ifwe have cut offthe search at a particular nonterminal state, then we do not
know what will happen in subsequent moves. For concreteness, assume the evaluation function
counts only material value. Then, in the opening position, the evaluation is 0, because both sides
have the same material. All the positions up to the first capture will also have an evaluation of
0. If MAX manages to capture a bishop without losing a piece, then the resulting position will
have an evaluation value of 3. The important point is that a given evaluation value covers many
different positions—all the positions where MAX is up by a bishop are grouped together into
a category that is given the label "3." Now we can see how the word "chance" makes sense:
the evaluation function should reflect the chance that a position chosen at random from such a
category leads to a win (or draw or loss), based on previous experience

This suggests that the evaluation function should be specified by the rules of probability:
if position A has a 100% chance of winning, it should have the evaluation 1.00, and if position B
has a 50% chance of winning, 25% of losing, and 25% of being a draw, its evaluation should be
+1 x 50+ —1 x .25+0x .25 = 25. But in fact, we need not be this precise; the actual numeric
values of the evaluation function are not important, as long as A is rated higher than B.

The material advantage evaluation function assumes that the value ofa piece can be judged
independently ofthe other pieces present on the board. This kind of evaluation function is called
a weighted linear function, because it can be expressed as

wifi + Wafrs see + Wala

where the w’s are the weights, and the f’s are the features of the particular position. The w's
would be the values ofthe pieces (1 for pawn, 3 forbishop, etc.), and the f’s would be the numbers

2 Techniques for automatically constructing evaluation functions with this property are discussed in Chapter 18, In
assessing the value of a category, more normally occusring positions should be given more weight

 
