serial input

SECTION 2-5 Shift Registers 53

With each clock pulse, the Dinput determines thenext state of theoutput. To
leave the output unchanged, it is necessary to make the D input equal to the
present value of the output.

‘Note that the clock pulses are applied to the Cinputs atall times. Theload
input determines whether the next pulse will accept new information or leave
the information in the register intact. The transfer of information from the
inputs into the register is done simultaneously with all four bits during asingle
pulse transition.

2-5 Shift Registers

A register capable of shifting its binary information in one or both directions
is called a shift register. The logical configuration of a shift register consists of
a chain of flip-flops in cascade, with the output of one flip-flop connected to
the input of the next flip-flop. All flip-flops receive common clock pulses that
initiate the shift from one stage to the next.

The simplest possible shift register is one that uses only flipflops, as
shown in Fig. 2-8. The output of a given flip-flop is connected to the D input
of the flip-flop atits right. The clock is common to all flip-flops. The serial input
determines what goes into the leftmost position during the shift. The serial
output is taken from the output of the rightmost flip-flop.

Sometimes it is necessary to control the shift so that it occurs with certain
lock pulses but not with others. This can be done by inhibiting the clock from
the input of the register if we do not want it to shift. When the shift register
of Fig 2-8is used, theshiftcan be controlled by connecting the clock to the input
ofan AND gate, and a second input of the AND gate can then control the shift
by inhibiting the clock. However, it is also possible to provide extra circuits to
control the shift operation through the D inputs of the flip-flops rather than
the clock input.

Bidirectional Shift Register with Parallel Load

Aregister capable of shifting inone direction only is called a unidirectional shift
register. A register that can shift in both directions is called a bidirectional shift
register. Some shift registers provide the necessary input and output terminals

Figure 28 4-bit shift register.

 

Serial
input

Serial
courput

 

—4> e@F+4> ef 4D efF+> @
c c c c

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Clock
