registers

register transfer

SECTION 42 Register Transfer 95

4-2 Register Transfer

Computer registers are designated by capital letters (sometimes followed by
numerals) to denote the function of the register. For example, the register that
holds an address for the memory unit is usually called a memory address
register and is designated by the name MAR. Other designations for registers
are PC (for program counter), IR (for instruction register, and R1 (for processor
register). The individual flip-flops in an n-bit register are numbered in se-
quence from 0 through n — 1, starting from 0 in the rightmost position and
increasing the numbers toward the left. Figure 4-1 shows the representation
of registers in block diagram form. The most common way to represent a
register is by a rectangular box with the name of the register inside, as in
Fig. 4-1(a), The individual bits can be distinguished as in (b). The numbering
of bits in a 16-bit register can be marked on top of the box as shown in (c). A
16-bit register is partitioned into two parts in (d). Bits 0 through 7 are assigned
the symbol L (for low byte) and bits 8 through 15 are assigned the symbol H
(for high byte). The name of the 16-bit register is PC. The symbol PC(0-7) or
PC(L) refers to the low-order byte and PC(8-15) or PC(H) to the high-order
byte

Information transfer from one register to another is designated in sym-
bolic form by means of a replacement operator. The statement

R2-R1

denotes a transfer of the content of register R1 into register R2. It designates
a replacement of the content of R2 by the content of R1. By definition, the
content of the source register R1 does not change after the transfer.

A statement that specifies a register transfer implies that circuits are
available from the outputs of the source register to the inputs of the destination
register and that the destination register has a parallel load capability. Nor-

 

Figure 4-1 Block diagram of register.

 

 

 

AL 76543210
(a) Register R (©) Showing individual bits
1s o - 87 o
R PC, Pew)

 

 

 

 

 

(Numbering of bits (@) Divided into two pans
