470) cunerer TWELVE Memory Organization

address space
‘memory space

memory space were available, equal to the totality of auxiliary memory.
address that is referenced by the CPU goes through an address mapping from
the so-called virtual address to a physical address in main memory. Virtual
memory is used to give programumers the illusion that they have a very large
‘memory at their disposal, even though the computer actually has a relatively
small main memory. A virtual memory system provides a mechanism for
translating program-generated addresses into correct main memory locations.
This is done dynamically, while programs are being executed in the CPU. The
translation or mapping is handled automatically by the hardware by means of
a mapping table

 

‘Address Space and Memory Space

An address used by a programmer will be called a virtual address, and the set
of such addresses the address space. An address in main memory is called a
location or physical address. The set of such locations is called the memory space.
Thus the address space is the set of addresses generated by programs as they
reference instructions and data; the memory space consists of the actual main
memory locations directly addressable for processing. In most computers the
address and memory spaces are identical. The address space is allowed to be
larger than the memory space in computers with virtual memory.

Asan illustration, consider a computer with a main-memory capacity of
32K words (K = 1024). Fifteen bits are needed to specify a physical address in
memory since 32K = 2°. Suppose that the computer has available auxiliary
memory for storing 2” = 1024K words. Thus auxiliary memory has a capacity
for storing information equivalent to the capacity of 32 main memories. Denot-
ing the address space by Nand the memory space by M, we then have for this,
example N = 1024K and M = 32K.

Ina multiprogram computer system, programs and data are transferred
to and from auxiliary memory and main memory based on demands imposed
by the CPU. Suppose that program 1 is currently being executed in the CPU.
Program 1 and a portion of its associated data are moved from auxiliary
memory into main memory as shown in Fig. 12-16. Portions of programs and
data need not be incontiguouslocations in memory since information is being
moved in and out, and empty spaces may be available in scattered locations
in memory.

Ina virtual memory system, programmersare told that they have the total
address space at their disposal. Moreover, the address field of the instruction
code has a sufficient number of bits to specify all virtual addresses. In our
example, the address field of an instruction code will consist of 20 bits but
physical memory addresses must be specified with only 15 bits. Thus CPU will
reference instructions and data with a 20-bit address, but the information at
this address must be taken from physical memory because access to auxiliary
storage for individual words will be prohibitively long. (Remember that for
