complement and
increment

SECTION 102 Addition and Submactian 337

 

 

 

 

 

a Complementer ‘M (Mode control)

 

 

 

 

 

Input cary

 

 

 

 

 

a Aresisir J_— Load sum

 

Figure 10-1 Hacdwore for signed-owgninude addition and subersction.

the adder is equal to the sum A + B. When M = 1, the I’s complement of B
is applied to the adder, the input carry is 1, and output S = A +B + 1. This
is equal to A plus the 2's complement of B, which is equivalent to the subtrac-
tion A - B.

‘Hardware Algorithm
‘The flowchart for the hardware algorithm is presented in Fig. 10-2. The two
signs A, and B, are compared by an exclusive-OR gate. If the output of the gate
is, the signsare identical ifitis1, the signs are different. Foran aidoperaton,
identical signs dictate that the magnitudes be added. For a subtract operation,
different signs dictate that the magnitudes be added. The magnitudes are
added with a microoperation EA +A + B, where EA is a register that com-
bines Eand A. The cairy in E after the addition constitutes an overflow if itis
equal to 1. The value of Eis transfered into the add-averflow flip-flop AVF.
‘The two magnitudes are subtracted if the signs are different for an add
operation oF identical for a subtract operation. The magnitudes are subtracted
by adding A to the2'scomplementof B. No overflow can oscur if the numbers
are subtracted so AVF is cleared to0. A 1 in E indicates that A > B and the
number in A is the correct result. If this number is zero. the sign A, must be
made positive to avoid a negative zero. Ain E indicates that A < B. For this
case it snecessaty to takethe 2's complement ofthe valueinA. This operation
can be done with one microoperation A+ A + 1. However, we assume that
the A register has circuits for cnicrooperations complement and increment, 90 the
2's complement is obtained from these two microoperations. In other paths of
the flowchart, the sign of the result is the same as the sign of A, so no change
in A, istequired. However, when A <B, the sign of the result is the comple-
ment of the original sign of A. It is then necessary to complement A, to obtain

 
