398 CHAPTER LEVEN Input-Output Organization

baud rate

ofa start bit, eight information bits, and two stop bits, fora total of 11 bits. Ten
characters per second means that each character takes 0.1 s for transfer. Since
there are 11 bits to be transmitted, it follows that the bit time is 9.09 ms. The
baud rate is defined as the rate at which serial information is transmitted and
is equivalentto the data transferin bits per second. Tencharacters per second
with an 11-bit format has a transfer rate of 110 baud.

The terminal hasa keyboard and a printer. Every timeakey is depressed,
the terminal sends 11 bits serially along a wire. To print a character in the
printer, an 11-bit message must be received along another wire. The terminal
interface consists of a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitter accepts an
8-bitcharacterfrom thecomputer and proceeds to send a serial 11-bit message
into the printer line. The receiver accepts a serial 11-bit message from the
keyboard line and forwards the 8-bit character code into the computer. Inte-
grated circuits are available which are specifically designed to provide the
interface between computer and similar interactive terminals. Such a circuit is
called an asynchronous communication interface or a universal asynchronous receiver-
transmitter (UART).

 

Asynchronous Communication Interface

The block diagram of an asynchronous communication interface is shown in
Fig. 11-8. It functions as both a transmitter and a receiver. The interface is
initialized for a particular mode of transfer by means of a control byte that is
loaded into its control register. The transmitter registeracceptsa data byte from
the CPU through the data bus. This byte is transferred to a shift register for
serial transmission The receiver portion receives serial information into an-
other, shift register, and when a complete data byte is accumulated, it is
transferred to the receiver register. The CPU can select the receiver register to
read the byte through the data bus. The bits in the status register are used for
input and output flags and for recording certain errors that may occur during
the transmission. The CPU can read the status register to check the status of
the flag bits and to determine if any errors have occurred. The chip select and
the read and write control lines communicate with the CPU. The chip select
(CS)input is used to select the interface through the address bus. The register
select (RS) is associated with the read (RD) and write (WR) controls. Two
registers are write-only and two are read-only. The register selected is a func-
tion of the RS value and the RD and WR status, as listed in the table accom-
panying the diagram.

The operation of theasynchronous communication interface is initialized
by the CPU by sending a byte to the control register. The initialization proce-
dure places the interface in a specific mode of operation as it defines certain
parameters such as the baud rate to use, how many bits are in each character,
whether to generate and check parity, and how many stop bits are appended
to each character. Two bits in the status register are used as flags. One bit is

 
