78 cuarren THREE Data Representation

signed numbers

fixed in one position. The two positions most widely used are (1) a binary point
in the extreme left of the register to make the stored number a fraction, and
Qa binary point in the extreme right of the register to make the stored number
an integer. In either case, the binary point is not actually present, but its
presence is assumed from the fact that the number stored in the register is
treated as a fraction or as an integer. The floating-point representation uses a
second register to store a number that designates the position of the decimal
point in the first register. Floating-point representation is discussed further in
the next section

Integer Representation

When an integer binary number is positive, the sign is represented by 0 and
the magnitude by a positivebinary number. When the number isnegative, the
sign is represented by 1 but the rest of the number may be represented in one
of three possible ways:

1. Signed-magnitude representation
2. Signed-I's complement representation
3. Signed 2’s complement representation

The signed-magnitude representation of a negative number consists of the
magnitude and a negative sign. In the other two representations, the negative
numbers represented in either the Y's or2’s complement of its positive value.
Asan example, consider the signednumber 14 stored in an 8-bit register. +14
is represented by a sign bit of 0 in the leftmost position followed by the binary
equivalent of 14: 00001110. Note that each of the eight bits of the register must
havea value and therefore0’s must be inserted in the most significant positions
following the sign bit. Although there is only one way to represent +14, there
are three different ways to represent ~14 with eight bits.

In signed-magnitude representation 1 0001110
In signed-1's complement representation 1 1110001
In signed-2's complement representation 1 1110010

The signed-magnitude representation of ~14is obtained from +14 by comple-
menting only the sign bit. The signed-1’s complement representation of ~14
is obtained by complementing all the bits of +14, including the sign bit. The
signed-2's complement representation is obtained by taking the 2’s comple-
ment of the positive number, including its sign bit.

The signed-magnitude system is used in ordinary arithmetic but is awk-
ward when employed in computer arithmetic. Therefore, the signed-comple-
ment is normally used. The 1’s complement imposes difficulties because it
