Section 2.3.

Structure of Intelligent Agents 39

 

4. Even ifwe gave the agent a learning mechanism as well, so that it could have a degree of
autonomy, it would take forever to learn the right value for all the table entries.

Despite all this, TABLE-DRIVEN-AGENT does do what we want: it implements the desired agent
mapping. It is not enough to say, "It can't be intelligent;” the point is to understand why an agent
that reasons (as opposed to looking things up ina table) can do even better by avoiding the four
drawbacks listed here.

An example

At this point, it will be helpful to consider a particular environment, so that our discussion
can become more concrete. Mainly because of its familiarity, and because it involves a broad
range of skills, we will look at the job of designing an automated taxi driver. We should point
out, before the reader becomes alarmed, that such a system is currently somewhat beyond the
capabilities of existing technology, although most ofthe components are available in some form.®
The full driving task is extremely open-ended—there is no limit to the novel combinations of
circumstances that can arise (which is another reason why we chose it as a focus for discussion).

We must first think about the percepts, actions, goals and environment for the taxi. They
are summarized in Figure 2.6 and discussed in turn.

 

 

Agent Type Percepts Actions Goals Environment

Taxi driver Cameras, Steer, accelerate, Safe, fast, legal, Roads, other
speedometer, GPS, | brake, wlk to comfortable trip, traffic, pedestrians,
sonar, microphone | passenger maximize profits customers

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 26 The taxi driver agent type.

 

 

 

The taxi will need to know where it is, what else is on the road, and how fast it is going.
This information can be obtained from the percepts provided by one or more controllable TV
cameras, the speedometer, and odometer. To control the vehicle properly, especially on curves, it
should have an accelerometer; it will also need to know the mechanical state of the vehicle, so it
will need the usual array of engine and electrical system sensors. It might have instruments that
are not available to the average human driver: a satellite global positioning system (GPS) to give
it accurate position information with respect to an electronic map; or infrared or sonar sensors to
detect distances to other cars and obstacles. Finally, it will need a microphone or keyboard for
the passengers to tell it their destination.

The actions available to a taxi driver will be more or less the same ones available to a human
driver: control over the engine through the gas pedal and control over steering and braking. In
addition, it will need output to a screen or voice synthesizer to talk back to the passengers, and
perhaps some way to communicate with other vehicles.

© See page 26 for a description of an existing driving robot, or look at the conference proceedings on Intelligent Vehicle
and Highway Systems (IVHS).
