288

Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

GODEL’s INCOMPLETENESS THEOREM

By slightly extending the language of first-order logic to allow for the mathematical
induction schema in arithmetic, Godel was able to show, in his incompleteness
theorem, that there are true aYithmetic sentences that cannot be proved.

The proof of the incompleteness theorem is somewhat beyond the scope of this
book, occupying, as it does, at least 30 pages, but we can give a hint here. We
begin with the logical theory of numbers. In this theory, there is a single constant,
0, and a single function, S (the successor function). In the intended model, 5(0)
denotes 1, S(S(0)) denotes 2, and so on; the language therefore has names for all
the natural numbers. The vocabulary also includes the function symbols +, x, and
Expt (exponentiation), and the usual set of logical connectives and quantifiers. The
first step is to notice that the set of sentences that we can write in this language can
be enumerated. (Imagine defining an alphabetical order on the symbols and then
arranging in alphabetical order each of the sets of sentences of length 1, 2, and so
on.) We can then number each sentence a with a unique natural number #a (the
Godel number). This is crucial: number theory contains a name for each of its own
sentences. Similarly, we can number each possible proof P with a Godel number
G(P), because a proofis simply a finite sequence of sentences.

Now suppose we have a set A of sentences that are true statements about the
natural numbers. Recalling that A can be named by a given set of integers, we can
imagine writing in our language a sentence a(j, A)of the following sort:

Vi_ iis not the Godel number of a proof of the sentence whose Godel
number isj, where the proofuses only premises in A.

Then let o be the sentence a(#c, A), that is, a sentence that states its own unprovability
fromA. (That this sentence always exists is true but not entirely obvious.)

Now we make the following ingenious argument. Suppose that a is provable
from A; then a is false (because a says it cannot be proved). But then we have a
false sentence that is provable from A, so A cannot consist of only true sentences—a
violation ofour premise. Therefore a is not provable fromA. But this is exactly what
c itselfclaims; hence ¢ is a true sentence.

So, we have shown (barring 29 and a halfpages) that forany set of true sentences
of number theory, and in particular any set of basic axioms, there are other true
sentences that cannot be proved from those axioms. This establishes, among other
things, that we can never prove all the theorems of mathematics within any given
system of axioms. Clearly, this was an important discovery for mathematics. Its
significance for AI has been widely debated, beginning with speculations by Godel
himself. We take up the debate in Chapter 26.

 

 

 

 
