Chapter 1 The Role of Algorithms in Computing

Because many programs use it as an intermediate step, sorting is a fundamental
operation in computer science. As a result, we have a large number of good sorting
algorithms at our disposal. Which algorithm is best for a given application depends
on—among other factors—the number of items to be sorted, the extent to which
the items are already somewhat sorted, possible restrictions on the item values,
the architecture of the computer, and the kind of storage devices to be used: main
memory, disks, or even tapes.

An algorithm is said to be correct if, for every input instance, it halts with the
correct output. We say that a correct algorithm solves the given computational
problem. An incorrect algorithm might not halt at all on some input instances, or it
might halt with an incorrect answer. Contrary to what you might expect, incorrect
algorithms can sometimes be useful, if we can control their error rate. We shall see
an example of an algorithm with a controllable error rate in Chapter 31 when we
study algorithms for finding large prime numbers. Ordinarily, however, we shall
be concerned only with correct algorithms.

An algorithm can be specified in English, as a computer program, or even as
a hardware design. The only requirement is that the specification must provide a
precise description of the computational procedure to be followed.

What kinds of problems are solved by algorithms?

Sorting is by no means the only computational problem for which algorithms have
been developed. (You probably suspected as much when you saw the size of this
book.) Practical applications of algorithms are ubiquitous and include the follow-
ing examples:

* The Human Genome Project has made great progress toward the goals of iden-
tifying all the 100,000 genes in human DNA, determining the sequences of the
3 billion chemical base pairs that make up human DNA, storing this informa-
tion in databases, and developing tools for data analysis. Each of these steps
requires sophisticated algorithms. Although the solutions to the various prob-
lems involved are beyond the scope of this book, many methods to solve these
biological problems use ideas from several of the chapters in this book, thereby
enabling scientists to accomplish tasks while using resources efficiently. The
savings are in time, both human and machine, and in money, as more informa-
tion can be extracted from laboratory techniques.

 

* The Internet enables people all around the world to quickly access and retrieve
large amounts of information. With the aid of clever algorithms, sites on the
Internet are able to manage and manipulate this large volume of data. Examples
of problems that make essential use of algorithms include finding good routes
on which the data will travel (techniques for solving such problems appear in
