286

Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

-SUBSUMPTION

Subsumption

The subsumption method eliminates all sentences that are subsumed by (ie., more specific than)
an existing sentence in the KB. For example, if P(x)is in the KB, then there is no sense in adding
P(A), and even less sense in adding P(A) V Q(B). Subsumption helps keep the KB small, which
helps keep the search space small:

9.7__COMPLETENESS OF RESOLUTION

 

REFUTATION.
‘COMPLETE,

 

HERBRAND
UNIVERSE

This section proves that resolution is complete. It can be safely skipped by those who are willing
to take it on faith.

Before we show that resolution is complete, we need to be more precise about the particular
flavor of completeness that we will establish. Resolution is refutation-complete, which means
that ifa set of sentences is unsatisfiable, then resolution will derive a contradiction. Resolution
cannot be used to generate all logical consequences of a set of sentences, but it can be used to
establish that a given sentence is entailed by the set. Hence, it can be used to find all answers to
a given question, using the negated-goal method described before.

We will take it as given that any sentence in first-order logic (without equality) can be
rewritten in normal form. This can be proved by induction on the form of the sentence, using
atomic sentences as the base case (Davis and Putnam, 1960). Our goal therefore is to prove the
following: if Sis an unsatisfiable set ofsentences in clausalform, then the application ofafinite
number ofresolution steps to S will yield a contradiction.

Our proof sketch follows the original proof due to Robinson, with some simplifications
from Genesereth and Nilsson (1987). The basic structure ofthe proofis shown in Figure 9.8, and
is as follows:

1. We begin by observing that if S is unsatisfiable, then there exists a particular set of ground
instances of the sentences of S, such that this set is also unsatisfiable (Herbrand's theorem).

2. We then show that resolution is complete for ground sentences (i.e., propositional logic).
This is easy because the set of consequences of a propositional theory is always finite

3. We then use a lifting lemma to show that, for any resolution proof using the set of ground
sentences, there is a comesponding proof using the first-order sentences from which the
ground sentences were obtained.

To carry out the first step, we will need three new concepts:

0 Herbrand universe: If 5 is a set ofclauses, then Hs, the Herbrand universe of S, is the set
of all ground terms constructible from the following:
a. The function symbols in S, if any.
b. The constant symbols in S, if any; ifnone, then the constant symbol A.
For example, ifS contains just the clause P(x, F(x, A)) A Q(x.4) = R(x, B), then Hsis the
following infinite set of ground sentences:
{A,B, F(A, A), F(A, B), F(B, A), F(B, B), F(A, F(A, A)).F(A, F(A.B)),...}
