common bus

SECTION 43 Bus and Memory Transfers 97

in the timing diagram, P is activated in the control section by the rising edge
of a clock pulse at time t. The next positive transition of the clock at time ¢ + 1
finds the load input active and the data inputs of R2 are then loaded into the
register in parallel P may go back to Oat time t + 1; otherwise, the transfer
will occur with every clock pulse transition while P remains active.

‘Note that the clock is not included as a variable in the register transfer
statements. Itis assumed that ll transfers occur during a clock edge transition.
Even though the control condition such as P becomes active just after time t,
the actual transfer does not occur until the register is triggered by the next
positive transition of the clock at time f + 1.

The basic symbols f the register transfer notation are listed in Table 4.
Registers are denoted by capital letters, and numerals may follow the letters.
Parentheses are used to denote a part of a register by specifying the range of
bits or by givinga symbol name to a portion of a register. The arrow denotes
a transfer of information and the direction of transfer. A comma is used to
separate two or more operations that are executed at the same time. The
statement

 

T: R2< Rl, R1@ R2

denotes an operation that exchanges the contents of two registers during one
common clock pulse provided that T= 1. This simultaneous operation is
possible with registers that have edge-triggered flip-flops.

TABLE 4-1 Basic Symbols for Register Transfers

 

Symbol Description Examples
Letters Denotes a register MAR, R2

(and numerals)
Parentheses ( ) Denotes a part of a register 20-7), RAL)
Arrow = Denotes transfer of information R2 < R1
Comma Separates two microoperations R2 + Ri, Rl « R2

4-3__Bus and Memory Transfers

A typical digital computer has many registers, and paths must be provided to
transfer information from one register to another. The number of wires will be
excessive if separate lines are used between each register and all other registers
in the system. A more efficient scheme for transferring information between
registers in a multiple-register configuration is a common bus system. A bus
structure consists of a set of common lines, one for each bit of a register,
through which binary information is transferred one ata time. Control signals
