460  Chapter13_ I/O Systems

6. The controller clears the command-ready bit, clears the error bit in the status
register to indicate that the device I/O succeeded, and clears the busy bit to
indicate that it is finished.

This loop is repeated for each byte.

In step 1, the host is busy-waiting or polling; It is in a loop, reading the
status register over and over until the busy bit becomes clear. If the controller
and device are fast, this method is a reasonable one. But if the wait may be long,
the host should probably switch to another task. How then does the host know
when the controller has become idle? For some devices, the host must service
the device quickly, or data will be lost. For instance, when data are streaming
in ona serial port or from a keyboard, the small buffer on the controller will
overflow and data will be lost if the host waits too long before returning to read
the bytes.

In many computer architectures, three CPU-instruction cycles are sufficient
to poll a device: read a device register, logical—and to extract a status bit, and
branch if not zero. Clearly, the basic polling operation is efficient. But polling
becomes inefficient when it is attempted repeatedly, yet rarely finds a device
to be ready for service, while other useful CPU processing remains undone. In
such instances, it may be more efficient to arrange for the hardware controller to
notify the CPU when the device becomes ready for service, rather than to require
the CPU to poll repeatedly for an I/O completion. The hardware mechanism
that enables a device to notify the CPU is called an interrupt.

13.2.2 Interrupts

The basic interrupt mechanism works as follows. The CPU hardware has a
wire called the interrupt-request line that the CPU senses after executing every
instruction. When the CPU detects that a controller has asserted a signal on the
interrupt request line, the CPU saves a small amount of state, such as the current
value of the instruction pointer, and jumps to the interrupt-handler routine
at a fixed address in memory. The interrupt handler determines the cause of
the interrupt, performs the necessary processing, and executes a return from
interrupt instruction to return the CPU to the execution state prior to the
interrupt. We say that the device controller raises an interrupt by asserting a
signal on the interrupt request line, the CPU catches the interrupt and dispatches
to the interrupt handler, and the handler clears the interrupt by servicing the
device. Figure 13.3 summarizes the interrupt-driven I/O cycle.

This basic interrupt mechanism enables the CPU to respond to an asyn-
chronous event, such as a device controller becoming ready for service. In
a modern operating system, we need more sophisticated interrupt-handling
features. First, we need the ability to defer interrupt handling during critical
processing. Second, we need an efficient way to dispatch to the proper interrupt
handler for a device, without first polling all the devices to see which one raised
the interrupt. Third, we need multilevel interrupts, so that the operating system
