100 carrer rour Register Transfer and Microoperations

three-state gate

high-impedance

buffer

bus system

Three-State Bus Buffers

‘Abus system canbe constructed with three-state gates instead of multiplexers.
A three-state gate is a digital circuit that exhibits three states. Two of the states
are signals equivalent to logic 1 and 0 as ina conventional gate. The third state
is ahighimpedance state. The high-impedance state behaves like an open circuit,
which means that the output is disconnected and does not have a logic signif-
icance. Three-state gates may performany conventional logic, such as ANDor
NAND. However, the one most commonly used in the design of a bus system
is the buffer gate.

The graphic symbol of a three-state buffer gate is shown in Fig. 4-4. It is
distinguished froma normal buffer by having both anormal input anda control
input. The control input determines the output state. When the control input
is equal to 1, the output is enabled and the gate behaves like any conventional
buffer, with the output equal to the normal input. When the control input is
0, the output is disabled and the gate goes to a high-impedance state, regard-
less of the value in the normal input. The high-impedance state of a three-state
gate provides a special feature not available in other gates. Because of this
feature, a largenumber of three-state gate outputs can be connected with wires
to form a common bus line without endangering loading effects.

‘The construction of a bussystem with three-state buffersis demonstrated
in Fig. 4-5. The outputs of four buffers are connected together to form asingle
bus line. (It must be realized that this type of connection cannot be done with
gates that do not have three-state outputs.) The control inputs to the buffers
determine which of the four normal inputs will communicate with the bus line.
No more than one buffer may be in the active state at any given time. The
connected buffers must be controlled so that only one three-state buffer
has access to the bus line while all other buffers are maintained in a high-
impedance state.

‘One way to ensure that no more than one control input is active at any
given time is touusea decoder, as shownin the diagram. When theenableinput
Of the decoder is 0, all of its four outputs are 0, and the bus line is in a
high-impedance state because all four buffers are disabled. When the enable
input is active, one of the three-state buffers will be active, depending on the
binary value in the select inputs of the decoder. Careful investigation will
reveal that Fig. 45 is another way of constructing a 4 x 1 multiplexer since the
circuit can replace the multiplexer in Fig. 43.

To construct a common bus for four registers of n bits each using three-

Figure 44 Graphic symbols for three-state buffer.

Normal input A a ee ANeel
CCl input ©
