16.4 Matroids and greedy methods 437

16.3-9

Show that no compression scheme can expect to compress a file of randomly cho-
sen 8-bit characters by even a single bit. (Hint: Compare the number of possible
files with the number of possible encoded files.)

 

* 16.4 Matroids and greedy methods

In this section, we sketch a beautiful theory about greedy algorithms. This theory
describes many situations in which the greedy method yields optimal solutions. It
involves combinatorial structures known as “matroids.” Although this theory does
not cover all cases for which a greedy method applies (for example, it does not
cover the activity-selection problem of Section 16.1 or the Huffman-coding prob-
lem of Section 16.3), it does cover many cases of practical interest. Furthermore,
this theory has been extended to cover many applications; see the notes at the end
of this chapter for references.

Matroids
A matroid is an ordered pair M = (S, I) satisfying the following conditions.

1. S is a finite set.

2. I is a nonempty family of subsets of S, called the independent subsets of S,
such that if B € I and A C B, then A € I. We say that I is hereditary if it
satisfies this property. Note that the empty set % is necessarily a member of I.

3. If A € I, B € I, and |A| < |B], then there exists some element x € B— A
such that A U {x} € I. We say that M satisfies the exchange property.

The word “matroid” is due to Hassler Whitney. He was studying matric ma-
troids, in which the elements of S are the rows of a given matrix and a set of rows is
independent if they are linearly independent in the usual sense. As Exercise 16.4-2
asks you to show, this structure defines a matroid.

As another example of matroids, consider the graphic matroid Mg = (Sg. Ig)
defined in terms of a given undirected graph G = (V, E) as follows:

* The set Sg is defined to be E, the set of edges of G.

+ If A isasubset of E, then A € Ig if and only if A is acyclic. That is, a set of
edges A is independent if and only if the subgraph G4 = (V, A) forms a forest.

The graphic matroid Mg is closely related to the minimum-spanning-tree problem,
which Chapter 23 covers in detail.
