FS

516 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

14.8 = Tertiary-Storage Structure

Would you buy a VCR that had inside it only one tape that you could not take
out or replace? Or an audio cassette player or CD player that had one album
sealed inside? Of course not. You expect to use a VCR or CD player with
many relatively inexpensive tapes or disks. On a computer as well, using many
inexpensive cartridges with one drive lowers the overall cost.

14.8.1 Tertiary-Storage Devices

Low cost is the defining characteristic of tertiary storage. So, in practice,
tertiary storage is built with removable media. The most common examples
of removable media are floppy disks, CD-ROMs, and tapes; many other kinds of
tertiary-storage devices are available as well.

14.8.1.1 Removable Disks

Removable disks are one kind of tertiary storage. Floppy disks are an example
of removable magnetic disks. They are made from a thin flexible disk coated
with magnetic material, enclosed in a protective plastic case. Although com-
mon floppy disks can hold only about 1 MB, similar technology is used for
removable magnetic disks that hold more than 1 GB. Removable magnetic disks
can be nearly as fast as hard disks, although the recording surface is at greater
risk of damage from scratches.

A magneto-optic disk is another kind of removable disk. It records data
on a rigid platter coated with magnetic material, but the recording technology
is quite different from that for a magnetic disk. The magneto-optic head flies
much farther from the disk surface than a magnetic disk head does, and the
magnetic material is covered with a thick protective layer of plastic or glass.
This arrangement makes the disk much more resistant to head crashes.

The drive has a coil that produces a magnetic field; at room temperature,
the field is too large and too weak to magnetize a bit on the disk. To write a
bit, the disk head flashes a laser beam at the disk surface. The laser is aimed at
a tiny spot where a bit is to be written. The laser heats this spot, which makes
the spot susceptible to the magnetic field. So the large, weak magnetic field can
record a tiny bit.

The magneto-optic head is too far from the disk surface to read the data by
detecting the tiny magnetic fields in the way that the head of a hard disk does.
Instead, the drive reads a bit using a property of laser light called the Kerr
effect. When a laser beam is bounced off of a magnetic spot, the polarization
of the laser beam is rotated clockwise or counter-clockwise, depending on the
orientation of the magnetic field. This rotation is what the head detects to read
a bit.
