4.1 The maximum-subarray problem 69

lls

 

 

104
94
84 Price [10 11 7 10 6
74 Change 1-4 3 -4
64

Figure 4.2 An example showing that the maximum profit does not always start at the lowest price
or end at the highest price. Again, the horizontal axis indicates the day, and the vertical axis shows
the price. Here, the maximum profit of $3 per share would be earned by buying after day 2 and
selling after day 3. The price of $7 after day 2 is not the lowest price overall, and the price of $10
after day 3 is not the highest price overall.

demonstrating that the maximum profit sometimes comes neither by buying at the
lowest price nor by selling at the highest price.

A brute-force solution

We can easily devise a brute-force solution to this problem: just try every possible
pair of buy and sell dates in which the buy date precedes the sell date. A period of n
days has ('}) such pairs of dates. Since (1) is O(n), and the best we can hope for
is to evaluate each pair of dates in constant time, this approach would take Q(n?)
time. Can we do better?

A transformation

In order to design an algorithm with an 0(n?) running time, we will look at the
input in a slightly different way. We want to find a sequence of days over which
the net change from the first day to the last is maximum. Instead of looking at the
daily prices, let us instead consider the daily change in price, where the change on
day i is the difference between the prices after day i — 1 and after day 7. The table
in Figure 4.1 shows these daily changes in the bottom row. If we treat this row as
an array A, shown in Figure 4.3, we now want to find the nonempty, contiguous
subarray of A whose values have the largest sum. We call this contiguous subarray
the maximum subarray. For example, in the array of Figure 4.3, the maximum
subarray of A[1.. 16] is A[8..11], with the sum 43. Thus, you would want to buy
the stock just before day 8 (that is, after day 7) and sell it after day 11, earning a
profit of $43 per share.

At first glance, this transformation does not help. We still need to check

("5') = (7) subarrays for a period of n days. Exercise 4.1-2 asks you to show
