342

Chapter 11. Planning

 

PLANNER

will be useful to handle action sequences as well as single actions. We will use Resuli'(/,5) to
mean the situation resulting from executing the sequence of actions / starting in s. Result’ is
defined by saying that an empty sequence of actions has no effect on a situation, and the result
ofa nonempty sequence of actions is the same as applying the first action, and then applying the
rest of the actions from the resulting situation:

Vs Result'({],9)=s
Va.p,s Result'({alp],s)= Result (p, Result(a, s))

A solution to the shopping problem is a plan p that when applied to the start state Sy yields a
situation satisfying the goal query. In other words, a p such that

At(Home, Result'(p, So)) A. Have(Milk,Result!(p, S)) A. Have(Bananas, Result! (p, So)
A Have(Drill, Result'(p.So))

If we hand this query to ASK, we end up with a solution such as

pb = [Go(SuperMarket),Buy(Milk),Buy(Banana),
Go(HardwareStore), Buy(Drill), Go(Home)]

From the theoretical point of view, there is little more to say. We have a formalism for expressing
goals and plans, and we can use the well-defined inference procedure of first-order logic to find
plans. It is true that there are some limitations in the expressiveness of situation calculus, as
discussed in Section 8.4, but situation calculus is sufficient for most planning domains.

Unfortunately, a good theoretical solution does not guarantee a good practical solution.
We saw in Chapter 3 that problem solving takes time that is exponential in the length of the
solution in the worst case, and in Chapter 9, we saw that logical inference is only semidecidable
If you suspect that planning by unguided logical inference would be inefficient, you're right
Furthermore, the inference procedure gives us no guarantees about the resulting plan p other than
that it achieves the goal. In particular, note that if achieves the goal, then so do [Nothing|p land
[A,A7! \p], where Nothing is an action that makes no changes (or at least no relevant changes) to
the situation, and A~' is the inverse of A (in the sense that s = Result(A~', Result(A,s))).So we
may end up with a plan that contains irrelevant steps if we use unguided logical inference

To make planning practical we need to do two things: (1) Restrict the language with which
we define problems. With a restrictive language, there are fewer possible solutions to search
through. (2) Use a special-purpose algorithm called a planner rather than a general-purpose
theorem prover to search for a solution. The two go hand in hand: every time we define a new
problem-description language, we need a new planning algorithm to process the language. The
remainder of this chapter and Chapter 12 describe a series of planning languages of increasing
complexity, along with planning algorithms for these languages. Although we emphasize the
algorithms, it is important to remember that we are always dealing with a logic: a formal
language with a well-defined syntax, semantics, and proof theory. The proof theory says what
can be inferred about the results of action sequences, and therefore what the legal plans are. The
algorithm enables us to find those plans. The idea is that the algorithm can be designed to process
the restricted language more efficiently than a resolution theorem prover.

 
