 

492 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

of a logical block is usually 512 bytes, although some disks can be low-level
formatted to choose a different logical block size, such as 1,024 bytes. This
option is described in Section 14.3.1.

The one-dimensional array of logical blocks is mapped onto the sectors of
the disk sequentially. Sector 0 is the first sector of the first track on the outermost
cylinder. The mapping proceeds in order through that track, then through the
rest of the tracks in that cylinder, and then through the rest of the cylinders from
outermost to innermost.

By using this mapping, we can—at least in theory —convert a logical block
number into an old-style disk address that consists of a cylinder number, a track
number within that cylinder, and a sector number within that track. In practice,
it is difficult to perform this translation, for two reasons. First, most disks have
some defective sectors, but the mapping hides this by substituting spare sectors
from elsewhere on the disk. Second, the number of sectors per track is not a
constant on some drives. On media that use constant linear velocity (CLV), the
density of bits per track is uniform. The farther a track is from the center of the
disk, the greater its length, so the more sectors it can hold. As we move from
outer zones to inner zones, the number of sectors per track decreases. Tracks
in the outermost zone typically hold 40 percent more sectors than do tracks in
the innermost zone. The drive increases its rotation speed as the head moves
from the outer to the inner tracks to keep the same rate of data moving under
the head. This method is used in CD-ROM and DVD-ROM drives. Alternatively,
the disk rotation speed can stay constant, and the density of bits decreases from
inner tracks to outer tracks to keep the data rate constant. This method is used
in hard disks and is known as constant angular velocity (CAV).

The number of sectors per track has been increasing as disk technology
improves, and the outer zone of a disk usually has several hundred sectors per
track. Similarly, the number of cylinders per disk has been increasing; large
disks have tens of thousands of cylinders.

14.2 = Disk Scheduling

One of the responsibilities of the operating system is to use the hardware
efficiently. For the disk drives, meeting this responsibility entails having a fast
access time and disk bandwidth. The access time has two major components
(also see Section 2.3.2). The seek time is the time for the disk arm to move the
heads to the cylinder containing the desired sector. The rotational latency is
the additional time waiting for the disk to rotate the desired sector to the disk
head. The disk bandwidth is the total number of bytes transferred, divided by
the total time between the first request for service and the completion of the last
transfer. We can improve both the access time and the bandwidth by scheduling
the servicing of disk I/O requests in a good order.
