page fault

SECTION 12-6 Virtual Memory 475

block number. The page field in each word is compared with the page number
in the virtual address. If a match occurs, the word is read from memory and
its corresponding block number is extracted.

Consider again the case of eight pages and four blocks as in the example
of Fig. 12-19. We replace the random access memory-page table with an
associative memory of four words as shown in Fig. 12-20. Each entry in the
associative memory array consists of two fields. The first three bits specify a
field for storing the page number. The last twobits constitutea field for storing
the block number. The virtual address is placed in the argument register. The
page number bitsin the argument register are compared with all page numbers
in the page field of the associative memory. If the page number is found, the
S-bit word is read out from memory. The corresponding block number, being
in the same word, is transferred to the main memory address register. If no
‘match occurs, a call to the operating system is generated to bring the required
page from auxiliary memory.

Page Replacement

A virtual memory system is a combination of hardware and software tech-
niques The memory management software system handles all the software
operations for the efficient utilization of memory space. It must decide (1)
which page in main memory ought to be removed to make room for a new
page, (2) when a new page is to be transferred from auxiliary memory to main
memory, and (3) where the pageis to be placed in main memory. The hardware
mapping mechanism and the memory management software together consti-
tute the architecture of a virtual memory.

When a program starts execution, one or more pages are transferred into
main memory and the page table is set to indicate their position. The program
is executed from main memory until it attempts to reference a page that is still
in auxiliary memory. This condition is called pagefault. When page fault occurs,
the execution of the present program is suspended until the required page is
brought into main memory. Since loading a page from auxiliary memory to
main memory is basically an UO operation, the operating system assigns this
task to the /O processor. In the meantime, control is transferred to the next
program in memory that is waiting to be processed in the CPU. Later, when
the memory block has been assigned and the transfer completed, the original
program can resume its operation.

When a page fault occurs in a virtual memory system, it signifies that the
page referenced by the CPU is not in main memory. A new page is then
transferred from auxiliary memory to main memory. If main memory is full,
it would be necessary to remove a page from a memory block to make room
forthe new page. The policy for choosing pages to remove is determined from
the replacement algorithm that is used. The goal of a replacement policy is to
tay to remove the page least likely to be referenced in the immediate future

Two of the most common replacement algorithms used are the first-in,

 
