448° curren TWELVE Memory Organization

randomvaccess
memory (RAM)

read-only memory
ron

bootstrap loader

computer startup

program is to be executed, it is transferred to main memory to be executed by
the CPU. Thus one may think of auxiliary memory as containing the totality
of information stored in a computer system. It is the task of the operating
system to maintain in main memory a portion of this information that is
currently active. The part of the computer system that supervises the flow of
information between auxiliary memory and main memory iscalled the memory
management system. The hardware for a memory management system is pre-
sented in Sec. 12-7.

12-2 Main Memory

The main memory is the central storage unit in a computer system. It is a
relatively large and fast memory used to store programs and data during the
computer operation. The principal technology used for the main memory is
based on semiconductor integrated circuits. Integrated circuit RAM chips are
available in two possible operating modes, static and dynamic. The static RAM
consists essentially of internal flip-flops that store the binary information. The
stored information remains valid as long as power is applied to the unit The
dynamic RAMstores the binary information in the form of electric charges that
are applied to capacitors. The capacitors are provided inside the chip by MOS
transistors. The stored charge on the capacitors tend to discharge with timeand
the capacitors must be periodically recharged by refreshing the dynamic mem-
ory. Refreshing is done by cycling through the words every few milliseconds
to restore the decaying charge. The dynamic RAM offers reduced power
consumption and larger storage capacity in a single memory chip. The static
RAM is easier to use and has shorter read and write cycles

Most of the main memory in a general-purpose computer is made up of
RAM integrated circuit chips, buta portion of the memory may be constructed
with ROM chips. Originally, RAM was used to refer to a random-access
memory, but now it is used to designate a read/write memory to distinguish
itfromaread-only memory, although ROMis alsorandom access. RAMis used
forstoring the bulk of the programs and data that are subject to change. ROM
is used for storing programs that are permanently resident in the computer and
for tables of constants that do not change in value once the production of the
computer is completed.

‘Among other things, the ROM portion of main memory is needed for
storing an initial program called a bootstrap loader. The bootstrap loader is a
program whose function is to start the computer software operating when
power is turned on. Since RAM is volatile, its contents are destroyed when
power is turned off. The contents of ROM remain unchanged after power is
turned off and on again. The startup of a computer consists of tuning the
power on and starting the execution of an initial program. Thus when power
is turned on, the hardware of the computer sets the program counter to the
