‘two-wire control

SECTION 113 Asynchronous Data Transfer 393

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Data bus
‘Source Destination
unit, — |__ Swobe unit
(2) Block diagram
Data Valid data >
Strobe
() Timing diagram

Figure 11-4 Destination-initited strobe for data transfer.

which is the destination, that this is a write operation. Similarly, the strobe of
Fig. 11-4 could be a memory-read control signal from the CPU to a memory
unit. The destination, the CPU, initiates the read operation to inform the
memory, which is the source, to place a selected word into the data bus.

The transfer of data between the CPU and an interface units similar to
the strobe transfer just described. Data transfer between an interface and an
VO device is commonly controlled by a set of handshaking lines.

Handshaking

The disadvantage of the strobe method is that the source unit that initiates the
transfer has no way of knowing whether the destination unit has actually
received the data item that was placed in the bus. Similarly, a destination unit
that initiates the transfer has no way of knowing whether the source unit has
actually placed thedataon thebus. The handshake method solves this problem
by introducing a second control signal that provides a reply to the unit that
initiates the transfer. The basic principle of the two-wire handshaking method
of data transfer is as follows. One control line is in the same direction as the
data flow in the bus from the source to the destination. It is used by the source
unit to inform the destination unit whether there are valid data in the bus. The
other control line is in the other direction from the destination to the source.
It is used by the destination unit to inform the source whether it can accept
data. The sequence of control during the transfer depends on the unit that
initiates the transfer.

Figure 11-5 shows the data transfer procedure when initiated by the
source. The two handshaking lines are data valid, which is generated by the
source unit, and data accepted, generated by the destination unit. The timing
diagram shows the exchange of signals between the two units. The sequence
of events listed in part (c) shows the four possible states that the system can
