13.3 Insertion 321

 

Figure 13.6 Cases 2 and 3 of the procedure RB-INSERT-FIXuP. As in case 1, property 4 is violated
in either case 2 or case 3 because z and its parent z.p are both red. Each of the subtrees a, B, y, and 5
has a black root (a, B, and y from property 4, and 5 because otherwise we would be in case 1), and
each has the same black-height. We transform case 2 into case 3 by a left rotation, which preserves
property 5: all downward simple paths from a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. Case 3
causes some color changes and a right rotation, which also preserve property 5. The while loop then
terminates, because property 4 is satisfied: there are no longer two red nodes in a row.

both z and Z.p are red, the rotation affects neither the black-height of nodes
nor property 5. Whether we enter case 3 directly or through case 2, z’s uncle y
is black, since otherwise we would have executed case 1. Additionally, the
node Z.p.p exists, since we have argued that this node existed at the time that
lines 2 and 3 were executed, and after moving z up one level in line 10 and then
down one level in line 11, the identity of z.p.p remains unchanged. In case 3,
we execute some color changes and a right rotation, which preserve property 5,
and then, since we no longer have two red nodes in a row, we are done. The
while loop does not iterate another time, since Z.p is now black.

 

 

We now show that cases 2 and 3 maintain the loop invariant. (As we have just
argued, Z.p will be black upon the next test in line 1, and the loop body will not
execute again.)

a. Case 2 makes z point to z.p, which is red. No further change to Z or its color
occurs in cases 2 and 3.

b. Case 3 makes Z.p black, so that if z.p is the root at the start of the next
iteration, it is black.

c. As in case 1, properties 1, 3, and 5 are maintained in cases 2 and 3.
Since node Z is not the root in cases 2 and 3, we know that there is no viola-
tion of property 2. Cases 2 and 3 do not introduce a violation of property 2,
since the only node that is made red becomes a child of a black node by the
rotation in case 3.
Cases 2 and 3 correct the lone violation of property 4, and they do not intro-
duce another violation.
