PROM

EEPROM

C0127 Mernory Unie 63.

that the customer fill out the truth table that he or she wishes the ROM to
satisfy. The truth table may be submitted in a special form provided by the
manufactures or in a specified format on a computer output medium. The
manufacturer makes the cocesponding mask for the paths to produce the 1's
and0’saccording to the customer’ truth table. This procedure is costly because
the vendor chargesthe castomera special fee for custom masking the particular
ROM. For thisreason, mask programming is economical only ifa large quantity
of the same ROM configuration is to be ordered.

For small quantities it ts mare econamical to use a second type of ROM
called a programmable read-only memuryor PROM, When ordered, PROM unite
contain all the fuses intact, giving all 1's in the bits of the stured words. The
fuses in the PROM are blown by application of cuzrent pulses trough the
output tecminals for each address. A blown fuse defines a binary 0 state, and
an intact fuse gives a binary 1 state. This allows users to program PROMS in
their own laboratories to achieve the desired relationship between input ad-
drewes and stored words. Special instruments called PROM progrommers are
available commercially to fac litate this procedure. in any case, all procedures
for programming ROMs are hardware procedures even though the ward
“programming” is used.

“The hardware procedure for programming ROMs or PROMS is irre-
versible, and once programmed, the fixed pattem is permanent and cannotbe
altered. Once a bit patiern has been established, the unit must be discarded
ifthe bit patiernis to bechanged. A third type of ROM available is called erasable
PROM or EPROM. The EPROM can be restructured to the initial value even
though its fuses have been blown previously, When the EPROM is placed
under a special ultraviolet light for a given period of time, the shortwave
radiation discharges the internal gates that serve as fuses. AMer erasure, the
EPROM returns to its initial state and can be reprogracuned to a new set of
words. Certain PROMs can be erased with electrical signals instead of ultravi-
olet light. These PROMS are called electrically erasable PROM or EEPROM.

 

 

 

 

PROBLEMS

 

 

 

2A, ‘TTLSSI come mostly in 4-pin KC packages Two pins are reserved for power
supply and the other pins are used for input and output @rminals. How
many cirevite are inchided in one such package if it contains the fallow
type of circuits? (a) inverters; (b) two-input excusive-OR gates; (c) threein-
put OR gates: (4) fouinput AND gates: ( fiveinput NOR gates; (f) eight-
input NAND gates: (g) docked JK fip-lops with asynchronaas: Gear.

2:2, MSI chips perform elementary digital functions suchas desde, muttiplex-
ers, eegivters, and comitera. The folowing are TTL-type integrated circuits
that provide such functions. Find their description in a data book and
cornpare them with the corresponding cnmporent presented in this chapter.
