846

Chapter 29 Linear Programming

are linear inequalities. We use the general term linear constraints to denote either
linear equalities or linear inequalities. In linear programming, we do not allow
strict inequalities. Formally, a linear-programming problem is the problem of
either minimizing or maximizing a linear function subject to a finite set of linear
constraints. If we are to minimize, then we call the linear program a minimization
linear program, and if we are to maximize, then we call the linear program a
maximization linear program.

The remainder of this chapter covers how to formulate and solve linear pro-
grams. Although several polynomial-time algorithms for linear programming have
been developed, we will not study them in this chapter. Instead, we shall study the
simplex algorithm, which is the oldest linear-programming algorithm. The simplex
algorithm does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, but it is fairly efficient
and widely used in practice.

An overview of linear programming

In order to describe properties of and algorithms for linear programs, we find it
convenient to express them in canonical forms. We shall use two forms, standard
and slack, in this chapter. We will define them precisely in Section 29.1. Infor-
mally, a linear program in standard form is the maximization of a linear function
subject to linear inequalities, whereas a linear program in slack form is the max-
imization of a linear function subject to linear equalities. We shall typically use
standard form for expressing linear programs, but we find it more convenient to
use slack form when we describe the details of the simplex algorithm. For now, we
restrict our attention to maximizing a linear function on 7 variables subject to a set
of m linear inequalities.
Let us first consider the following linear program with two variables:

  

maximize x + XxX (29.11)
subject to

4x, -— x% < 8 (29.12)

2x, + % < 10 (29.13)

5x, — 2x, > -2 (29.14)

X1,X2 > 0. (29.15)

We call any setting of the variables x, and x, that satisfies all the constraints
(29.12)-(29.15) a feasible solution to the linear program. If we graph the con-
straints in the (x, X2)-Cartesian coordinate system, as in Figure 29.2(a), we see
