396 © cHArTERELEVEN Input-Output Organization

timeout

‘synchronous

‘asynchronous

sequence of events in both cases would be identical if we consider the ready for
data signal as the complement of data accepted. In fact, the only difference
between the source-initiated and the destination-initiated transfer is in their
choice of initial state.

The handshaking scheme provides ahighdegreeof flexibility and reliabil-
ity because the successful completion of a data transfer relies on active partic-
ipation by both units. If one unit is faulty, the data transfer will not be
completed. Such an error can be detected by means of a timeout mechanism,
which produces an alarm if the data transfer is not completed within a prede-
termined time. The timeout is implemented by means of an internal clock that
starts counting time when the unit enables one of its handshaking control
signals If the return handshake signal does not respond within a given time
period, the unit assumes that an error has occurred. The timeout signal can be
used to interrupt the processor and hence execute a service routine that takes
appropriate error recovery action.

Asynchronous Serial Transfer

The transfer of data between two units may be done in parallel or serial. In
parallel data transmission, each bit of the message has its own path and the
total message is transmitted at the same time. This means that an n-bit message
must be transmitted through 7 separate conductor paths. In serial data trans-
mission, each bit in the message is sent in sequence oneata time. This method
requires the use of one pair of conductors or one conductor and a common
ground. Parallel transmission is faster but requires many wires. It is used for
short distances and where speed is important Serial transmission is slower but
is less expensive since it requires only one pair of conductors.

Serial transmission can be synchronous or asynchronous. In synchron-
ous transmission, the two units share a common clock frequency and bits are
transmitted continuously at the rate dictated by the clock pulses. In long-
distant serial transmission, each unit is driven by a separate clock of the same
frequency. Synchronization signals are transmitted periodically between the
two units to keep their clocks in step with each other. In asynchronous trans-
mission, binary information is sent only when it is available and the line
remains idle when there is no information to be transmitted. This is in contrast
to synchronous transmission, where bits must be transmitted continuously to
keep the clock frequency in both units synchronized with each other. Syn-
chronous serial transmission is discussed further in Sec. 11-8.

A serial asynchronous data transmission technique used in many interac-
tive terminals employs special bits that are inserted at both ends of the char-
acter code. With this technique, each character consists of three parts: a start
bit, the character bits, and stop bits. The convention is that the transmitter rests
