332 Chapter 10. Logical Reasoning Systems

 

tractable. Hector Levesque and Ron Brachman (1987) showed that certain logical constructs,
notably certain uses of disjunction and negation, were primarily responsible for the intractability %
of logical inference. Building on the KL-ONE system (Schmolze and Lipkis, 1983), a number
of systems have been developed whose designs incorporate the results of theoretical complexity
analysis, most notably KRYPTON (Brachman er al., 1983) and Classic (Borgidaer al., 1989). The }
result has been a marked increase in the speed of inference, and a much better understanding
of the interaction between complexity and expressiveness in reasoning systems. On the other
hand, as Doyle and Patil (1991) argue, restricting the expressiveness of a language either makes “4
it impossible to solve certain problems, or encourages the user to circumvent the language
restrictions using nonlogical means

The study of truth maintenance systems began with the TMS (Doyle, 1979) and RUP |
(McAllester, 1980) systems, both of which were essentially JTMSs. The ATMS approach was
described in a series of papers by Johan de Kleer (1986c; 1986a; 1986b). Building Problem §
Solvers (Forbus and de Kleer, 1993) explains in depth how TMSs can be used in AI applications.

 

EXERCISES

10.1 Recall that inheritance information in semantic networks can be captured logically by
suitable implication sentences. In this exercise, we will consider the efficiency of using such
sentences for inheritance.

a. Consider the information content in a used-car catalogue such as Kelly's "Blue Book": §
that, for example, 1973 Dodge Vans are worth $575. Suppose all this information (for
11,000 models) is encoded as logical rules, as suggested in the chapter. Write down three
such rules, including that for 1973 Dodge Vans. How would you use the rules to find the |
value ofa particular car (¢.g., JB, which is a 1973 Dodge Van) given a backward-chaining
theorem prover such as Prolog?

b. Compare the time efficiency of the backward-chaining method for solving this problem
with the inheritance method used in semantic nets

c. Explain how forward chaining allows a logic-based system to solve the same problem.
efficiently, assuming that the KB contains only the 11,000rules about price

d. Describe a situation in which neither forward nor backward chaining on the rules will allow
the price query for an individual car to be handled efficiently.

e. Can you suggest a solution enabling this type of query to be solved efficiently in all cases in
logic systems? (Hint: Remember that two cars of the same category have the same price.)

10.2 The following Prolog code defines a relation R.
R([],X,X).
R({A|X],¥, [A|Z]) = R(X, ¥,2Z)
a. Show the proof tree and solution obtained for the queries
R( [1,2] ,L, [1,2,3.4]) and R(L,M, [1,2,3,4])

 
