SECTION 8.8 Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) 289

accessed at any given time, the instruction format can specify a processor
register with a register field of five bits.

Figure 8-10 shows the 32-bit instruction formats used for register-to-
register instructions and memory access instructions. Seven of the bits in the
operation code specify an operation, and the eighth bit indicates whether to
update the status bits after an ALU operation. For register-to-register instruc-
tions, the 5-bit Rd field selects one of the 32 registers as a destination for the
result of the operation. The operation is performed with the data specified in
fields Rs and $2. Rs is one of the source registers. If bit 13 of the instruction
is 0, the low-order 5 bits of $2 specify another source register. If bit 13 of the
instruction is 1, $2 specifies a sign-extended 13-bit constant. Thus the instruc-
tion hasa three-address format, but the second source may be either a register
oran immediate operand. Memory access instructions use Rs to specify a 32-bit
address in a register and $2 to specify an offset. Register RO contains all O's,
so it can be used in any field to specify a zero quantity. The third instruction
format combines the last three fields to form a 19-bit relative address Y and is,
used primarily with the jump and call instructions. The COND field replaces
the Rd field for jump instructions and is used to specify one of 16 possible
branch conditions.

The 31 instructions of RISC I are listed in Table 8-12. They have been
grouped into three categories. Data manipulation instructions perform arith-
metic, logic, and shift operations. The symbols under the opcode and operands
columns are used when writing assembly language programs. The register
transfer and description columns explain the instruction in register transfer
notation and in words. Note that all instructions have three operands. The
second source $2 can be either a register or an immediate operand, symbolized
by the number sign #. Consider, for example, the ADD instruction and how
it can be used to perform a variety of operations.

  

  

ADD Re2,R21,R23 R23 R22 + R21
ADDR22,#150,R2@3 9 REI R22 +150

ADD RO,R21,R22 R22<-R21 (Move)

ADD RO, #1S0,R22 R22<1S50 (Load immediate)
ADD R22, #1,Re2 Re@—R22+1 (Increment)

By using register RO, which always contains ('s, it is possible to transfer the
contents of one register or a constant into another register. The increment
operation is accomplished by adding a constant 1 to a register.

The data transfer instructions consist of six load instructions, three store
instructions, and two instructions that transfer the program status word PSW.
‘The register that holds PSW contains the status of the CPU and includes the
program counter, the status bits from the ALU, pointers used in conjunction
with the register windows, and other information that determines the state of
the CPU.
