Part I Sorting and Order Statistics 149

 

In this part, we shall introduce two more algorithms that sort arbitrary real num-
bers. Heapsort, presented in Chapter 6, sorts m numbers in place in O(n Ign) time.
It uses an important data structure, called a heap, with which we can also imple-
ment a priority queue.

Quicksort, in Chapter 7, also sorts n numbers in place, but its worst-case running
time is ©(n?). Its expected running time is O(7 1g n), however, and it generally
outperforms heapsort in practice. Like insertion sort, quicksort has tight code, and
so the hidden constant factor in its running time is small. It is a popular algorithm
for sorting large input arrays.

Insertion sort, merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort are all comparison sorts: they
determine the sorted order of an input array by comparing elements. Chapter 8 be-
gins by introducing the decision-tree model in order to study the performance limi-
tations of comparison sorts. Using this model, we prove a lower bound of Q(n lg)
on the worst-case running time of any comparison sort on 7 inputs, thus showing
that heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.

Chapter 8 then goes on to show that we can beat this lower bound of Q(n lg n)
if we can gather information about the sorted order of the input by means other
than comparing elements. The counting sort algorithm, for example, assumes that
the input numbers are in the set {0,1,...,}. By using array indexing as a tool
for determining relative order, counting sort can sort n numbers in @(k + 7) time.
Thus, when kK = O(n), counting sort runs in time that is linear in the size of the
input array. A related algorithm, radix sort, can be used to extend the range of
counting sort. If there are n integers to sort, each integer has d digits, and each
digit can take on up to k possible values, then radix sort can sort the numbers
in @(d(n +k)) time. When d is a constant and k is O(n), radix sort runs in
linear time. A third algorithm, bucket sort, requires knowledge of the probabilistic
distribution of numbers in the input array. It can sort 7 real numbers uniformly
distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1) in average-case O(n) time.

The following table summarizes the running times of the sorting algorithms from
Chapters 2 and 6-8. As usual, n denotes the number of items to sort. For counting
sort, the items to sort are integers in the set {0,1,...,k}. For radix sort, each item
is a d-digit number, where each digit takes on k possible values. For bucket sort,
we assume that the keys are real numbers uniformly distributed in the half-open
interval [0, 1). The rightmost column gives the average-case or expected running
time, indicating which it gives when it differs from the worst-case running time.
We omit the average-case running time of heapsort because we do not analyze it in
this book.
