60 carrer Two Digital Components

byte

‘write and
read operations

bits that move in and out of storage as a unit. A memory word is a group of
Ys and 0's and may represent a number, an instruction code, one or more
alphanumeric characters, or any other binary-coded information. A group of
eight bits is called a byte. Most computer memories use words whose number
bits is a multiple of 8. Thus a 16-bit word contains two bytes, and a 32-bit

word is made up of four bytes. The capacity of memories in commercial
computers is usually stated as the total number of bytes that can be stored.

The internal structure of a memory unit is specified by the number of
words it containsand the number ofbitsin each word. Specialinputlines called
address lines select one particular word. Each word in memory is assigned an
identification number, called an address, starting from 0 and continuing with
1,2, 3, up to 2 — 1 where k is the number of address lines. The selection of
a specific word inside the memory is done by applying the k-bit binary address
to the address lines. A decoder inside the memory accepts this address and
opens the paths needed to select the bits of the specified word. Computer
memories may range from 1024 words, requiring an address of 10bits, to 2”
words, requiring32 address bits. Itis customary torefer to the number of words
(or bytes) ina memory with one of the letters K (kilo), M (mega), o G (giga).
Kis equal to2"°, Mis equal to 2", and Gis equal to2®. Thus 64K = 2'6,2M = 22,
and 4G = 2.

‘Two major types of memories are used in computer systems: random-
access memory (RAM) and read-only memory (ROM).

Random-Access Memory

In random-access memory (RAM) the memory cells can be accessed for infor-
mation transfer from any desired random location. That is, the process of
locating a word in memory is the same and requires an equal amount of time
no matter where the cells are located physically in memory: thus the name
“random access.”

‘Communication between a memory and its environment is achieved
through data input and output lines, address selection lines, and control lines
that specify the direction of transfer. A block diagram of a RAM unit is shown
in Fig, 2-12. The n data input lines provide the information to be stored in
memory, and the n data output lines supply the information coming out of
memory. The k address lines provide a binary number of k bits that specify a
particular word chosen among the 2 available inside the memory. The two
control inputs specify the direction of transfer desired.

The two operations that a random-access memory can perform are the
write and read operations. The write signal specifies a transfer-in operation
and the read signal specifies a transfer-out operation. On accepting one of
these control signals, the internal circuits inside the memory provide the
desired function The steps that must be taken for the purpose of transferring
a new word to be stored into memory are as follows:

1. Apply the binary address of the desired word into the address lines.
