 

522 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

systems such as TOPS-20, which ran on minicomputers from Digital Equipment
Corporation in the late 1970s. Today, HSM is usually found in supercomputing
centers and other large installations that have enormous volumes of data.

14.8.3 Performance Issues

As with any component of the operating system, the three most important
aspects of tertiary-storage performance are speed, reliability, and cost.

14.8.3.1 Speed

The speed of tertiary storage has two aspects: bandwidth and latency. We
measure the bandwidth in bytes per second. The sustained bandwidth is the
average data rate during a large transfer, that is, the number of bytes divided
by the transfer time. The effective bandwidth calculates the average over the
entire I/O time, including the time for seek or locate and any cartridge-
switching time in a jukebox. In essence, the sustained bandwidth is the data
rate when the data stream is actually flowing, and the effective bandwidth is
the overall data rate provided by the drive. The bandwidth of a drive is generally
understood to mean the sustained bandwidth.

For removable disks, the bandwidth ranges from less than 0.25 MB per
second for the slowest, to several megabytes per second for the fastest. Tapes
have an even wider range of bandwidths, from less than 0.25 MB per second
to over 30 MB per second. The fastest tape drives have significantly higher
bandwidth than do removable disk drives.

The second aspect of speed is the access latency. By this performance
measure, disks are much faster than tapes: Disk storage is essentially two-
dimensional—all the bits are out in the open. A disk access simply moves the
arm to the selected cylinder and waits for the rotational latency, which may take
less than 5 milliseconds. By contrast, tape storage is three-dimensional. At any
time, a small portion of the tape is accessible to the head, whereas most of the
bits are buried below hundreds or thousands of layers of tape wound on the
reel. A random access on tape requires winding the tape reels until the selected
block reaches the tape head, which can take tens or hundreds of seconds. So
we can generally say that random access within a tape cartridge is more than a
thousand times slower than random access on disk.

If a jukebox is involved, the access latency can be significantly higher. For
a removable disk to be changed, the drive must stop spinning, then the robotic
arm must switch the disk cartridges, and the drive must spin up the new
cartridge. This operation takes several seconds—about a hundred times larger
than the random-access time within one disk. So switching disks in a jukebox
incurs a relatively high performance penalty.

For tapes, the robotic-arm time is about the same as for disk. But for tapes
to be switched, the old tape generally must rewind before it can be ejected, and
that operation can take as long as 4 minutes. And, after a new tape is loaded
