1.2. Algorithms as a technology 13

50-107 lg 10” instructions

= 1163 seconds (less than 20 minutes) .
107 instructions/second seconds (less than 20 minutes)

By using an algorithm whose running time grows more slowly, even with a poor
compiler, computer B runs more than 17 times faster than computer A! The advan-
tage of merge sort is even more pronounced when we sort 100 million numbers:
where insertion sort takes more than 23 days, merge sort takes under four hours.
In general, as the problem size increases, so does the relative advantage of merge
sort.

Algorithms and other technologies

The example above shows that we should consider algorithms, like computer hard-
ware, as a technology. Total system performance depends on choosing efficient
algorithms as much as on choosing fast hardware. Just as rapid advances are being
made in other computer technologies, they are being made in algorithms as well.

You might wonder whether algorithms are truly that important on contemporary
computers in light of other advanced technologies, such as

* advanced computer architectures and fabrication technologies,
* easy-to-use, intuitive, graphical user interfaces (GUIs),

* object-oriented systems,

* integrated Web technologies, and

* fast networking, both wired and wireless.

The answer is yes. Although some applications do not explicitly require algorith-
mic content at the application level (such as some simple, Web-based applications),
many do. For example, consider a Web-based service that determines how to travel
from one location to another. Its implementation would rely on fast hardware, a
graphical user interface, wide-area networking, and also possibly on object ori-
entation. However, it would also require algorithms for certain operations, such
as finding routes (probably using a shortest-path algorithm), rendering maps, and
interpolating addresses.

Moreover, even an application that does not require algorithmic content at the
application level relies heavily upon algorithms. Does the application rely on fast
hardware? The hardware design used algorithms. Does the application rely on
graphical user interfaces? The design of any GUI relies on algorithms. Does the
application rely on networking? Routing in networks relies heavily on algorithms.
Was the application written in a language other than machine code? Then it was
processed by a compiler, interpreter, or assembler, all of which make extensive use
