commands

SECTION 11-7 Input-Output Processor 421

 

 

 

 

 

oma
eno wan a Peripheral devies
om TE ® © © ©
prota (OP Tobe

 

 

 

Figure 11-19 Block diagram of a computer with VO processor.

The data formats of peripheral devices differ from memory and CPU data
formats. The IOP must structure data words from many different sources. For
example, it may be necessary to take four bytes from an input device and pack
them into one 32-bit word before the transfer to memory. Data are gathered
in the IOP at the device rate and bit capacity while the CPU is executing its own
Program. After the input data are assembled into a memory word, they are
transferred from IOP directly into memory by “stealing” one memory cycle
from the CPU. Similarly, an output word transferred from memory to the IOP
is directed from the IOP to the output device at the device rate and bit capacity.

The communication between the IOP and the devices attached to it is
similar to the program control method of transfer. Communication with the
memory is similar to the direct memory access method. The way by which the
CPU and IOP communicate depends on the level of sophistication included in
the system. In very-large-scale computers, each processor is independent of
all others and any one processor can initiate an operation. In most computer
systems, the CPU is the master while the IOP is a slave processor. The CPU
is assigned the task of initiating all operations, but /Oinstructions are executed
in the IOP. CPUinstructions provide operations to start an [/O transferand also
to test /O status conditions needed for making decisions on various /O
activities. The IOP, in tum, typically asks for CPU attention by means of an
interrupt. It also responds to CPU requests by placing a status word in a
prescribed location in memory to be examined later by a CPU program. When
an U/O operation is desired, the CPU informs the IOP where to find the JO
Program and then leaves the transfer details to the IOP.

Instructions that are read from memory by an IOP are sometimes called
commands, to distinguish them from instructions that are read by the CPU.
Otherwise, an instruction and a command have similar functions. Commands
are prepared by experienced programmers and are stored in memory. The
command words constitutethe program for the IOP. The CPUinforms the IOP
where to find the commands in memory when it is time to execute the /O
program.
