indirect address

SECTION $5 InstructionCycle 143,

effective address from memory. The microoperation for the indirect address
condition can be symbolized by the register transfer statement

AR<MIAR]

Initially, AR holds the address part of the instruction. This address is used
during the memory read operation. The word at the address given by AR is
read from memory and placed on the common bus. The LD input of ARis then
enabled to receive the indirect address that resided in the 12 least significant
bits of the memory word.

The three instruction types are subdivided into four separate paths. The
selected operation is activated with the clock transition associated with timing
signal T; This can be symbolized as follows

DsIT; AR<MIAR]

DsI'Ts: Nothing

DjI'Ts: Execute a register-reference instruction
D;IT;: Execute an input-output instruction

 

When a memory-reference instruction with I = 0 is encountered, it is not
necessary to do anything since the effective addressis already in AR. However,
the sequence counter SC must be incremented when DT; = 1, so that the
execution of the memory-reference instruction can be continued with timing
variable T,. A register-reference or input-output instruction can be executed
with the clock associated with timing signal T;, After the instruction is executed,
SC is cleared to 0 and control returns to the fetch phase with To = 1.

Note that the sequence counter SCis either incremented or cleared to 0
with every positive clock transition. We will adopt the convention that if SC
is incremented, we will not write the statement SC «SC + 1, but it will be
implied that the control goes to the next timing signal in sequence. When SC
is to be cleared, we will include the statement SC-<-0.

The register transfers needed for the execution of the register-reference
instructions are presented in this section. The memory-reference instructions
are explained in the next section. The input-output instructions are included in
Sec. 5-7.

Register-Reference Instructions
Register-reference instructions are recognized by the control when D, = 1 and
I = 0. These instructions use bits 0 through 11 of the instruction code to specify
one of 12 instructions. These 12 bits are available in IR(0-11). They were also
transferred to AR during time T:.

The control functions and microoperations for the register-reference in-

 
