72 carrer THREE Data Representation.

binary code

The registers in a digital computer contain many bits. Specifying the
content of registers by their binary values will require a long string of binary
digits. It is more convenient to specify content of registers by their octal or
hexadecimal equivalent The number of digits is reduced by one-third in the
octal designationand by one-fourthin the hexadecimal designation For exam-
ple, the binary number 1111 1111 1111 has 12 digits. It can be expressed in
octals as 7777 (four digits) or in hexadecimal as FFF (three digits). Computer
manuals invariably choose either the octal or the hexadecimal designation for
specifying contents of registers.

Decimal Representation

The binary number system is the most natural system for a computer, but
people are accustomed to the decimal system. One way to solve this conflict
is to convert all input decimal numbers into binary numbers, let the computer
performalllarithmeticoperations in binary and then convert the binary results
back to decimal for the human user to understand. However, itis also possible
for the computer to perform arithmetic operations directly with decimal num-
bers provided they are placed in registers in a coded form Decimal numbers
enter the computer usually as binary-coded alphanumeric characters. These
codes, introduced later, may contain from six to eight bits for each decimal
digit When decimal numbers are used for internal arithmetic computations,
they are converted to a binary code with four bits per digit.

A binary code is a group of n bits that assume up to 2" distinct combina-
tions of 1's and 0's with each combination representing one element of the set
that is being coded. For example, a set of four elements can be coded by a 2-bit
code with each element assigned one of the following bit combinations; 00, 01,
10, or 11. A set of eight elements requires a 3-bit code, a set of 16 elements
requires a 4-bit code, and so on. Abinary code will have some unassigned bit
combinations if the number of elements in the set is not a multiple power of
2. The 10 decimal digits form such a set. A binary code that distinguishes
among 10 elements must contain at least four bits, but six combinations will
remain unassigned. Numerous different codes can be obtained by arranging
four bits in 10 distinct combinations. The bit assignment most commonly
for the decimal digits is the straight binary assignment listed in the first 10
entries of Table 3-3. This particular code is called binary-coded decimal and is
commonly referred to by its abbreviation BCD. Other decimal codes are some-
times used and a few of them are given in Sec. 35.

It is very important to understand the difference between the conversion.
of decimal numbers into binary and the binary coding of decimal numbers, For
example, when converted to a binary number, the decimal number 99 is repre-
sented by the string of bits 1100011, but when represented in BCD, it becomes
3001 1001. The only difference between a decimal number represented by the
familiar digit symbols 0, 1, 2,..., 9and the BCD symbols 0001, 0010, ..., 1001
isin the symbols used to represent the digits—the number itself is exactly the
