bus selection

SECTION 4.3 Bus and Memory Transfers. 99

The two selection lines S; and S are connected to the selection inputs of
all four multiplexers. The selection lines choose the four bits of one register and
transfer them into the four-line common bus. When S159 = 00, the 0 data
inputs of all four multiplexers are selected and applied to the outputs that form
the bus. This causes the bus lines to receive the content ofregister A since the
outputs of this register are connected to the 0 data inputs of the multiplexers.
Similarly, register B is selected if SiS, = 01, and so on. Table 42 shows the
register that is selected by the bus for each of the four possible binary value
of the selection lines.

 

TABLE 4-2 Function Table for Bus of Fig. 43
Si So Register selected
A

0
1 B
0 c
1 D

In general, a bus system will multiplex k registers of n bits each to produce
an n-line common bus. The number of multiplexers needed to construct the
bus is equal to n, the number of bits in each register. The size of each multi-
plexer must be k X 1 since it multiplexes k data lines. For example, a common
bus for eight registers of 16 bits each requires 16 multiplexers, one for each line
in the bus Each multiplexer must have eight data input lines and three
selection lines to multiplex one significant bit in the eight registers.

The transfer of information from a bus into one of many destination
registers can be accomplished by connecting the bus lines to the inputs of all
destination registers and activating the load control of the particular destina-
tion register selected. The symbolic statement for a bus transfer may mention
the bus or its presence may be implied in the statement. When the bus is
includes in the statement, the register transfer is symbolized as follows:

BUS<C, Rl = BUS

The content of register C is placed on the bus, and the content of the bus is
loaded into register R11 by activating its load control input. If the bus is known
to exist in the system, it may be convenient just to show the direct transfer.

RI-C

From this statement the designer knows which control signals must be acti-
vated to produce the transfer through the bus.
