132.

138,

4.

138,

136.

137.

138,

139,

13-10.

13-41.

1342,

13-13,

13-14.

Problems 513

Whatisthe purpose of the system bus controller shown inFig, 13-2? Explain
how the system can be designed to distinguish between references to local
memory and references to common shared memory.
How many switch points are there in a crossbar switch network that con-
ects p processors to m memory modules?
‘The 8 x 8 omega switching network of Fig. 13-8 has three stages with four
switches in each stage, for a total of 12 switches. How many stages and
switches per stage are needed in an n x 7 omega switching network?
‘Suppose that the wire breaks between the switch in the first row, second
column and the switch in the second row, third column in the omega
switching network of Fig. 13.8 What paths will be disconnected?
Construct a diagram for a4 x 4 omega switching network. Show the switch
setting required to connect input 3 to output 1
‘Three types of switches are used to design a multistage interconnection
network: an interchange switch with two inputs and two outputs asin Fig,
13-6, an arbitration switch with twoinputs and one output, and a distribu-
tion ‘switch with one input and two outputs.
a. Show how the arbitration and distribution switches operate.
b. Using arbitration and interchange switches, construct an 8 x 4 network
with a unique path between any source and any destination.
. Using distribution and interchange switches, construct a 4 x 8 network
with a unique path between any source and any destination.
Draw a diagram showing the structure of a four-dimensional hypercube
network. List all the paths available from node 7 to node 9 that use the
‘minimum number of intermediate nodes.
Draw a logic diagram using gates and flip-flops showing the circuit of one
bus arbiter stage in the daisy-chain arbitration scheme of Fig. 13-10.
The bus controlled by the parallel arbitration logic shown in Fig, 13-11 is
initially idle. Devices 2 and 3then request the bus at the same time. Specify
the input and output binary values in the encoder and decoder and deter-
‘mine which bus arbiter is acknowledged
‘Show how the arbitration logic of Fig, 13-10 can be modified to provide a
rotating daisy-chain arbitration procedure. Explain how the priority is deter-
mined once the bus line is disabled
Consider a bus topology in which two processors communicate through a
buffer in shared memory. When one processor wishes to communicate with
the other processor it puts the information in the memory buffer and sets
a flag, Periodically, the other processor checks the flags todetermine if it has.
information to receive. What can be done to ensure proper synchronization
and to minimize the time between sending and receiving the information?
Describe the following terminology associated with multiprocessors.
(@) mutual exclusion; (b) critical section; (c) hardware lock; (4). semaphore;
(@) test-andset instruction.
What is cache coherence, and why is it important in shared-memory multi-
processor systems? How can the problem be resolved with a snoopy cache
controller?
