84 curren THREE Data Representation

Gray code

ized because of the three leading 0's. The number can be normalized by shifting
it three positions to the left and discarding the leading 0's to obtain 11010000.
‘The threeshifts multiply the number by 2° = 8. Tokeep the same value forthe
floating-point number, the exponent must be subtracted by 3. Normalized
numbers provide the maximum possible precision for the floating-point num-
ber. A zero cannot be normalized because it does not have a nonzero digit. It
is usually represented in floating-point by all (’s in the mantissa and exponent.

Arithmetic operations with floating-point numbers are more complicated
than arithmeticoperations with fixed-point numbers and their execution takes
longer and requires more complex hardware. However, floating-point repre-
sentation is a must for scientific computations because of the scaling problems
involved with fixed-point computations, Many computers and all electronic
calculators have the built-in capability of performing floating, point arithmetic
operations. Computers that do not have hardware for floating-point computa-
tions have a set of subroutines to help the user program scientific problems
with floating-point numbers. Arithmetic operations with floating-point num-
bers are discussed in Sec. 10-5.

3-5__Other Binary Codes

In previous sections we introduced the most common types of binary-coded
data found in digital computers. Other binary codes for decimal numbers and
alphanumeric characters are sometimes used. Digital computers also employ
other binary codes for special applications. A few additional binary codes
encountered in digital computers are presented in this section.

Gray Code
Digital systems can process data in discrete form only. Many physical systems
supply continuous output data. The data must be converted into digital form
before they can be used by a digital computer. Continuous, or analog, infor-
mation is converted into digital form by means of an analog-to-digital con-
verter. The reflected binary or Gray code, shown in Table 3-5, is sometimes used
for the converted digital data. The advantage of the Gray code over straight
binary numbers is that the Gray code changes by only one bit as it sequences
from one number to the next. In other words, the change from any number
to the next in sequence is recognized by a change of only one bit from 0 to 1
or from 1 to 0. A typical application of the Gray code occurs when the analog
data are represented by the continuous change of a shaft position. The shaft
is partitioned into segments with eachsegment assigned a number. If adjacent
segments are made to correspond to adjacent Gray code numbers, ambiguity
is reduced when the shaft position is in the line that separates any two
segments.

Gray code counters are sometimes used to provide the timing sequences
