magnetic tape

magnetic disk

asc

SECTION 11-1 Peripheral Devices 383

that is used to imprint the character images. The pattern is then transferred
onto paper in the same manner as a copying machine.

Magnetic tapes are used mostly for storing files of data: for example, a
company's payroll record. Access is sequential and consists of records that can
be accessed one after another as the tape moves along a stationary read-write
mechanism. It is one of the cheapest and slowest methods for storage and has
the advantage that tapes can be removed when notin use. Magnetic disks have
high-speed rotational surfaces coated with magnetic material. Access is
achieved by moving a read-write mechanism to a track in the magnetized
surface. Disks are used mostly for bulk storage of programs and data. Tapes
and disks are discussed further in Sec. 12-1 in conjunction with their role as
auxiliary memory.

Other input and output devices encountered in computer systems are
digitalincremental plotters, optical and magnetic character readers, analog-to-
digital converters, and various data acquisition equipment. Notallinput comes
from people, and not all output is intended for people. Computers are used
to control various processes in real time, such as machine tooling, assembly
line procedures, and chemical and industrial processes. For such applications,
a method must be provided for sensing status conditions in the process and
sending control signals to the process being controlled.

The input-output organization of a computer is a function of the size of
the computer and the devices connected to it. The difference between a small
and a large system is mostly dependent on the amount of hardware the
computer has available for communicating with peripheral units and the num-
ber of peripherals connected to the system. Since each peripheral behaves
differently from any other, it would be prohibitive to dwell on the detailed
interconnections needed between the computer and each peripheral. Certain
techniques common to most peripherals are presented in this chapter.

ASCII Alphanumeric Characters
Input and output devices that communicate with people and the computer are
usually involved in the transfer of alphanumeric information to and from the
device and the computer. The standard binary code for the alphanumeric
characters is ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange). It
uses seven bits to code 128 characters as shown in Table 11-1. The seven bits
of the code are designated by b; through b;, with b being the most significant
bit. The letter A, for example, is represented in ASCII as 1000001 (column 100,
row 0001). The ASCII code contains 94 characters that can be printed and 34
nonprinting characters used for various control functions. The printing char-
acters consist of the 26 uppercase letters A through Z, the 26 lowercase letters,
the 10 numerals 0 through9, and 32 special printable characters such as %, *,
and $.

The34 control characters are designated in the ASCII table with abbrevi-
