506

CHAPTER THIRTEEN Multiprocessors

whose processor is currently controlling the bus. Once an arbiter releases the
bus, it has the lowest priority.

13-4 Interprocessor Communication
and Synchronization

The various processors in a multiprocessor system must be provided with a
facility for communicating with each other. A communication path can be
established through common input-output channels. In a shared memory
multiprocessor system, the most comunon procedure is to set aside a portion
of memory that is accessible to all processors. The primary use of the common
memory is toactas a message centersimilar toa mailbox, where each processor
can leave messages for other processors and pick up messages intended for it.

‘The sending processor structures a request, a message, or a procedure,
and places itin the memory mailbox. Status bits residing in common memory
are generally used to indicate the condition of the mailbox, whether it has
meaningful information, and forwhich processor itis intended. The receiving
processor can check the mailbox periodically to determine if there are valid
messages for it. The response time of this procedure can be time consuming
since a processor will recognize request only when polling messages. A more
efficient procedureis for the sending processor to alert the receiving processor
directly by means of an interrupt signal. This can be accomplished through a
software-initiated interprocessor interrupt by means of an instruction in the
program of one processor which when executed produces an external interrupt
condition in a second processor. This alerts the interrupted processor of the
fact that a new message was inserted by the interrupting processor.

In addition to shared memory, a multiprocessor system may have other
shared resources. For example, a magnetic disk storage unit connected to an
IOP may be available to all CPUs. This provides a facility for sharing of system
programs stored in the disk. A communication path between two CPUs can
be established through a link between two IOPs associated with two different
CPUs This type of link allows each CPU to treat the other as an /O device so
that messages can be transferred through the /O path.

To prevent conflicting use of shared resources by several processors there
must be a provision for assigning resources to processors. This task is given
to the operating system. There are three organizations that have been used in
the design of operating system for multiprocessors: master-slave configura-
tion, separate operating system, and distributed operating system.

Ina master-slave mode, one processor, designated the master, always
executes the operating system functions. The remaining processors, denoted
asslaves, do notperform operatingsystem functions. Ifa slave processor needs
