2.2. Analyzing algorithms 23

an (n + 1)-element array C. State the problem formally and write pseudocode for
adding the two integers.

 

2.2. Analyzing algorithms

Analyzing an algorithm has come to mean predicting the resources that the algo-
rithm requires. Occasionally, resources such as memory, communication band-
width, or computer hardware are of primary concern, but most often it is compu-
tational time that we want to measure. Generally, by analyzing several candidate
algorithms for a problem, we can identify a most efficient one. Such analysis may
indicate more than one viable candidate, but we can often discard several inferior
algorithms in the process.

Before we can analyze an algorithm, we must have a model of the implemen-
tation technology that we will use, including a model for the resources of that
technology and their costs. For most of this book, we shall assume a generic one-
processor, random-access machine (RAM) model of computation as our imple-
mentation technology and understand that our algorithms will be implemented as
computer programs. In the RAM model, instructions are executed one after an-
other, with no concurrent operations.

Strictly speaking, we should precisely define the instructions of the RAM model
and their costs. To do so, however, would be tedious and would yield little insight
into algorithm design and analysis. Yet we must be careful not to abuse the RAM
model. For example, what if a RAM had an instruction that sorts? Then we could
sort in just one instruction. Such a RAM would be unrealistic, since real computers
do not have such instructions. Our guide, therefore, is how real computers are de-
signed. The RAM model contains instructions commonly found in real computers:
arithmetic (such as add, subtract, multiply, divide, remainder, floor, ceiling), data
movement (load, store, copy), and control (conditional and unconditional branch,
subroutine call and return). Each such instruction takes a constant amount of time.

The data types in the RAM model are integer and floating point (for storing real
numbers). Although we typically do not concern ourselves with precision in this
book, in some applications precision is crucial. We also assume a limit on the size
of each word of data. For example, when working with inputs of size n, we typ-
ically assume that integers are represented by c lg bits for some constant c > 1.
We require c > | so that each word can hold the value of 7, enabling us to index the
individual input elements, and we restrict c to be a constant so that the word size
does not grow arbitrarily. (If the word size could grow arbitrarily, we could store
huge amounts of data in one word and operate on it all in constant time—clearly
an unrealistic scenario.)
