SECTION 106 Decimal Arithmetic Unit 365

output data. When the application calls for alarge amount of input-output and
a relatively smaller number of arithmetic calculations, it becomes convenient
to do the internal arithmetic directly with the decimal numbers. Computers
capable of performing decimal arithmeticmust store the decimal data in binary-
coded form. The decimal numbers are then applied toa decimalarithmeticunit
capable of executing decimal arithmetic microoperations.

Electronic calculators invariably use an internal decimal arithmetic unit
since inputs and outputs are frequent. There does not seem to be a reason for
converting the keyboard input numbers to binary and again converting the
displayed results to decimal, since this process requires special circuits and also
takes a longer time to execute. Many computers have hardware for arithmetic
calculations with both binary and decimal data Users can specify by pro-
grammed instructions whether they want the computerto perform calculations
with binary or decimal data.

A decimal arithmetic unit is a digital function that performs decimal
microoperations. It can add or subtract decimal numbers, usually by forming
the ¥s or 10’s complement of the subtrahend, The unit accepts coded decimal
numbers and generates results in the same adopted binary code. A single-stage
decimal arithmeticunit consists of nine binary input variables and five binary
output variables, since a minimum of four bits is required to represent each
coded decimal digit. Each stage must have four inputs for the augend digit,
fourinputs for the addend digit, and an input-carry. The outputs include four
terminals for the sum digit and one for the output-carry. Of course, there is
a wide variety of possible circuit configurations dependent on the code used
to represent the decimal digits.

BCD Adder

Consider the arithmetic addition of two decimal digits in BCD, together with
a possible carry froma previous stage. Since each input digit does not exceed
9, the output sum cannotbe greaterthan9 +9 + 1 = 19, the 1inthesum being
an input-carry. Suppose that we apply two BCD digits to a4-bit binary adder.
The adder will form the sum in binary and produce a result that may range from
0 to 19. These binary numbers are listed in Table 10-4 and are labeled by
symbols K, Z,, 24, Z2, and Z;. Kis the carry and the subscripts under the letter
Z represent the weights 8, 4, 2, and 1 that can be assigned to the four bits in
the BCD code. The first column in the table lists the binary sums as they appear
in the outputs of a4-bit binary adder. The output sum of two decimal numbers
must be represented in BCD and should appear in the form listed in the second
column of the table The problem is to find a simple rule by which the binary
number in the first column can be converted to the correct BCD digit represen
tation of the number in the second column.

Inexamining the contents of the table, its apparent that when the binary
sum is equal to or less than 1001, the corresponding BCD number is identical
