ECL

Mos

cmos

decoder

SECTION 22 Decoders 43

power supply voltage for TTL circuits is 5 volts, and the two logic levels are
approximately 0 and 35 volts.

The emitter-coupled logic (ECL) family provides the highest-speed digital
Circuits in integrated form. ECL is used in systems such as supercomputersand
signal processors where high speed is essential. The transistors in ECL gates
operate in a nonsaturated state, a condition that allows the achievement of
propagation delays of 1 to 2 nanoseconds.

The metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) is a unipolar transistor that
depends on the flow of only one type of carrier, which may be electrons
(m-channel) or holes (p-channel). This is in contrast to the bipolar transistor
used in TL and ECL gates, where both carriers exist during normal operation.
‘A p-channel MOS is referred to as PMOS and an n-channel as NMOS, NMOS
is the one that is commonly used in circuits with only one type of MOS
transistor. The complementary MOS (CMOS) technology uses PMOS and
NMOS transistors connected in a complementary fashion in all circuits. The
most importantadvantages of CMOS over bipolar are the high packing density
of circuits, a simpler processing technique during fabrication, and a more
economical operation because of low power consumption.

Because of their many advantages, integrated circuits are used exclu-
sively toprovide various digital components needed in the design of computer
systems. Tounderstand the organization and design of digital computers it is
very important to be familiar with the various components encountered in
integrated circuits, For this reason, the most basic components are introduced
in this chapter with an explanation of their logical properties. These compo-
nents provide a catalog of elementary digital functional units commonly used
as basic building blocks in the design of digital computers.

2-2 Decoders

Discrete quantities of information are represented in digital computers with
binary codes. A binary code of nbits is capable of representing up to 2" distinct
elements of the coded information. A decoder is a combinational circuit that
converts binary information from the n coded inputs to a maximum of 2"
unique outputs. If the n-bit coded information has unused bit combinations,
the decoder may have less than 2" outputs.

The decoders presented in this section are called n-to-m-line decoders,
where m = 2". Their purpose is to generate the 2" (or fewer) binary combina-
tions of the n input variables. A decoder has n inputs and m outputs and is also
referred to as an n x m decoder.

The logic diagram of a 3-to-8-line decoder is shown in Fig. 2-1. The three
data inputs, Ao, Ay, and 42, are decoded into eight outputs, each output
