426

Chapter 16 Greedy Algorithms

take it or leave it behind; he cannot take a fractional amount of an item or take an
item more than once.)

In the fractional knapsack problem, the setup is the same, but the thief can take
fractions of items, rather than having to make a binary (0-1) choice for each item.
You can think of an item in the 0-1 knapsack problem as being like a gold ingot
and an item in the fractional knapsack problem as more like gold dust.

Both knapsack problems exhibit the optimal-substructure property. For the 0-1
problem, consider the most valuable load that weighs at most W pounds. If we
remove item j from this load, the remaining load must be the most valuable load
weighing at most W — w, that the thief can take from the 7 — 1 original items
excluding j. For the comparable fractional problem, consider that if we remove
a weight w of one item j from the optimal load, the remaining load must be the
most valuable load weighing at most W — w that the thief can take from the n — 1
original items plus w; — w pounds of item j.

Although the problems are similar, we can solve the fractional knapsack problem
by a greedy strategy, but we cannot solve the 0-1 problem by such a strategy. To
solve the fractional problem, we first compute the value per pound v;/w; for each
item. Obeying a greedy strategy, the thief begins by taking as much as possible of
the item with the greatest value per pound. If the supply of that item is exhausted
and he can still carry more, he takes as much as possible of the item with the next
greatest value per pound, and so forth, until he reaches his weight limit W. Thus,
by sorting the items by value per pound, the greedy algorithm runs in O(n lgn)
time. We leave the proof that the fractional knapsack problem has the greedy-
choice property as Exercise 16.2-1.

To see that this greedy strategy does not work for the 0-1 knapsack problem,
consider the problem instance illustrated in Figure 16.2(a). This example has 3
items and a knapsack that can hold 50 pounds. Item 1 weighs 10 pounds and
is worth 60 dollars. Item 2 weighs 20 pounds and is worth 100 dollars. Item 3
weighs 30 pounds and is worth 120 dollars. Thus, the value per pound of item | is
6 dollars per pound, which is greater than the value per pound of either item 2 (5
dollars per pound) or item 3 (4 dollars per pound). The greedy strategy, therefore,
would take item 1 first. As you can see from the case analysis in Figure 16.2(b),
however, the optimal solution takes items 2 and 3, leaving item 1 behind. The two
possible solutions that take item 1 are both suboptimal.

For the comparable fractional problem, however, the greedy strategy, which
takes item | first, does yield an optimal solution, as shown in Figure 16.2(c). Tak-
ing item 1 doesn’t work in the 0-1 problem because the thief is unable to fill his
knapsack to capacity, and the empty space lowers the effective value per pound of
his load. In the 0-1 problem, when we consider whether to include an item in the
knapsack, we must compare the solution to the subproblem that includes the item
with the solution to the subproblem that excludes the item before we can make the
