32 cHarTER one Digital Logic Circuits

binary counter

 

Figure 1-26 Sure diagrams of sequential circuit.

is 1, the output is 0. After a clock transition, the circuit goes to the next state
O1. The same clock transition may change the input value. If the input changes
to 0, the output becomes 1, but if the input remains at 1, the output stays at
0. Thisinformation is obtained from the state diagram along the two directed
lines emanating from the circle representing state 01. A directed line connect-
ing a circle with itself indicates that no change of state occurs.

There is no difference between a state table and a state diagram except
in the manner of representation. The state table is easier to derive froma given
logic diagram and the state diagram follows directly from the state table. The
state diagram gives a pictorial view of state transitions and is the form suitable
for human interpretation of the circuit operation. For example, the state dia-
gram of Fig. 1-26 clearly shows that starting from state 00, the output is 0 as
ong as the input staysat 1. The first input after a string of 1's gives an output
of 1 and transfers the circuit back to the initial state 00.

Design Example

The procedure for designing sequential circuits will be demonstrated by a
specific example. The design procedure consists of first translating the circuit
specifications into a state diagram. The state diagram is then converted into a
state table. From the state table we obtain the information for obtaining the
logic circuit diagram.

We wish to design a clocked sequential circuit that goes through a se-
quence of repeated binary states 00, 01, 10, and 11 when an external input x
is equalto 1. The state of the circuit remains unchanged when x = 0. This type
of circuit is called a 2-bit binary counter because the state sequence is identical
to the count sequence of two binary digits Input x is the control variable that
specifies when the count should proceed.

The binary counter needs two flip-flops to represent the two bits. The
state diagram for the sequential circuit is shown in Fig. 1-27. The diagram is
drawn to show that the states of the circuit follow the binary count as long as

 

  
