tag field

SECTION 125 Cache Memory 465,

address is found, the corresponding 12-bit data is read and sent to the CPU.
If no match occurs, the main memory is accessed for the word. The ad-
dress-data pairis then transferred tothe associative cache memory. Ifthe cache
is full, an address-data pair must be displaced to make room for a pair that is
needed and not presently in the cache. The decision as to what pair is replaced
is determined fromthe replacement algorithm that the designer chooses for the
cache. A simple procedure is to replace cells of the cache in round-robin order
whenever a new word is requested from main memory. This constitutes a
first-in first-out (FIFO) replacement policy.

Direct Mapping

‘Associative memories are expensive compared to random-access memories
because of the added logic associated with each cell. The possibility of using
a random-access memory for the cache is investigated in Fig. 12-12. The CPU
address of 15 bits is divided into two fields. The nine least significant bits
constitute the index field and the remaining sixbits form the tag field. The figure
shows that main memory needs an address that includes both the tag and the
index bits. The number of bits in the index field is equal to the number of
address bits required to access the cache memory.

In the general case, there are 2* words in cache memory and 2" words in
main memory. The n-bit memory address is divided into two fields: k bits for
the index field and » ~ k bits for the tag field. The direct mapping cache
organization uses the n-bit address to access the main memory and the k-bit
index to access the cache. The internal organization of the words in the cache
memory is as shown in Fig. 12-13(b). Each word in cache consists of the data
word and its associated tag. When a new word is first brought into the cache,
the tag bits are stored alongside the data bits. When the CPU generates a
memory request, the index field is used for the address to access the cache. The

Figure 12-12 Addressing relationships between main and cache memories,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Gbits 9 bits
Tag [Index
00, 000 32K x 12 000 51212
Octal Cache memory
Octal Main memory address pddeses 9 tits
address pee ahr |__Data=i2 bits.
Data = 12 bits
nm

 

 

 
