320

Chapter 10. — Logical Reasoning Systems

 

MULTIPLE
INHERITANCE

contains positive Rel atoms (i.e., Rel(Legs, Birds,2) A Rel(Flies, Birds, T)),then we are stuck.
Therefore, the translation of a semantic network like Figure 10.7 should include sentences that
say that the Re/ and Valrelations that are shown are the only ones that are true:

Vr.a,b Rel(r,a,b) < [r,a,b] € {[Alive,Animal, 7], [Flies Animal, F], +9}
Vr.a,b Vallr,a,b) & tr,a,b] € {(Friend, Opus, Bill],{ Friend, Bill, Opus], ..}

Multiple inheritance

Some semantic network systems allow multiple inheritance—that is, an object can belong to
more than one category and can therefore inherit properties along several different paths. In 4
some cases, this will work fine. For example, some people might belong to both the categories
Billionaire and PoloPiayer, in which case we can infer that they are rich and can ride a horse.

It is possible, however, for two inheritance paths to produce conflicting answers. An
example of this difficulty is shown in Figure 10.9. Opus is a penguin, and therefore speaks only
in squawks. Opus is a cartoon character, and therefore speaks English. In the simple logical |
translation given earlier, we would be able to infer both conclusions, which, with appropriate
background knowledge, would lead to a contradiction. Without additional information indicating
some preference for one path, there is no way to resolve the conflict.

 

   

     
 

Vocalization |
eon

Vocalization

 

 

 

 

Figure 109 An example of conflicting inferences from multiple inheritance paths.

 

 

Inheritance and change

A knowledge base is not of much use to an agent unless it can be expanded. In systems based
on first-order logic, we use TELL to add a new sentence to the knowledge base, and we enjoy the

° The classical example of multiple inheritance conflict is called the "Nixon diamond." It arises from the observation
that Richard Nixon was both a Quaker (and hence a pacifist) and a Republican (and hence not a pacifist). Because of
its potential for controversy, we will avoid this particular example. The other canonical example involves a bird called
Tweety, about whom the less said the better.

 
