410

Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming

Give an algorithm to find a seam with the lowest disruption measure. How
efficient is your algorithm?

15-9 Breaking a string

A certain string-processing language allows a programmer to break a string into
two pieces. Because this operation copies the string, it costs 7 time units to break
a string of n characters into two pieces. Suppose a programmer wants to break
a string into many pieces. The order in which the breaks occur can affect the
total amount of time used. For example, suppose that the programmer wants to
break a 20-character string after characters 2, 8, and 10 (numbering the characters
in ascending order from the left-hand end, starting from 1). If she programs the
breaks to occur in left-to-right order, then the first break costs 20 time units, the
second break costs 18 time units (breaking the string from characters 3 to 20 at
character 8), and the third break costs 12 time units, totaling 50 time units. If she
programs the breaks to occur in right-to-left order, however, then the first break
costs 20 time units, the second break costs 10 time units, and the third break costs
8 time units, totaling 38 time units. In yet another order, she could break first at 8
(costing 20), then break the left piece at 2 (costing 8), and finally the right piece
at 10 (costing 12), for a total cost of 40.

Design an algorithm that, given the numbers of characters after which to break,
determines a least-cost way to sequence those breaks. More formally, given a
string S with n characters and an array L[1 ..m] containing the break points, com-
pute the lowest cost for a sequence of breaks, along with a sequence of breaks that
achieves this cost.

15-10 Planning an investment strategy

Your knowledge of algorithms helps you obtain an exciting job with the Acme
Computer Company, along with a $10,000 signing bonus. You decide to invest
this money with the goal of maximizing your return at the end of 10 years. You
decide to use the Amalgamated Investment Company to manage your investments.
Amalgamated Investments requires you to observe the following rules. It offers n
different investments, numbered | through n. In each year /, investment i provides
areturn rate of r;;. In other words, if you invest d dollars in investment i in year /,
then at the end of year j, you have dr;; dollars. The return rates are guaranteed,
that is, you are given all the return rates for the next 10 years for each investment.
You make investment decisions only once per year. At the end of each year, you
can leave the money made in the previous year in the same investments, or you
can shift money to other investments, by either shifting money between existing
investments or moving money to a new investement. If you do not move your
money between two consecutive years, you pay a fee of f; dollars, whereas if you
switch your money, you pay a fee of f, dollars, where fy > fi.
