440 > cuarrer ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

ns.

ns.

ny.

118.

19,

11-10.

wn.

12,

1-13.

What is the difference between isolated /O and memory-mapped 0? What

are the advantages and disadvantages of each?

Indicate whether the following constitute a control, status, or data transfer

‘commands

a. Skip next instruction if flag is set.

b. Seek a given record on a magnetic disk

¢. Check if VO device is ready.

4. Move printer paper to beginning of next page.

ce. Read interface status register.

‘A commercial interface unit uses different names for the handshake lines

associated with the transfer of data from the UO device into the interface

unit. The interface input handshake line is labeled STB (strobe), and the

interface output handshake line is labeled IBF (input buffer full). A low-level

signal on STB loads data from the /O bus into the interface data register. A

high-level signal on IBF indicates that the data item has been accepted by the

interface. IBF goes low after an /O read signal from the CPU when it reads

the contents of the data register.

a. Draw a block diagram showing the CPU, the interface, and the /O device
together with the pertinent interconnections among the three units.

b. Draw a timing diagram for the handshaking transfer.

¢. Obtaina sequence-of-e vents flow chartfor the transfer from the deviceto
the interface and from the interface to the CPU.

ACPU witha 20-MHz docks connected toa memory unit whose accesstime

is 40 ns. Formulate a read and write timing diagrams using a READ strobe

and a WRITE strobe. Indude the address in the timing diagram.

‘The asynchronous communication interface shown in Fig. 11-8 is connected

betweena CPU anda printer. Draw a flowchart that describes the sequence

‘of operations in the transmitter portion of the interface when the CPU sends

characters to be printed.

Give at Jeast six status conditions for the setting of individual bits in the

status register of an asynchronous communication interface.

How many bits are there in the transmitter shift register of Fig. 11-8 when

the interface is attached to a terminal that needs one stop bit? List the bits

inthe shift register when the letter W is transmitted using ASCII with even

Parity.

How many characters per second can be transmitted over a 1200-baud line

in each of the following modes? (Assume a character code of eight bits)

a. Synchronous serial transmission.

'b. Asynchronous serial transmission with two stop bits.

¢ Asynchronous serial transmission with one stop bit.

Information is inserted into a FIFO buffer at a rate of m bytes per second.

‘The information is deleted at a rate of n byte per second. The maximum.

capacity of the buffer is k bytes

a. How long does it take for an empty buffer to fill up when m > n?

'b. How long does it take for a full buffer to empty when m <n?

¢. Is the FIFO buffer needed if m = n?
