54 — cHArTer Two Digital Components

for parallel transfer. The most general shift register has all the capabilities listed
below. Others may have some of these capabilities, with at least one shift
operation.

1. An input for clock pulses to synchronize all operations.

2. A shift-right operation anda serial mput lin associated with the shit
right.

3. Ashift-leftoperationanda serial input line associated with the shift-left.

4. A parallel load operation and n input lines associated with the parallel
transfer.

5. n parallel output lines.

6. A control state that leaves the information in the register unchanged
even though clock pulses are applied continuously.

A Abit bidirectional shift register with parallel load is shown in Fig. 2-9.
Each stage consists of a D flip-flop and a4 x 1 multiplexer. The two selection
inputs 5; and S, select one of the multiplexer data inputs for the D flip-flop.
The selection lines control the mode of operation of the register according to
the function table shown in Table 2-4. When the mode control $15, = 00, data
input 0 of each multiplexer is selected. This condition forms a path from the
output of each flip-flop into the input of the same flip-flop. The next clock
transition transfers into each flip-flop the binary value it held previously, and
no change of state occurs. When $,S_ = 01, the terminal marked 1 in each
multiplexer hasa path to the D input of the corresponding flip-flop. This causes
a shift-right operation, with the serial input data transferred into flip-flop Ay
and the content of each flip-flop A, -; transferred into flip-flop A, fori = 1, 2,
3. When 5,5, = 10ashift-leftoperation results, with the other serial input data
going into flip-flop A, and thecontent of flip-flop A, ,: transferred into flip-flop
A; for i = 0, 1, 2. When S\S5 = 11, the binary information from each input
th through 4; is transferred into the corresponding flip-flop, resulting in a
parallel load operation. Note that the way the diagram is drawn, the shift-right
operation shifts the contents of the register in the down direction while the
shift left operation causes the contents of the register to shift in the upward
direction.

TABLE 2-4 Function Table for Register of Fig. 29
Mode control
Si So Register operation
No change
Shift right (down)

Shift left (up)
Parallel load
