130 Chapter 5, Game Playing

 

 

 

Black to move

 

 

Figure 55 The horizon problem. A series of checks by the black rook forces the inevitable
queening move by white "over the horizon" and makes this position look like a slight advantage
for black, when it is really a sure win for white.

 

 

 

PRUNING without examining it is called pruning the search tree. The particular technique we will examine 4
A RRBETA is called alpha-beta pruning. When applied to a standard minimax tree, it returns the same move

as minimax would, but prunes away branches that cannot possibly influence the final decision.
Consider the two-ply game tree from Figure 5.2, shown again in Figure 5.6. The search
proceeds as before: 4\, then A\\, A\2, Aj3, and the node under A, gets minimax value 3. Now
we followA2, and A), which has value 2. At this point, we realize that if MAX plays Az, MIN has
the option ofreaching a position worth 2, and some other options besides. Therefore, we can say
already that move A) is worth at most 2 to MAX. Because we already know that move 4 | is worth 4
3, there is no point at looking further under A2. In other words, we can prune the search tree at

this point and be confident that the pruning will have no effect on the outcome.
The general principle is this. Consider a node n somewhere in the tree (see Figure 5.7),
such that Player has a choice of moving to that node. If Player has a better choice m either at the
te parent node of n, or at any choice point further up, then n will never be reached in actual play.
[Es So once we have found out enough about n (by examining some of its descendants) to reach this
conclusion, we can prune it.

Remember that minimax search is depth-first, so at any one time we just have to consider
the nodes along a single path in the tree. Let a be the value of the best choice we have found so
far at any choice point along the path for MAX, and 7 be the value ofthe best (.e., lowest-value)
choice we have found so far at any choice point along the path formin. Alpha-beta search updates
the value of a and 8 as it goes along, and prunes a subtree (i.e., terminates the recursive call) as
soon as it is known to be worse than the current « or J3 value.

The algorithm description in Figure 5.8 is divided into a MAX-VALUE function and a
MIN-VALUE function. These apply to MAX nodes and In nodes, respectively, but each does the
same thing: return the minimax value of the node, except for nodes that are to be pruned (in

    
