    

Section 11.9. Summary 363

 

Coenen EE EEE
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

The roots of AI planning lie partly in problem solving through state-space search and associated
techniques such as problem reduction and means-ends analysis, especially as embodied in
Newell and Simon's GPS, and partly in theorem proving and situation calculus, especially as
embodied in the QA3 theorem proving system (Green, 1969b). Planning has also been historically
motivated by the needs of robotics. STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson, 1971), the first major planning
system, illustrates the interaction ofthese three influences. STRIPS was designed as the planning
component of the software for the Shakey robot project at SRI International. Its overall control
structure was modeled on that of GPS, and it used a version of QA3 as a subroutine for establishing
preconditions for actions. Lifschitz (1986) offers careful criticism and formal analysis of the
STRIPS system. Bylander (1992) shows simple planning in the fashion of STRIPS to be PSPACE-
complete. Fikes and Nilsson (1993) give a historical retrospective on the STRIPS project and a
survey of its relationship to more recent planning efforts.

For several years, terminological confusion has reigned in the field of planning. Some
authors (Genesereth and Nilsson, 1987) use the term linear to mean what we call totally ordered,
and nonlinear for partially ordered. Sacerdoti (1975), who originated the term, used "linear" to
refer to a property that we will call noninterleaved. Given a set of subgoals, a noninterleaved
planner can find plans to solve each subgoal, but then it can only combine them by placing all
the steps for one subplan before or after all the steps of the others. Many early planners of the
1970s were noninterleaved, and thus were incomplete—they could not always find a solution
when one exists. This was forcefully driven home by the Sussman Anomaly (see Exercise 11.4),
found during experimentation with the HACKER system (Sussman, 1975). (The anomaly was
actually found by Alien Brown, not by Sussman himself, who thought at the time that assuming
linearity to begin with was often a workable approach.) HACKER introduced the idea ofprotecting
subgoals, and was also an early example ofplan learning.

Goal regression planning, in which steps in a totally ordered plan are reordered so as to avoid
conflict between subgoals, was introduced by Waldinger { 1975) and also used by Warren's (1974)
WARPLAN. WARPLAN is also notable in that it was the first planner to be written using a logic
programming language (Prolog), and is one of the best examples of the remarkable economy
that can sometimes be gained by using logic programming: WARPLAN is only 100 lines of
code, a small fraction of the size of comparable planners of the time. INTERPLAN (Tate, 1975b;
Tate, 1975a) also allowed arbitrary interleaving of plan steps to overcome the Sussman anomaly
and related problems.

The construction of partially ordered plans (then called task networks) was pioneered by
the NOAH planner (Sacerdoti, 1975;Sacerdoti, 1977), and thoroughly investigated in Tate's (1977)
NONLIN system, which also retained the clear conceptual structure of its predecessor INTERPLAN.
INTERPLAN and NONLIN provide much of the grounding for the work described in this chapter and
the next, particularly in the use of causal links to detect potential protection violations. NONLIN
was also the first planner to use an explicit algorithm for determining the truth or falsity of
conditions at various points in a partially specified plan.

TWEAK (Chapman, 1987) formalizes a generic, partial-order planning system. Chapman
provides detailed analysis, including proofs of completeness and intractability (NP-hardness and
