15.4 Longest common subsequence 391

bases, where the possible bases are adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine.
Representing each of these bases by its initial letter, we can express a strand
of DNA as a string over the finite set {A,C,G,T}. (See Appendix C for
the definition of a string.) For example, the DNA of one organism may be
S| = ACCGGTCGAGTGCGCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA, and the DNA of another organ-
ism may be S, = GTCGTTCGGAATGCCGTTGCTCTGTAAA. One reason to com-
pare two strands of DNA is to determine how “similar” the two strands are, as some
measure of how closely related the two organisms are. We can, and do, define sim-
ilarity in many different ways. For example, we can say that two DNA strands are
similar if one is a substring of the other. (Chapter 32 explores algorithms to solve
this problem.) In our example, neither S; nor S3 is a substring of the other. Alter-
natively, we could say that two strands are similar if the number of changes needed
to turn one into the other is small. (Problem 15-5 looks at this notion.) Yet another
way to measure the similarity of strands S, and S, is by finding a third strand S;
in which the bases in S3 appear in each of S; and S,; these bases must appear
in the same order, but not necessarily consecutively. The longer the strand S3 we
can find, the more similar S; and S, are. In our example, the longest strand S3 is
GTCGTCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA.

We formalize this last notion of similarity as the longest-common-subsequence
problem. A subsequence of a given sequence is just the given sequence with zero or

more elements left out. Formally, given a sequence X = (X1,X2,..-, Xm), another
sequence Z = (Z1, Z2...-. Zk) is a subsequence of X if there exists a strictly
increasing sequence (i, .i2.....i,) of indices of X such that forall 7 = 1,2..... k,

we have x;, = Z;. For example, Z = (B,C, D, B) is a subsequence of X =
(A, B,C, B, D, A, B) with corresponding index sequence (2,3, 5,7).

Given two sequences X and Y, we say that a sequence Z is a common sub-
sequence of X and Y if Z is a subsequence of both X and Y. For example, if
X = (A,B,C, B,D,A,B) and Y = (B, D.C, A, B, A), the sequence (B,C, A) is
a common subsequence of both X and Y. The sequence (B,C, A) is not a longest
common subsequence (LCS) of X and Y, however, since it has length 3 and the
sequence (B,C, B, A), which is also common to both X and Y, has length 4. The
sequence (B, C, B, A) is an LCS of X and Y, as is the sequence (B, D, A, B),
since X and Y have no common subsequence of length 5 or greater.

In the longest-common-subsequence problem, we are given two sequences
X = (X1.X2.-.-, Xm) and Y = (yy, y2..--, Yn) and wish to find a maximum-
length common subsequence of X and Y. This section shows how to efficiently
solve the LCS problem using dynamic programming.
