412

Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming

You are considering N different positions, and for each position, P free-agent
players who play that position are available.* Because you do not want to overload
your roster with too many players at any position, for each position you may sign
at most one free agent who plays that position. (If you do not sign any players at a
particular position, then you plan to stick with the players you already have at that
position.)

To determine how valuable a player is going to be, you decide to use a sabermet-
ric statistic? known as “VORP,” or “value over replacement player.” A player with
ahigher VORP is more valuable than a player with a lower VORP. A player with a
higher VORP is not necessarily more expensive to sign than a player with a lower
VORP, because factors other than a player’s value determine how much it costs to
sign him.

For each available free-agent player, you have three pieces of information:

* the player’s position,
* the amount of money it will cost to sign the player, and
* the player’s VORP.

Devise an algorithm that maximizes the total VORP of the players you sign while
spending no more than $X altogether. You may assume that each player signs for a
multiple of $100,000. Your algorithm should output the total VORP of the players

you sign, the total amount of money you spend, and a list of which players you
sign. Analyze the running time and space requirement of your algorithm.

 

Chapter notes

R. Bellman began the systematic study of dynamic programming in 1955. The
word “programming,” both here and in linear programming, refers to using a tab-
ular solution method. Although optimization techniques incorporating elements of
dynamic programming were known earlier, Bellman provided the area with a solid
mathematical basis [37].

 

8 although there are nine positions on a baseball team, NV is not necesarily equal to 9 because some
general managers have particular ways of thinking about positions. For example, a general manager
might consider right-handed pitchers and left-handed pitchers to be separate “positions,” as well as
starting pitchers, long relief pitchers (relief pitchers who can pitch several innings), and short relief
pitchers (relief pitchers who normally pitch at most only one inning).

° Sabermetrics is the application of statistical analysis to baseball records. It provides several ways
to compare the relative values of individual players.
