402

CHAPTER ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

the movement of data through the registers. Whenever the F, bit of the control
register is set (F, = 1) and the F,; bit is reset (F/.: = 1), a clock is generated.
causing register R(I + 1) to accept the data from register RI. The same clock
transition sets F., to 1 and resets F; to 0. This causes the control flag to move
‘one position to the right together with the data. Data in the registers move
down the FIFO toward the output as long as there are empty locations ahead
fit. This ripple-through operation stops when the data reacha register RI with
the next flip-flop F,., being set to 1, or at the last register R4. An overall master
clear is used to initialize all control register flip-flops to 0.

Data are inserted into the buffer provided that the input ready signal is
enabled. This occurs when the first control flip-flop F; is reset, indicating that
register Rl is empty. Data are loaded from the input lines by enabling the clock
in RI through the insert control line. The same clock sets F,, which disables the
input ready control, indicating that the FIFO is now busy and unable to accept
more data. The ripple-through process begins provided that R2 is empty. The
data in RI are transferred into R2 and F,is cleared. This enables the input realy
line, indicating that the inputs are now available for another data word. If the
FIFO is full, F, remains set and the input ready line stays in the 0 state. Note
that the two control lines input readyand insert constitute a destination-initiated
pair of handshake lines.

The data falling through the registers stack up at the output end. The
output ready control line is enabled when the last control flip-flop F, is set,
indicating that there are valid data in the output register R4. The output data
from R4 are accepted by a destination unit, which then enables the delete
control signal. This resets F,, causing output rendy to disable, indicating that the
data on the output are no longer valid. Only after the delete signal goes back
to 0 can the data from R3 move into R4. If the FIFO is empty, there will be no
data in R3 and F, will remain in the reset state. Note that the two control lines
output ready and delete constitute a source-initiated pair of handshake lines.

11-4 Modes of Transfer

Binary information received from an external device is usually stored in mem-
ory forlater processing. Information transferred from the central computer into
an external device originates in the memory unit. The CPU merely executes the
VO instructions and may accept the data temporarily, but the ultimate source
or destination is the memory unit. Data transfer between the central computer
and VO devices may be handled in a variety of modes. Some modes use the
(CPUas an intermediate path; others transfer the data directly to and from the
memory unit. Data transfer to and from peripherals may be handled in one of
three possible modes:

1. Programmed /O
2. Interrupt-initiated VO
3. Direct memory access (DMA)
