Section 9.8.

Summary 293

 

introduced clausal form, and produced a program that attempted to find refutations by substituting
members of the Herbrand universe for variables to produce ground clauses and then looking for
propositional inconsistencies among the ground clauses. Prawitz (1960) developed the key idea
of letting the quest for propositional inconsistency drive the search process, and generating terms
from the Herbrand universe only when it was necessary to do so in order to establish propositional
inconsistency. After further development by other researchers, this idea led J. A. Robinson (no
relation) to develop the resolution method (Robinson, 1965), which used unification in its mod-
em form to allow the demonstration of propositional inconsistency without necessarily making
explicit use of terms from the Herbrand universe. The so-called "inverse method" developed at
about the same time by the Soviet researcher S. Maslov (1964; 1967) is based on principles some-
what different from Robinson's resolution method but offers similar computational advantages
in avoiding the unnecessary generation of tems in the Herbrand universe. The relations between
resolution and the inverse method are explored by Maslov (1971) and by Kuehner (1971).

The demodulation rule described in the chapter was intended to eliminate equality axioms
by combining equality substitution with resolution, and was introduced by Wos (1967). Tem
rewriting systems such as the Knuth-Bendix algorithm (Knuth and Bendix, 1970) are based on
demodulation, and have found wide application in programming languages. The paramodulation
inference rule (Wos and Robinson, 1968)is a more general version of demodulation that provides
a complete proof procedure for first-order logic with equality.

In addition to demodulation and paramodulation for equality reasoning, other special-
purpose inference rules have been introduced to aid reasoning of other kinds. Boyer and
Moore (1979) provide powerful methods for the use of mathematical induction in automated
reasoning, although their logic unfortunately lacks quantifiers and does not quite have the full
power of first-order logic. Stickel's (1985) "theory resolution" and Manna and Waldinger's (1986)
method of "special relations" provide general ways of incorporating special-purpose inference
tules into a resolution-style framework.

A number of control strategies have been proposed for resolution, beginning with the unit
preference strategy (Wos et al., 1964). The set of support strategy was proposed by Wos et
al. (1965), to provide a degree of goal-directedness in resolution. Linear resolution first appeared
in (Loveland, 1968). Wolfgang Bibel (1981) developed the connection method which allows
complex deductions to be recognized efficiently. Developments in resolution control strategies,
and the accompanying growth in the understanding of the relationship between completeness and
syntactic restrictions on clauses, contributed significantly to the development of logic program-
ming (see Chapter 10). Genesereth and Nilsson (1987, Chapter 5) provide a short but thorough
analysis of a wide variety of control strategies.

There are a number of good general-purpose introductions to automated deduction and to
the theory of proof and inference; some were mentioned in Chapter 7. Additional textbooks on
matters related to completeness and undecidability include Computabilityand Logic (Boolos and
Jeffrey, 1989), Metalogic (Hunter, 1971), and (for an entertaining and unconventional, yet highly
rigorous approach) A Course in Mathematical Logic (Manin, 1977). Many of the most important
papers from the turn-of-the-century development of mathematical logic are to be found in From
Frege to Gédel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic (van Heijenoort, 1967). The journal
of record for the field of pure mathematical logic (as opposed to automated deduction) is The
Journal of Symbolic Logic.
