534

14.27

14.28

14.29

 

Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

for random access that performs transfers in each of the four sizes
given in part a.

c. Suppose that a utilization of 25 percent (or higher) is considered
acceptable. Using the performance figures given, compute the
smallest transfer size for disk that gives acceptable utilization.

d. Complete the following sentence: A disk is a random-access device
for transfers larger than ---_- bytes, and is a sequential-access
device for smaller transfers.

e. Compute the minimum transfer sizes that give acceptable utiliza-
tion for cache, memory, and tape.

f, When isa tape a random-access device, and when is it a sequential-
access device?

Imagine that a holographic storage drive has been invented. Suppose
that a holographic drive costs $10,000 and has an average access time of
40 milliseconds. Suppose that it uses a $100 cartridge the size of a CD.
This cartridge holds 40,000 images, and each image is a square black-
and-white picture with resolution 6, 000 x 6, 000 pixels (each pixel stores 1
bit). Suppose that the drive can read or write one picture in 1 millisecond.
Answer the following questions.

a. What would be some good uses for this device?

b. How would this device affect the I/O performance of a computing
system?

c. Which other kinds of storage devices, if any, would become obsolete
as a result of this device being invented?

Suppose that a one-sided 5.25-inch optical-disk cartridge has an areal
density of 1 gigabit per square inch. Suppose that a magnetic tape has
an areal density of 20 megabits per square inch, and is 1/2 inch wide and
1,800 feet long. Calculate an estimate of the storage capacities of these
two kinds of storage cartridges. Suppose that an optical tape exists that
has the same physical size as the tape, but the same storage density as
the optical disk. What volume of data could the optical tape hold? What
would be a marketable price for the optical tape if the magnetic tape cost
$25?

Suppose that we agree that 1 KB is 1,024 bytes, 1 MB is 1,024? bytes,
and 1 GB is 1,024? bytes. This progression continues through terabytes,
petabytes, and exabytes (1,024°). Several newly proposed scientific
projects plan to be able to record and store a few exabytes of data during
the next decade. To answer the following questions, you will need to
