474

Chapter 17 Amortized Analysis

We shall analyze this rebuilding scheme using the potential method. For a node x

in a binary search tree T, we define

A(x) = |x. left.size — x.right.size| ,

and we define the potential of T as

@(T)=c > A(x).

xET:A(x)>2

where c is a sufficiently large constant that depends on @.

c.

Argue that any binary search tree has nonnegative potential and that a 1/2-
balanced tree has potential 0.

|. Suppose that m units of potential can pay for rebuilding an m-node subtree.

How large must c be in terms of @ in order for it to take O(1) amortized time
to rebuild a subtree that is not a-balanced?

Show that inserting a node into or deleting a node from an n-node @-balanced
tree costs O(lgn) amortized time.

17-4 The cost of restructuring red-black trees

There are four basic operations on red-black trees that perform structural modi-
fications: node insertions, node deletions, rotations, and color changes. We have
seen that RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE use only O(1) rotations, node insertions,
and node deletions to maintain the red-black properties, but they may make many
more color changes.

a.

Describe a legal red-black tree with n nodes such that calling RB-INSERT to
add the (n + 1)st node causes Q(lgm) color changes. Then describe a legal
red-black tree with 1 nodes for which calling RB-DELETE on a particular node
causes Q(lg 7) color changes.

Although the worst-case number of color changes per operation can be logarithmic,
we shall prove that any sequence of m RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE operations on
an initially empty red-black tree causes O(m) structural modifications in the worst
case. Note that we count each color change as a structural modification.

b

Some of the cases handled by the main loop of the code of both RB-INSERT-
Fixup and RB-DELETE-FIXUP are terminating: once encountered, they cause
the loop to terminate after a constant number of additional operations. For each
of the cases of RB-INSERT-FIxuP and RB-DELETE-FIXUP, specify which are
terminating and which are not. (Hint: Look at Figures 13.5, 13.6, and 13.7.)
