486

Chapter 18 B-Trees

from the spindle. When a given head is stationary, the surface that passes under-
neath it is called a track. Multiple platters increase only the disk drive’s capacity
and not its performance.

Although disks are cheaper and have higher capacity than main memory, they are
much, much slower because they have moving mechanical parts.! The mechanical
motion has two components: platter rotation and arm movement. As of this writing,
commodity disks rotate at speeds of 5400—15,000 revolutions per minute (RPM).
We typically see 15,000 RPM speeds in server-grade drives, 7200 RPM speeds
in drives for desktops, and 5400 RPM speeds in drives for laptops. Although
7200 RPM may seem fast, one rotation takes 8.33 milliseconds, which is over 5
orders of magnitude longer than the 50 nanosecond access times (more or less)
commonly found for silicon memory. In other words, if we have to wait a full rota-
tion for a particular item to come under the read/write head, we could access main
memory more than 100,000 times during that span. On average we have to wait
for only half a rotation, but still, the difference in access times for silicon memory
compared with disks is enormous. Moving the arms also takes some time. As of
this writing, average access times for commodity disks are in the range of 8 to 11
milliseconds.

In order to amortize the time spent waiting for mechanical movements, disks
access not just one item but several at a time. Information is divided into a number
of equal-sized pages of bits that appear consecutively within tracks, and each disk
read or write is of one or more entire pages. For a typical disk, a page might be 2!
to 2! bytes in length. Once the read/write head is positioned correctly and the disk
has rotated to the beginning of the desired page, reading or writing a magnetic disk
is entirely electronic (aside from the rotation of the disk), and the disk can quickly
read or write large amounts of data.

Often, accessing a page of information and reading it from a disk takes longer
than examining all the information read. For this reason, in this chapter we shall
look separately at the two principal components of the running time:

* the number of disk accesses, and
* the CPU (computing) time.

We measure the number of disk accesses in terms of the number of pages of infor-
mation that need to be read from or written to the disk. We note that disk-access
time is not constant—it depends on the distance between the current track and
the desired track and also on the initial rotational position of the disk. We shall

 

As of this writing, solid-state drives have recently come onto the consumer market, Although they
are faster than mechanical disk drives, they cost more per gigabyte and have lower capacities than
mechanical disk drives.
