468 CHAPTER TWELVE Memory Organization

replacement
algorithms

 

 

 

Index Tag Data Taga
ooo[or | 3450 [| 02 | 5670
m[e2 [ene | oo | 2340 |

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 12-15 Two-way set-associative mapping cache.

The octal numbers listed in Fig. 12-15 are with reference to the main
memory contents illustrated in Fig. 12-13(a). The words stored at addresses
01000 and 02000 of main memory are stored in cache memory at index address
000. Similarly, the words at addresses 02777 and 00777 are stored in cache at
indexaddress777. When the CPU generates amemory request, the index value
‘of the address is used to access the cache. The tag field of the CPU address is
thencompared with both tags in the cache to determine ifa match occurs. The
comparison logic is done by an associative search of the tags in the set similar
toan associative memory search: thus the name “set-associative.” The hit ratio
will improve as the set size increases because more words with the same index
but different tags can reside in cache. However, an increase in the set size
increases the number of bits in words of cache and requires more complex
comparison logic.

When a miss occurs in a set-associative cache and the set is full, it is
necessary to replace one of the tag-data items with a new value. The most
common replacement algorithms used are: random replacement, first-in, first-
out (FIFO), and least recently used (LRU). Withthe random replacement policy
the control chooses one tag-data item for replacement at random. The FIFO
procedure selects forreplacement the item that has been in the set the longest.
‘TheLRUalgorithm selects forreplacementthe item thathas been least recently
used by the CPU. Both FIFO and LRU can be implemented by adding a few
extra bits in each word of cache.

Writing into Cache

‘An important aspect of cache organization is concerned with memory write
requests. When the CPU finds a word in cache during a read operation, the
main memory is not involved in the transfer. However, if the operation is a
write, there are two ways that the system can proceed.
