LI Algorithms 9

Not every problem solved by algorithms has an easily identified set of candidate
solutions. For example, suppose we are given a set of numerical values represent-
ing samples of a signal, and we want to compute the discrete Fourier transform of
these samples. The discrete Fourier transform converts the time domain to the fre-
quency domain, producing a set of numerical coefficients, so that we can determine
the strength of various frequencies in the sampled signal. In addition to lying at
the heart of signal processing, discrete Fourier transforms have applications in data
compression and multiplying large polynomials and integers. Chapter 30 gives
an efficient algorithm, the fast Fourier transform (commonly called the FFT), for
this problem, and the chapter also sketches out the design of a hardware circuit to
compute the FFT.

Data structures

This book also contains several data structures. A data structure is a way to store
and organize data in order to facilitate access and modifications. No single data
structure works well for all purposes, and so it is important to know the strengths
and limitations of several of them.

Technique

Although you can use this book as a “cookbook” for algorithms, you may someday
encounter a problem for which you cannot readily find a published algorithm (many
of the exercises and problems in this book, for example). This book will teach you
techniques of algorithm design and analysis so that you can develop algorithms on
your own, show that they give the correct answer, and understand their efficiency.
Different chapters address different aspects of algorithmic problem solving. Some
chapters address specific problems, such as finding medians and order statistics in
Chapter 9, computing minimum spanning trees in Chapter 23, and determining a
maximum flow in a network in Chapter 26. Other chapters address techniques,
such as divide-and-conquer in Chapter 4, dynamic programming in Chapter 15,
and amortized analysis in Chapter 17.

Hard problems

Most of this book is about efficient algorithms. Our usual measure of efficiency
is speed, i.e., how long an algorithm takes to produce its result. There are some
problems, however, for which no efficient solution is known. Chapter 34 studies
an interesting subset of these problems, which are known as NP-complete.

Why are NP-complete problems interesting? First, although no efficient algo-
rithm for an NP-complete problem has ever been found, nobody has ever proven
