356 — cuarrer Ten Computer Arithmetic

the smaller exponent to the right by a number of places equal to the difference
between the exponents. After this is done, the mantissas can be added:

5372400 x 10?
+.0001580 x 10?
5373980 x 10?

When two normalized mantissas are added, the sum may contain an
overflow digit. An overflow can be corrected easily by shifting the sum once
to the right and incrementing the exponent. When two numbers are sub-
tracted, the result may contain most significant zerosas shown in the following
example:

56780 x 10°
9430 x_10°
00350 x 10°

 

A floating-point number that has a 0 in the most significant position of the
mantissa is said to havean underflow. To normalize a number that contains an
underflow, it is necessary to shift the mantissa to the left and decrement the
exponent until a nonzero digit appears in the first position. In the example
above, it is necessary to shift left twice to obtain 35000 x 10°. In most comput-
ers, anormalization procedure is performed after each operation to ensure that
all results are in a normalized form.

Floating-pointmultiplication and division do not require an alignment of
the mantissas. The product can be formed by multiplying the two mantissas
and adding the exponents. Division is accomplished by dividing the mantissas
and subtracting the exponents.

The operations performed with the mantissas are the same as in fixed-
point numbers, so the two can share the same registers and circuits. The
operations performed with the exponents are compare and increment (for
aligning the mantissas), add and subtract (for multiplication and division), and
decrement (to normalize the result). The exponent may be represented in any
one of the three representations: signed-magnitude, signed-2’s complement,
or signed-1’s complement.

‘A fourth representation employed in many computers is known as a
biased exponent. In this representation, the sign bit is removed from being a
separate entity. The bias is a positive number that is added to each exponent
as the floating-point number is formed, so that internally all exponents are
positive. The following example may clarify this type of representation. Con-
sider an exponent that ranges from ~50 to 49. Internally, it is represented by
two digits (without a sign) by adding to it a bias of 50. The exponent register
contains the number e + 50, where ¢ is the actual exponent. This way, the
exponents are represented in registers as positive numbers in the range of 00
