214

Chapter 9 Medians and Order Statistics

 

9.1 Minimum and maximum

How many comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum of a set of 7
elements? We can easily obtain an upper bound of n — 1 comparisons: examine
each element of the set in turn and keep track of the smallest element seen so
far. In the following procedure, we assume that the set resides in array A, where
A. length =n.

MINIMUM (A)

1 min = Al]

2 fori = 2 to A.length
3 if min > A[i]

4 min = Afi]

5 return min

We can, of course, find the maximum with n — | comparisons as well.

Is this the best we can do? Yes, since we can obtain a lower bound of n — 1
comparisons for the problem of determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm
that determines the minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each compar-
ison is a match in the tournament in which the smaller of the two elements wins.
Observing that every element except the winner must lose at least one match, we
conclude that 1 — 1 comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum. Hence,
the algorithm MINIMUM is optimal with respect to the number of comparisons
performed.

Simultaneous minimum and maximum.

In some applications, we must find both the minimum and the maximum of a set
of n elements. For example, a graphics program may need to scale a set of (x, y)
data to fit onto a rectangular display screen or other graphical output device. To
do so, the program must first determine the minimum and maximum value of each
coordinate.

At this point, it should be obvious how to determine both the minimum and the
maximum of 7 elements using @(7) comparisons, which is asymptotically optimal:
simply find the minimum and maximum independently, using n — 1 comparisons
for each, for a total of 21 — 2 comparisons.

In fact, we can find both the minimum and the maximum using at most 3 [n/2|
comparisons. We do so by maintaining both the minimum and maximum elements
seen thus far. Rather than processing each element of the input by comparing it
against the current minimum and maximum, at a cost of 2 comparisons per element,
