58 — curren Two Digital Components

increment

‘word

output carry can be used to extend the counter to more stages, with each stage
having an additional flip-flop and an AND gate.

Binary Counter with Parallel Load
Counters employed in digital systems quite often require a parallel load capa-
bility for transferring an initial binary number prior to the count operation.
Figure2-11 shows the logicdiagram of a binary counter that has a parallel load
capability and can also be cleared to 0 synchronous with the clock. When equal
to 1, the clear input sets all the K inputs to 1, thus clearing all flip-flops with
the next clock transition, The input load control when equal to 1, disables the
count operation and causes a transfer of data from the four parallel inputs into
the ourflip-flops (provided that the clear input is 0). If the clear and load inputs
are both Oand the increment inputi 1, the circuitoperates as a binary counter.
The operation of the circuit is summarized in Table 2-5. With the clear,
load, and increment inputs all at 0, the outputs do not change even when
pulses are applied to the C terminals. If the clear and load inputs are main-
tained at logic 0, the increment input control the operation of the counter and
the outputs change to the next binary count for each positive transition of the
lock. The input data are loaded into the flip-flops when the load control input
is equal to 1 provided that the clear is disabled, but the increment input can
be 0 or 1. The register is cleared to 0 with the clear control regardless of the
values in the load and increment inputs.

TABLE 2-5 Function Table for the Register of Fi

 

 

Clock Clear Load Increment Operation
1 0 0 0 No change
t 0 0 1 Increment count by 1
t 0 1 x Load inputs o through Is
t 1 x x Clear outputs to 0

Counters with parallel load are very useful in the design of digital com-
puters. In subsequent chapters we refer to them as registers with load and
increment operations. The increment operation adds one to the content of a
register. By enabling the count input during one clock period, the content of
the register can be incremented by one.

2-7_Memory Unit

A memory unit isa collection of storage cells together with associated circuits
needed to transfer information in and out of storage. The memory stores binary
information in groups of bits called words. A word in memory is an entity of
