Mock trans fer

cRC

full-duptex

protocol

SECTION 11-8 Serial Communication 431

character received. Another procedure used in asynchronous terminals involv-
ing a human operator is to echo the character. The character transmitted from
the keyboard to the computer is recognized by the processor and retransmitted
to the terminal printer. The operator would realize that an error occurred
during transmission if the character printed is not the same as the character
whose key he has struck.

In synchronous transmission, where an entire block of characters is
transmitted, each character has a parity bit for the receiver to check. Afterthe
entire block is sent, the transmitter sends one more character that constitutes
a parity over the length of the message. This character is called a longitudinal
redundancy check (LRC) and is the accumulation of the exclusive-OR of all
transmitted characters. The receiving station calculates the LRC as it receives
characters and compares it with the transmitted LRC. The calculated and
received LRC should be equal for error-free messages. If the receiver finds an
error in the transmitted block, it informs the sender to retransmit the same
block once again. Another method used for checking errors in transmission is
the cyclic redundancy check (CRO). This is a polynomial code obtained from
the message bits by passing them through a feedback shift register containing
a number of exclusive-OR gates This type of code is suitable for detecting burst
errors occurring in the communication channel.

Data can be transmitted between two points in three different modes:
simplex, half-duplex, or full-duplex. A simplexline carries information in one
direction only. This mode is seldom used in data communication because
the receiver cannot communicate with the transmitter to indicate the occur-
rence of errors. Examples of simplex transmission are radio and television
broadcasting.

‘A half-duplex transmission system is one that is capable of transmitting in
both directions but data can be transmitted in only one direction at a time A
pair of wires is needed for this mode. A common situation is for one modem
to act as the transmitter and the other as the receiver. When transmission in
one direction is completed, the role of the modems is reversed to enable
transmission in the reverse direction. The time required to switch a half-duplex
line from one direction to the other is called the turnaround time.

AA full-duplex transmission can send and receive data in both directions
simultaneously. This can be achieved by means of a four-wire link, with a
different pair of wires dedicated to each direction of transmission. Alterna-
tively, a two-wire circuit can support full-duplex communication if the
frequency spectrum is subdivided into two nonoverlapping frequency bands
to create separate receive and transmit channels in the same physical pair of
wires.

‘The communication lines, modems, and other equipment used in the
transmission of information between two or more stations is called a data link.
The orderly transfer ofinformation in a data link is accomplished by means of
a protocol. A data link control protocol is a set of rules that are followed by
interconnecting computers and terminals to ensure the orderly transfer of
