354

Chapter 11. Planning

 

Start

 

attHtome) > At(HWS)
—___> |

 

 

 

 

 

Go(HWS) Go(SM)
At(HWS), Setis(HWS,Drill} 7 ASM), Seits(SM,Milk) — At(SM), Selis(SM Bananas) At'SM)
Buy (Drill) Buy(Milk} | Buy(Bananas) GojHome)

 

 

 

 

 

 

~N } > vy

Have(Drill), Have(Milk}, Have(Bananas) , At(rome)

 

Finish

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1111 Causal link protection in the shopping plan. The Go(HWS)*“™' Buy(Drill)
causal link is protected ordering the Go(SM) step after Buy(Drill), and the Go(SM) “8
Buy(Milk/Bananas)link is protected by ordering Go(Home) after Buy(Milk)and Buy(Bananas).

 

 

 

Only the Ar(Home) precondition of the Finish step remains unachieved. Adding a
Go(Home) step achieves it, but introduces an Az(x) precondition that needs to be achieved.® |
Again, the protection of causal links will help the planner decide how to do this:

+ Ifit tries to achieve Ar(x) by linking to Ar(Home) in the initial state, there will be no way
to resolve the threats caused by go(HWS)and Go(SM).

+ Ifit tries to link Ar(x) to the Go(HWS)step, there will be no way to resolve the threat posed
by the Go(SM)step, which is already constrained to come after Go(HWS).

* A link from Go(SM)to A(x) means that x is bound to SM, so that now the Go(Home)
step deletes the At(SM) condition. This results in threats to the A‘(SM) preconditions of
Buy(Milk)and Buy(Bananas), but these can be resolved by ordering Go(Home)to come
after these steps (Figure 11.11).

Figure 11.12 shows the complete solution plan, with the steps redrawn to reflect the ordering
constraints on them. The result is an almost totally ordered plan; the only ambiguity is that
Buy(Milk)and Buy(Bananas) can come in either order.

Let us take stock of what our partial-order planner has accomplished. It can take a problem
that would require many thousands of search states for a problem-solving approach, and solve it
with only a few search states. Moreover, the least commitment nature of the planner means it
only needs to search at all in places where subplans interact with each other. Finally, the causal
links allow the planner to recognize when to abandon a doomed plan without wasting a lot of
time expanding irrelevant parts of the plan.
© Notice that the Go(Home)step also has the effect A(x), meaning that the step will delete an 4? condition for some

location yet to be decided. This is a possible threat to protected conditions in the plan such as At(SM), but we will not
worry about it for now. Possible threats are dealt with in Section 11.7.
