SECTION 9-6 Vector Processing 325

The advantage of a modular memory is that it allows the use of a tech-
nique called interleaving. In an interleaved memory, different sets of addresses
are assigned to different memory modules. For example, in a two-module
memory system, the even addresses may be in one module and the odd
addresses in the other. When the number of modules is a power of 2, the least
significant bits of the address select a memory module and the remaining bits
designate the specific location to be accessed within the selected module.

‘Amodularmemory is useful in systemswith pipeline and vector process-
ing. A vector processor that uses an n-way interleaved memory can fetch n
operands from n different modules. By staggering the memory access, the
effective memory cycle time can be reduced by a factor close to the number of
modules. A CPU with instruction pipeline can take advantage of multiple
memory modules so that each segment in the pipeline can access memory
independent of memory access from other segments.

Supercomputers

Acommercial computer with vector instructions and pipelined floating-point
arithmetic operations is referred to as a supercomputer. Supercomputers are
very powerful, high-performance machines used mostly for scientific compu-
tations. To speed up the operation, the componentsare packed tightly together
to minimize the distance that the electronic signals have to travel. Supercom-
puters also use special techniques for removing the heat from circuits to
prevent them from burning up because of their close proximity.

The instruction set of supercomputers contains the standard data trans-
fer, data manipulation, and program control instructions of conventional com-
puters. This is augmented by instructions that process vectors and combina-
tions of scalarsand vectors. A supercomputerisa computer system best known
for its high computational speed, fast and large memory systems, and the
extensive use of parallel processing. It is equipped with multiple functional
units and each unit has its own pipeline configuration. Although the super-
computer is capable of general-purpose applications foundin all other comput-
crs, it isspecifically optimized for the type of numerical calculations involving,
vectors and matrices of floating-point numbers.

Supercomputers are not suitable for normal everyday processing of a
typical computer installation. They are limited in their use to a number of
scientific applications, such as numerical weather forecasting, seismic wave
analysis, and space research. They have limited use and limited market be-
cause of their high price.

‘A measure used to evaluate computers in their ability to perform a given
number of floating-point operations per second is referred to as flops. The term
re aflops is used to denote million flops and gigaflops to denote billion flops.
‘A typical supercomputer has a basic cycle time of 4 to 20 ns. If the processor
can calculate a floating-point operation through a pipeline each cycle time, it
will have the ability to perform 50 to 250 megaflops. This rate would be
