Boolean function

cruth table

gic diagram

SECTION 13 Boolean Algebra 7

1-3 Boolean Algebra

Boolean algebra is an algebra that deals with binary variables and logic oper-
ations. The variables are designated by letters such as A, B, x, and y. The three
basic logic operations are AND, OR, and complement. A Boolean function can
be expressed algebraically with binary variables, the logic operation symbols,
parentheses, and equal sign. For a given value of the variables, the Boolean
function can be either 1 or 0. Consider, for example, the Boolean function

 

Fexty'z

The function F is equal to 1if xis 1 orif bothy’ and z are equal to 1; Fis equal
to 0 otherwise. But saying that y’ = 1 is equivalent to saying that y = 0 since
y’ is the complement of y. Therefore, we may say that F is equal fo 1ifx = 1
or if yz = 01. The relationship between a function and its binary variables can
be represented in a truth table. To representa function in a truth table weneed
alist of the 2° combinations of the n binary variables. As shown in Fig. 1-3(a),
there are eight possible distinct combinations for assigning bits to the three
variables x, y, and z. The function F is equal to 1 for those combinations where
x= Lor yz = 01; it is equal to 0 for all other combinations.

‘A Boolean function can be transformed from an algebraic expression into
a logic diagram composed of AND, OR, and inverter gates. The logic diagram
for F is shown in Fig. 1-3(b). There is an inverter for input y to generate its
complement’. There is an AND gate for the term y'z, and an OR gate is used
to combine the two terms. In a logic diagram, the variables of the function are
taken to be the inputs of the circuit, and the variable symbol of the function
is taken as the output of the circuit

The purpose of Boolean algebra is to facilitate the analysis and design of
digital circuits. It provides a convenient tool to:

1. Express in algebraic form a truth table relationship between binary
variables,

Figure 1-3 Truth table and logic diagram for F = x + y'z,

   

(a) Truth table (b) Logie diagram
