SECTION 11-7 Input-Output Processor 423,

responds by inserting a status word in memory fortheCPU to check. The bits,
of the status word indicate the condition of the IOP and V/O device, such as
IOP overload condition, device busy with another transfer, or device ready for
VO transfer. The CPU refers to the status word in memory to decide what to
do next. If all is in order, the CPU sends the instruction to start UO transfer.
The memory address received with this instruction tells the IOP where to find
its program.

The CPU can now continue with another program while the IOP is busy
with the JO program. Both programs refer to memory by means of DMA
transfer. When the IOP terminates the execution of its program, it sends an
interrupt request to the CPU. The CPU responds to the interrupt by issuing
an instruction to read the status from the IOP. The IOP responds by placing
the contents of its status report into a specified memory location. The status
word indicates whether the transfer has been completed or if any errors
occurred during the transfer. From inspection of the bits in the status word,
the CPU determines if the I/O operation was completed satisfactorily without
errors.

The IOP takes care of all data transfers between several /O units and the
memory while the CPU is processing another program. The IOP and CPU are
competing for the use of memory, so the number of devices that can be in
operation is limited by the access time of the memory. It is not possible to
saturate the memory by /O devices in most systems, as the speed of most
devices is much slower than the CPU. However, some very fast units, such as
magnetic disks, can use an appreciable numberof the available memory cycles.
In that case, the speed of the CPU may deteriorate because it will often have
to wait for the IOP to conduct memory transfers.

IBM 370 V/O Channel
The VO processor in the IBM 370 computer is called a channel. A typical
computer system configuration includes a number of channels with each
channelattached to one or more /O devices. There are three types of channels:
multiplexer, selector, and block-multiplexer. The multiplexer channel can be
connected to a number of slow- and medium-speed devices and is capable of
operating with a number of /O devices simultaneously. The selector channel
is designed to handle one UO operation at a time and is normally used to
control one high-speed device. The block-multiplexer channel combines the
features of both the multiplexer and selector channels. It provides a connection
toa number of high-speed devices, but all /O transfers are conducted with an
entire block of data as compared to a multiplexer channel, which can transfer
only one byte at a time

The CPU communicates directly with the channels through dedicated
control lines and indirectly through reserved storage areas in memory.
Figure 11-21 shows the word formats associated with the channel operation.
