S-bit flag

zero insertion

SECTION 118 Serial Communication 437

Bit-Oriented Protocol

The bit-oriented protocol does not use characters in its control field and is,
independent of any particular code. It allows the transmission of serial bit
stream of any length without the implication of character boundaries. Mes-
sages are organized in a specific format called a frame. In addition to the
information field, a frame contains address, control, and error-checking fields.
‘The frame boundaries are determined from a special8-bit number called a flag.
Examples of bit-oriented protocols are SDLC (synchronous data link control)
used by IBM, HDLC (high-level data link control) adopted by the International
Standards Organization, and ADCCP (advanced data communication control
procedure) adopted by the American National Standards Institute.

‘Any data communication link involves at least two participating stations.
The station that has responsibility for the data link and issues the commands
tocontrol the linkis called the primary station. The other station is asecondary
station. Bit-oriented protocols assume the presence of one primary station and
one or more secondary stations. All communication on the data link is from
the primary station to one or more secondary stations, or from a secondary
station to the primary station.

The frame format for the bit-oriented protocol is shown in Fig. 11-26. A
frame starts with the &bit flag 01111110 followed by an address and control
sequence. The information field is not restricted in format or content and can
be of any length. The frame check field is a CRC (cyclic redundancy check)
sequence used for detecting errors in transmission. The ending flag indicates
to the receiving station that the 16 bits just received constitute the CRC bits.
The ending frame can be followed by another frame, another flag, or a se-
quence of consecutive 1’s. When two frames follow each other, the intervening
flag is simultaneously the ending flag of the first frame and the beginning flag
ofthe next frame. Ifnoinformationis exchanged, the transmitter sendsa series
of flags to keep the linein the active state. The line is said to be in theidle state
with the occurrence of 15 or more consecutive 1’s. Frames with certain control
messages are sent without an information field. A frame must havea minimum
0f 32 bits between two flags to accommodate the address, control, and frame
check fields. The maximum length depends on the condition of the communi-
cation channel and its ability to transmit long messages error-free.

Topreventa flag fromoccurring in the middle of a frame, the bit-oriented
protocol uses a method called zero insertion. This requires that a 0 be inserted

Figure 11-26 Frame formatfor bit-oriented protocol

 

Flag | Address | Control Information | Frame check | Flag
onitiio | “sbits | Bbits | anynumberofbits | I6bits — forliiii0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
