404

CHAPTER ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

Anexample of data transfer from an I/O device through an interface into
the CPU is shown in Fig. 11-10. The device transfers bytes of data one at a time
as they are available. When a byte of data is available, the device places it in
the VO bus and enables its data valid line. The interface accepts the byte into
its data register and enables the data accepted line. The interface sets a bit in
the status register that we will refer to.as an For “flag” bit. The device can now
disable the data valid line, but it will not transfer another byte until the data
accepted line is disabled by the interface. This is according to the handshaking
Procedure established in Fig. 11-5.

‘A program is written for the computer to check the flag in the status
register to determine if a byte has been placed in the data register by the /O
device. This is done by reading the status register into a CPU register and
checking the value of the flag bit. If the flag is equal to 1, the CPU reads the
data from the data register. The flag bit is then cleared to 0 by either the CPU
or the interface, depending on how the interface circuits are designed. Once
the flag is cleared, the interface disables the data accepted line and the device
can then transfer the next data byte

A flowchart of the program that must be written for the CPU is shown
in Fig. 11-11. It is assumed that the device is sending a sequence of bytes
that must be stored in memory. The transfer of each byte requires three
instructions:

1; Read the status register.

2. Check the status of the flag bit and branch to step 1 if not set or to step
Sif set.

3. Read the data register.
Each byte is read into a CPU register and then transferred to memory with a

store instruction. A common I/O programming task is to transfer a block of
words from an I/O device and store them in a memory buffer. A program that

Figure 11-10 Data transfer from UO device to CPU.

 

 

 

 

 

Interface
Data bus |___1obus
Address bus Data register
Data valid 1
ou Worad a
WO write status :
> register | ¥ Data accepted , |

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F =Flag bit
