424 © cuarrer eLeveN Input—Ourput Organization

 

Operation | Channel | Device
code | address | address

 

 

(@ WO instruction format

 

wey | attests om |

 

(®) Channel status word format

 

(©) Channel command word format

Figure 11-21 IBM 370 /O related word formats.

 

 

 

 

 

The VO instruction format has three fields: operation code, channel address,
and device address. Thecomputersystem may have a numberof channels, and
each is assigned an address. Similarly, each channel may be connected to
several devices and each device is assigned an address. The operation code
specifies one of eight I/O instructions: start /O, start I/O fast release, test /O,
clear 1/0, halt /O, halt device, test channel, and store channel identification.
The addressed channel responds to each of the L/O instructions and executes
it. It also sets one of four condition codes in a processor register called PSW
(processor status word). The CPU can check the condition code in the PSW to
determine the result of the /O operation. The meaning of the four condition
codes is dif ferent for each /O instruction. But, in general, they specify whether
the channel or the device is busy, whether or not it is operational, whether
interruptions are pending, if the /O operation had started successfully, and
whether a status word was stored in memory by the channel.

The format of the channel status word is shown in Fig. 11-21(b). It is
always stored in location 64 in memory. The key field isa protection mechanism
used to prevent unauthorized access by one user to information that belongs
toanother user or to the operating system. The address field in the status word
gives the address of the last command word used by the channel. The count
field gives the residual count when the transfer was terminated. The count field
will show zero if the transfer was completed successfully. The status field
identifies the conditions in the device and the channel and any errors that
occurred during the transfer.

The differencebetween the start /O and start I/O fast release instructions
is that the latter requires less CPU time for its execution. When the channel
