30 charrer one Digital Logic Circuits

present state

next state

The sequential circuit also has an external output, which is a function of
the input variable and the state of the flip-flops. This output can be specified
algebraically by the expression

y = Ax’ + Bx’

From this example we note that a flip-flop input equation is a Boolean
expression for a combinational circuit. The subscripted variable is a binary
variable name for the output of a combinational circuit. This output is always
connected to a flip-flop input.

State Table

The behavior of a sequential circuit is determined from the inputs, the outputs,
and the state ofits flip-flops. Both the outputs and the next state are a function
of the inputs and the present state. A sequential circuit is specified by a state
table that relates outputs and next states as a function of inputs and present
states. In clocked sequential circuits, the transition from present state to next
state is activated by the presence of a clock signal.

The state table for the circuit of Fig. 1-25 is shown in Table 1-4. The table
consists of four sections, labeled present state, input, next tate, and output. The
present-state section shows the states of flip-flops A and B at any given time
#. The input section gives a value of x for each possible present state. The
next-state section shows the states of the flip-flops one clock period later at ime
£ +1, The output section gives the value ofy for each present state and input
condition.

The derivation of a state table consists of first listing all possible binary
combinations of present state and inputs. In this case we have eight binary
combinations from 000 to 111. The next-state values are then determined from
the logic diagram or from the input equations. The input equation for flip-flop
Ais

D, = Ax + Br

Thenext-state value of a each flip-flop is equal to its D input valuein the present
state. The transition from present state to next state occurs after application of
aclock signal. Therefore, the next state of Ais equal to 1 when the present state
and input values satisfy the conditions Ax = 1 or Bx = 1, which makes Dy
equal 1. This is shown in the state table with three 1’s under the column for
next state of A. Similarly, the input equation for flip-flop B is

Ds=A'x
