 

Section 10.6.

Frame Systems and Semantic Networks 321

 

property of monotonicity: if Pfollows from KB, then it still follows when KB is augmented by
TELL(KB,S)In other words,

ifKB} Pthen (KB AS)+ P

Inheritance with exceptions is nonmonotonic: from the semantic network in Figure 10.7 it
follows that Bill has 4 legs, but if we were to add the new statement Rel(Legs, Cats, 3), then it no
longer follows that Bill has 4 legs. There are two ways to deal with this.

First, we could switch from first-order logic to a nonmonotonic logic that explicitly deals
with default values. Nonmonotonic logics allow you to say that a proposition P should be treated
as true until additional evidence allows you to prove that P is false. There has been quite a lot
of interesting theoretical work in this area, but so far its impact on practical systems has been
smaller than other approaches, so we will not address it in this chapter.

Second, we could treat the addition of the new statement as a RETRACT followed by a TELL.
Given the way we have defined Rel, this makes perfect sense. We do not make statements of the
form TELL(KB, Rel(R,A,B)). Instead, we make one big equivalence statement of the form

TELL(KB, Vr,a,b Rel(r,a,b) = ...)

where the indicate all the possible Rel’s. So to add Rel(Legs, Cats, 3), we would have to
remove the old equivalence statement and replace it by a new one. Once we have altered the
knowledge base by removing a sentence from it (and notjust adding a new one) we should not
be surprised at the nonmonotonicity. Section 10.8 discusses implementations of RETRACT.

Implementation of semantic networks

Once we have decided on a meaning for our networks, we can start to implement the network. Of
course, we could choose to implement the network with a theorem prover or logic programming
language, and in some cases this would be the best choice. But for networks with simple
semantics, a more straightforward implementation is possible. A node in anetwork is represented
by a data structure with fields for the basic taxonomic connections: which categories it is a
member of; what elements it has; what immediate subsets and supersets. It also has fields
for other relations in which it participates. The RELS-IN and RELS-OuT fields handle ordinary
(unboxed) links, and the ALL-RELS-IN and ALL-RELS-OUT fields handle boxed links. Here is the
data type definition for nodes:

 

datatype SEM-NET-NODE
components: NAME, MEMBERSHIPS, ELEMENTS, SUPERS, SUBS,
RELS-IN, RELS-OUT, ALL-RELS-IN, ALL-RELS-OUT

 

 

 

Each of the four REL-fields is organized as a table indexed by the relation. We use the function
Looxup(key, table) to find the value associated with a key in a table. So, if we have the two
links Opus Frend Bill and Opus "renSteve, then LOOKUP(Friend,RELS-OUT(Opus)gives us the
set {Bill, Steve}.

 
