400 curren ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

receiver

FIFO

baud rate. The CPU can transfer another character to the transmitter register
after checking the flag in the status register. The interface is said to be double
buffered because a new character can be loaded as soon as the previous one
starts transmission.

The operation of the receiver portion of the interface is similar. The
receive data input is in the 1-state when the line is idle. The receiver control
monitors the receive-data line for a 0 signal to detect the occurrence of a start
bit. Once a start bit has been detected, the incoming bits of the character are
shifted into the shift register at the prescribed baud rate. After receiving the
data bits, the interface checks for the parity and stop bits. The character without
the start and stop bits is then transferred in parallel from the shift register to
the receiver register. The flag in the status register is set to indicate that the
receiver register is full. The CPU reads the status register and checks the flag,
and if set, it reads the data from the receiver register.

The interface checks for any possible errors during transmission and sets
appropriate bits in the status register. The CPU can read the status register at
any time to check if any errors have occurred. Three possible errors that the
interface checks during transmission are parity error, framing error, and over-
run error. Parity error occurs if the number of 1’s in the received data is not
the correct parity. A framing error occurs if the right number of stop bits is not
detected at the end of the received character. An overrun error occurs if the
CPU does not read the character from the receiver register before the next one
becomes available in the shift register. Overrun error results in a loss of
characters in the received data stream.

 

  

First-In, First-Out Buffer
A first-in, first-out (FIFO) buffer is a memory unit that stores information in
such a manner that the item first in is the item first out. A FIFO buffer comes
with separate input and output terminals. The important feature of this buffer
is that it can input data and output data at two different rates and the output
data are always in the same order in which the data entered the buffer. When
placed between two units, the FIFO can accept data from the source unit atone
rate of transfer and deliver the data to the destination unit at another rate. If
the source unit is slower than the destination unit, the buffer can be filled with
data at a slow rate and later emptied at the higher rate. If the source is faster
than the destination, the FIFO is useful for those cases where the source data
arrive in bursts that fill out the buffer but the time between bursts is long
enough forthe destination unit to empty some or all the information from the
buffer. Thus a FIFO buffer can be useful in some applications when data are
transferred asynchronously. It piles up data as they come in and gives them
away in the same order when the data are needed.

The logicdiagram of a typical 4 x 4 FIFO bufferis shown in Fig. 11-9. It
consists of four 4-bit registers RI, I = 1, 2,3,4, and a control register with
