 

506 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

You should be aware that the assumption of independence of disk failures
is not valid. Power failures and natural disasters, such as earthquakes, fires,
and floods, may result in damage to both disks at the same time. Also,
manufacturing defects in a batch of disks can cause correlated failures. As disks
age, the probability of failure increases, increasing the chance that a second disk
will fail while the first is being repaired. In spite of all these considerations,
however, mirrored-disk systems offer much higher reliability than do single-
disk systems.

Power failures are a particular source of concern, since they occur far more
frequently than do natural disasters. However, even with mirroring of disks, if
writes are in progress to the same block in both disks, and power fails before
both blocks are fully written, the two blocks can be in an inconsistent state. The
solution to this problem is to write one copy first, then the next, so that one of
the two copies is always consistent. Some extra actions are required when we
restart after a power failure, to recover from incomplete writes.

14.5.2 Improvement in Performance via Parallelism

Now let us consider the benefit of parallel access to multiple disks. With disk
mirroring, the rate at which read requests can be handled is doubled, since read
requests can be sent to either disk (as long as both disks in a pair are functional,
as is almost always the case). The transfer rate of each read is the same as ina
single-disk system, but the number of reads per unit time has doubled.

With multiple disks, we can improve the transfer rate as well (or instead) by
striping data across multiple disks. In its simplest form, data striping consists
of splitting the bits of each byte across multiple disks; such striping is called
bit-level striping. For example, if we have an array of eight disks, we write bit
i of each byte to disk i, The array of eight disks can be treated as a single disk
with sectors that are eight times the normal size, and, more important, that have
eight times the access rate. In such an organization, every disk participates in
every access (read or write), so the number of accesses that can be processed
per second is about the same as on a single disk, but each access can read eight
times as many data in the same time as ona single disk.

Bit-level striping can be generalized to a number of disks that either is a
multiple of 8 or divides 8. For example, if we use an array of four disks, bits i
and 4+i of each byte go to disk i. Further, striping does not need to be at the level
of bits of a byte: For example, in block-level striping, blocks of a file are striped
across multiple disks; with n disks, block i of a file goes to disk (i mod n) + 1.
Other levels of striping, such as bytes of a sector or sectors of a block, also are
possible.

In summary, there are two main goals of parallelism ina disk system:

1. Increase the throughput of multiple small accesses (that is, page accesses)
by load balancing.

2. Reduce the response time of large accesses.
