864

Chapter 29 Linear Programming

linear program for which the solution has the property that d, is the shortest-path
weight from s to v for each vertex v € V.

29.2-4
Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the maximum flow
in Figure 26.1(a).

29.2-5
Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow (29.47)-(29.50) so that it uses only
O(V + E) constraints.

29.2-6
Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graph G = (V, E), solves the maxi-
mum-bipartite-matching problem.

29.2-7

In the minimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem, we are given directed graph
G = (V, E) in which each edge (u,v) € E has a nonnegative capacity c(u,v) > 0
and a cost a(u,v). As in the multicommodity-flow problem, we are given k dif-
ferent commodities, K. K2..... K;., where we specify commodity i by the triple
K; = (s;,t;,d;). We define the flow f; for commodity i and the aggregate flow fiy
on edge (u,v) as in the multicommodity-flow problem. A feasible flow is one
in which the aggregate flow on each edge (u,v) is no more than the capacity of
edge (u,v). The cost of a flow is >, ,ey 4(U.V) fav, and the goal is to find the
feasible flow of minimum cost. Express this problem as a linear program.

 

29.3. The simplex algorithm

The simplex algorithm is the classical method for solving linear programs. In con-
trast to most of the other algorithms in this book, its running time is not polynomial
in the worst case. It does yield insight into linear programs, however, and is often
remarkably fast in practice.

In addition to having a geometric interpretation, described earlier in this chapter,
the simplex algorithm bears some similarity to Gaussian elimination, discussed in
Section 28.1. Gaussian elimination begins with a system of linear equalities whose
solution is unknown. In each iteration, we rewrite this system in an equivalent
form that has some additional structure. After some number of iterations, we have
rewritten the system so that the solution is simple to obtain. The simplex algo-
rithm proceeds in a similar manner, and we can view it as Gaussian elimination for
inequalities.
