438 © cHAPTER LEVEN Input-Output Organization

control field

by the transmitting station after any succession of five continuous 1’s. The
receiver always removes a 0 that follows a succession of five 1’s. Thus the bit
pattern 0111111 is transmitted as 01111101 and restored by the receiver to its
original value by removal of the 0 following the five 1's. As a consequence, no
pattern of 01111110 is ever transmitted between the beginning and ending
flags.

Following the flag is the address field, which is used by the primary
station to designate the secondary station address. When a secondary station
transmits a frame, the address tells the primary station which secondary
station originated the frame. An address field of eight bits can specify up to
256 addresses. Some bit-oriented protocols permit the use of an extended
address field. To do this, the least significant bit of an address byte is set to 0
if another address byte follows. A 1in the least significant bit of a byte is used
to recognize the last address byte.

Following the address field is the control field. The control field comes
in three different formats, as shown in Fig. 11-27. The information transfer
format is used for ordinary data transmission. Each frame transmitted in this
format contains send and receive counts. A station that transmits sequenced
frames counts and numbers each frame. This countis given by the send count
N,. A station receiving sequenced frames counts each error-free frame that it
receives. This count is given by the receive count N,. The N, count advances
whena frameis checked and found to be without errors. The receiver confirms
accepted numbered information frames by returning its N, count to the trans-
mitting station.

The P/F bit is used by the primary station to poll a secondary station to

Figure 11-27 Control field format in bit-oriented protocol
1203 4 5 6 7 8

 

—
Information tranter: | 0 7 Pe » |

Supervisory: | 1 0 | Code | PIF |

 

 

 

Unumbered: | 1 Code | P/F Code

 

 

 

 

 

Send count P/F Pollfinal
N, Receive count Code Binary code
