10 command

control command

status

output data

input data

SECTION 11-2 Input-Output Interface 387

selected responds to the function codeand proceeds to executeit. The function
code is referred to as an I/O command and is in essence an instruction that is
executed in the interface and its attached peripheral unit The interpretation
of the command depends on the peripheral that the processor is addressing.
There are four types of commands that an interface may receive. They are
classified as control, status, data output, and data input.

‘Acontrolcommandis issued to activate the peripheral and toinform it what
to do. For example, a magnetic tape unit may be instructed to backspace the
tape by one record, to rewind the tape, or to start the tape moving in the
forward direction. The particular control command issued depends on the
peripheral, and each peripheral receives its own distinguished sequence of
control commands, depending on its mode of operation.

A status command is used to test various status conditions in the interface
and the peripheral. For example, the computer may wish to check the status
of the peripheralbeforea transfer is initiated. During the transfer, one or more
errors may occur which are detected by the interface. These errors are desi
nated by setting bits in a status register that the processor can read at certain
intervals.

‘A data out put command causes the interface to respond by transferring data
from the bus into one of its registers. Consider an example with a tape unit.
The computer starts the tape moving by issuing a control command. The
processor then monitors the status of the tape by means of a status command.
‘When the tape is in the correct position, the processor issues a data output
command. The interface responds to the address and command and transfers
the information from the data lines in the bus to its buffer register. The interface
then communicates with the tape controller and sends the data to be stored
on tape.

Phe datainputcommand isthe ‘opposite of the data output. In this case the
interface receives an item of data from the peripheral and places it in its buffer
register. The processor checks if data are available by means of a status com-
mand and then issues a data input command. The interface places the data on
the data lines, where they are accepted by the processor.

 

V/O versus Memory Bus

Inaddition to communicating with /O, the processor must communicate with
the memory unit. Like the /O bus, the memory bus contains data, address,
and read/write control lines. There are three ways that computer buses can be
used to communicate with memory and LO:

1. Use two separate buses, one for memory and the other for /O.

2. Use one common bus for both memory and /O but have separate
control lines for each. .

3. Use one common bus for memory and /O with common control lines.
