Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

offers a book-length treatment of natural deduction. Gallier (1986) uses Gentzen sequents to
expound the theoretical underpinnings of automated deduction.

Conjunctive normal form and disjunctive normal form for propositional formulas were
known to Schréder (1877), although the principles underlying the construction of these forms
go back at least to Boole. The use of clausal form (conjunctive normal form for first-order
logic) depends upon certain techniques for manipulating quantifiers, in particular skolemization.
Whitehead and Russell (1910) expounded the so-called rules ofpassage (the actual term is from
Herbrand (1930)) that are used to move quantifiers to the front of formulas. (Moving all the
quantifiers to the front of a formula is called prenexing the formula, and a formula with all }
the quantifiers in front is said to be in prenex form.) Horn form was introduced by Alfred
Hom (1951). What we have called “implicative normal form" was used (with a right-to-left
implication symbol) in Robert Kowalski’s (1979b) Logic for Problem Solving, and this way of
writing clauses is sometimes called “Kowalski form."

Skolem constants and Skolem functions were introduced, appropriately enough, by Thoralf
Skolem (1920). The general procedure for skolemization is given in (Skolem, 1928), along with
the important notion of the Herbrand universe

Herbrand's theorem, named after the French logician Jacques Herbrand (1930), has played
a vital role in the development of automated reasoning methods, both before and after Robinson's
introduction ofresolution. This is reflected in ourreference to the "Herbrand universe" rather than -
the "Skolem universe," even though Skolem really invented this concept (and indeed Herbrand
does not explicitly use Skolem functions and constants, but a less elegant although roughly $
equivalent device). Herbrand can also be regarded as the inventor of unification, because a }
variant of the unification algorithm occurs in (Herbrand, 1930).

First-order logic was shown to have complete proof procedures by Gidel (1930), using |
methods similar to those of Skolem and Herbrand. Alan Turing (1936) and Alonzo Church (1936) §
simultaneously showed, using very different proofs, that validity in first-order logic was not
decidable. The excellent text by Enderton (1972) explains all of these results in a rigorous yet
moderately understandable fashion.

The first mechanical device to carry out logical inferences was constructed by the third
Earl of Stanhope (1753-1816). The Stanhope Demonstrator could handle syllogisms and certain
inferences in the theory of probability. The first mechanical device to carry out inferences in
mathematical logic was William Stanley Jevons's "logical piano," constructed in 1869. Jevons
was one of the nineteenth-century logicians who expanded and improved Boole's work; the
logical piano carried out reasoning in Boolean logic. An entertaining and instructive history of
these and other early mechanical devices for reasoning is given by Martin Gardner (1968).

The first published results from research on automated deduction using electronic com-
puters were those of Newell, Shaw, and Simon (1957) on the Logic Theorist. This program
was based on an attempt to model human thought processes. Martin Davis (1957) had actually
designed a program that came up with a proof in 1954, but the Logic Theorist's results were
published slightly earlier. Both Davis's 1954 program and the Logic Theorist were based on
somewhat ad hoc methods that did not strongly influence later automated deduction.

It was Abraham Robinson who suggested attempting to use Herbrand’s Theorem to gener-
ate proofs mechanically. Gilmore (1960) wrote a program that uses Robinson's suggestion in a
way influenced by the “Beth tableaux" method of proof (Beth, 1955). Davis and Putnam (1960)

 
