62 cHAFTER TWO Digital Components

‘address input lines

 

mxnROM
m= 24)

|

‘data output lines

 

 

 

Figure 2-13 Block diagram of read only memory (ROM).

An m x n ROM is an array of binary cells organized into m words of
bits each. As shown in the block diagram of Fig. 2-13, a ROM has k address
input lines to select one of 2‘ = m words of memory, and n output lines, one
for each bit of the word. An integrated circuit ROM may also have one or more
enable inputs for expanding a number of packages into a ROM with larger
capacity.

pc The ROM does not need a read-control line since at any given time, the
output lines automatically provide the n bits of the word selected by the
address value. Because the outputs are a function of only the present inputs
(the address lines), a ROM isclassified as a combinationalcircuit. In fact, aROM
is constructed internally with decoders and a set of OR gates. There is no need
for providing storage capabilities as in a RAM, since the values of the bits in
the ROM are permanently fixed.

ROMS find a wide range of applications in the design of digital systems.
Basically, a ROM generates an input-output relation specified by a truth table.
As such, it can implementany combinational circuit with kinputs and n outputs.
When employed in a computer system as a memory unit, the ROMis used for
storing fixed programs that are not to be altered and for tables of constants that
are not subject to change. ROM is also employedin the design of control units,
for digital computers. As such, they are used to store coded information that
represents the sequence of internal control variables needed for enabling the
various operations in the computer. A control unit that utilizes a ROM to store
binary control information is called a microprogrammed control unit. This
subject is dicsussed in more detail in Chapter 7.

‘Types of ROMs

The required paths in a ROM may be programmed in three different ways. The
first, mask programming, isdone by the semiconductor company during thelast
fabrication process of the unit. The procedure for fabricating a ROM requires
