324

Chapter 10. Logical Reasoning Systems

The CLASSIC language (Borgida ef a/., 1989) is a typical description logic. The syntax §

of CLASSIC descriptions is shown in Figure 10.11.!° For example, to say that bachelors are
unmarried, adult males we would write

Bachelor = And(Unmarried, Adult, Male)
The equivalent in first-order logic would be
Vx Bachelor(x) <2 Unmarried(x)A Adult(x) A Male(x)

Notice that the description logic effectively allows direct logical operations on predicates, rather 4

than having to first create sentences to be joined by connectives. Any description in CLASSIC can

be written in first-order logic, but some descriptions are more straightforward in CLASSIC. For

example, to describe the set of men with at least three sons who are all unemployed and mantied

to doctors, and at most two daughters who are all professors in physics or chemistry departments, |

we would use
And(Man, AtLeast(3, Son), AtMost(2, Daughter),
All(Son, And( Unemployed, Married, All(Spouse, Doctor))),
All(Daughter, And(Professor,Fills(Department, Physics, Chemistry))))

We leave it as an exercise to translate this into first-order logic.

 

Concept — Thing | ConceptName

| And(Concept,...)

| All(RoleName, Concept)
| ArLeast(integer, RoleName)
| AtMost(Integer, RoleName)
| Fills (Role Name, IndividualName, ...)
| SameAs(Path, Path)

| OneOf (individualName,...)

Path — [RoleName,...]

 

Figure 10.11 The syntax of descriptions in a subset of the CLASSIC language.

 

 

Perhaps the most important aspect of description logics is the emphasis on tractability of
inference. A problem instance is solved by describing it and asking if it is subsumed by one of

several possible solution categories. In standard first-order logic systems, predicting the solution 4

time is often impossible. It is often left to the user to engineer the representation to detour around
sets of sentences that seem to be causing the system to take several weeks to solve a problem.
The thrust in description logics, on the other hand, is to ensure that subsumption-testing can be
solved in time polynomial in the size of the problem description. The CLASSIC language satisfies
this condition, and is currently the most comprehensive language to do so.

10 Notice that the language does not allow one to simply state that one concept, or category, is a subset of another. This

is a deliberate policy: subsumption between categories must be derivable from some aspects of the descriptions of the
categories. Ifnot, then something is missing from the descriptions

 
