308 © cuarrennine Pipeline and Vector Processing

A and B are two fractions that represent the mantissas and a and b are the
exponents. The floating-point addition and subtraction can be performed in
four segments, as shown in Fig. 9-6. The registers labeled R are placed between
the segments to store intermediate results. The suboperations that are per-
formed in the four segments are:

1. Compare the exponents.
2. Align the mantissas.
3. Add or subtract the mantissas.
4. Normalize the result.

This follows theprocedureoutlined in the flowchart of Fig, 10-15 but withsome
variations that are used to reduce the execution time of the suboperations. The
exponents are compared by subtracting them to determine their difference.
The larger exponent is chosen as the exponent of the result. The exponent
difference determines how many times the mantissa associated with the
smaller exponent must be shifted to the right. This produces an alignment of
the two mantissas. It should be noted that the shift must be designed as a
combinational circuit to reduce the shift time. The two mantissas are added or
subtracted in segment 3. The result is normalized in segment 4. When an
overflow occurs, the mantissa of the sum or difference is shifted right and the
exponent incremented by one. Ifan underflow occurs, the number of leading
zeros in the mantissa determines the number of left shiftsin the mantissa and
the number that must be subtracted from the exponent.

The following numerical example may clarify the suboperations per-
formed in each segment. For simplicity, we use decimal numbers, although
Fig. 94 refers to binary numbers. Consider the two normalized floating-point
numbers:

X = 0.9504 x 10°
YY = 0.8200 x 10°

The two exponents are subtracted in the first segment toobtain3 ~ 2 = 1. The
larger exponent 3 is chosen as the exponent of the result. The next segment
shifts the mantissa of Y to the right to obtain

X = 09504 x 10°
Y = 0.0820 x 10°

This aligns the two mantissas under the same exponent. The addition of the
two mantissas in segment 3 produces the sum

Z = 1.0324 x 10°
