378

UNIQUE MAIN
‘SUBACTION.

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   

Chapter 12. Practical Planning

Figure 12.6 shows an example where the upward solution property does not hold. That is,
the abstract solution is inconsistent, but there is a decomposition that solves the problem. The
problem is taken from the O. Henry story The Gift ofthe Magi. A poor couple has only two prized
possessions; he a gold watch and she her beautiful long hair. They each plan to buy presents to
make the other happy. He decides to trade his watch to buy a fancy comb for her hair, and she
decides to sell her hair to get a gold chain for his watch. As Figure 12.6(b) shows, the resulting
abstract plan is inconsistent. However, it is still possible to decompose this inconsistent plan
into a consistent solution, if the right decomposition methods are available. In Figure 12.6(c)
we decompose the "Give Comb" step with an "installment plan" method. In the first step of the
decomposition, the husband takes possession of the comb, and gives it to his wife, while agreeing
to deliver the watch in payment at a later date. In the second step, the watch is handed over and
the obligation is fulfilled. A similar method decomposes the "Give Chain" step. As long as both
giving steps are ordered before the delivery steps, this decomposition solves the problem.

One way to guarantee the upward solution property is to make sure that each decomposition
method satisfies the unique main subaction condition: that there is one step of the decomposed
plan to which all preconditions and effects of the abstract operator are attached. In the Magi 4
example, the unique main subaction condition does not hold. It does not hold in Figure 123
either, although it would be if Own Land were a precondition of the Pay Builder step. Sometimes

 

—_——
Watch” Giye | —Watch |
zw Comb |Happy(She)

 

 

Watch Happy(He)
Start fatch 1D}

—
Hair Happy(She)

 

Finish Stiart Finish

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ive |Happy(He)
(a) Initiall Problem watch, Give |[Chehn
Hair Chain | —Hair
Shain

 

(b) Abstract Inconsistent Plan

 

Watch | Give Comb a en) Watch | Deliver | ~Watch
A (Qn Credit) [nappyiShe) | Watch —e
Start = _ Finish
NI Give Chain | Chain Deliver “Hair

Hair Owe (Hair) — ————w] f
On Credit) Hair | -Owe/Hair)
Warch| ( ) | Happy(He) Har (Hair)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(©) Decomposition of (b) into a Consistent Solution

 

 

Figure 26 (a) The Gift of the Magi problem. (b) The partial plan is inconsistent, because
there is no way to order the two abstract steps without a conflict. (¢) A decomposition that solves
the problem. This violates the upward solution property, because the inconsistent plan in (b) now
has a solution.

 

 

 

 
