SECTION 1-3 Interprocessor Arbitration 503

 

Highest Lowest
priority Priority
To next
Bus Bus Bus Bus weet
1—|et poh*}pt POP} PO pL PO
arbiter 1 arbiter 2 arbiter 3 arbiter 4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bus busy line

Figure 13-10 Serial (daisy-chain) arbitration.

priority in (PH) of the next-lower-priority arbiter. The Pl of the highest-priority
‘unit is maintained at a logic 1 value The highest-priority unit in the system
will always receive access to the system bus when it requests it. The PO output
for a particular arbiter is equal to 1 if its PI inputs equal to 1 and the processor
associated with the arbiter logic is not requesting control of the bus. This is the
way that priority is passed to the nextunit in the chain. Ifthe processor requests
control of the bus and the corresponding arbiter finds its Pl input equal to 1,
it sets its PO output to 0. Lower-priority arbiters receive a 0 in PI and generate
a Oin PO. Thus the processor whose arbiter has a PI = 1 and PO = Ois the
one that is given control of the system bus.

‘A processor may be in the middle of a bus operation when a higher-
priority processor requests the bus. The lower-priority processor must com-
plete its bus operation before it relinquishes control of the bus. The bus busy
line shown in Fig. 13-10 provides a mechanism for an orderly transfer of
control. The busy line comes from open-collector circuits in each unit and
provides a wired-OR logic connection. When an arbiter receives control of the
bus (because its PI = 1 and PO = 0) it examines the busy line. If the line is
inactive, it means that no other processor is using the bus. The arbiter activates
the busy line and its processor takes control of the bus. However, if the arbiter
finds the busy line active, it means that another processor is currently using
the bus. The arbiter keeps examining the busy line while the lower-priority
processor that lost control of the bus completes its operation. When the bus
busy line returns to its inactive state, the higher-priority arbiter enables the
busy line, and its corresponding processor can then conduct the required bus
transfers

Parallel Arbitration Logic

The parallel bus arbitration technique uses an external priority encoder and a
decoder as shown in Fig. 13-11. Each bus arbiter in the parallel scheme has
a bus request output line and a bus acknowledge input line Each arbiter
enables the request line when its processor is requesting access to the system
