tightly coupled

loosely coupled

SECTION 1.2 Interconnection Structures 491.

Multiprocessors are classified by the way their memory is organized. A
multiprocessor system with common shared memory is classified as a shared-
‘memory or tightly coupled multiprocessor. This does not preclude each processor
from having its own local memory. In fact, most commercial tightly coupled
multiprocessors provide a cache memory with each CPU. In addition, there is
a global common memory that all CPUs can access. Information can therefore
be shared among the CPUs by placing it in the comunon global memory.

Analternative model of microprocessor is the distributed-memory or loosely
coupled system. Each processor element in a loosely coupled system has its own
private local memory. The processors are tied together by a switching scheme
designed to route information from one processor to another through a mes-
sage-passing scheme. The processors relay program and data to other proces-
sors in packets. A packet consists of an address, the data content, and some
error detection code. The packetsare addressed toa specific processor or taken
by the firstavailable processor, depending on the communication system used.
Loosely coupled systems are most efficient when the interaction between tasks
is minimal, whereas tightly coupled systems can tolerate a higher degree of
interaction between tasks.

13.

Thecomponents that form a multiprocessor systemare CPUs, IOPs connected
to input-output devices, and a memory unit that may be partitioned into a
number of separate modules. The interconnection between the components
can have different physical configurations, depending on the number of trans-
fer paths that are available between the processors and memory in a shared
memory system or among the processing elements in a loosely coupled sys-
tem. Thereare several physical forms available forestablishing an interconnec-
tion network. Some of these schemes are presented in this section:

 

Interconnection Structures

1. Time-shared common bus

2. Multiport memory

3. Crossbar switch

4. Multistage switching network
5. Hypercube system

Time-Shared Common Bus

A common-bus multiprocessor system consists of a number of processors
connected through a common path toa memory unit. A time-shared common
bus for five processors is shown in Fig. 13-1. Only one processor can commu-
nicate with the memory or another processor at any given time. Transfer
