450

12.5

12.6

12.7

12.8

12.9

12.10

12.11

12.12

12.13

Chapter 12 File-System Implementation

Consider a system that supports the strategies of contiguous, linked,
and indexed allocation. What criteria should be used in deciding which
strategy is best utilized for a particular file?

Consider a file system on a disk that has both logical and physical block
sizes of 512 bytes. Assume that the information about each file is already
in memory. For each of the three allocation strategies (contiguous, linked,
and indexed), answer these questions:

a. How is the logical-to-physical address mapping accomplished in
this system? (For the indexed allocation, assume that a file is always
less than 512 blocks long.)

b. If we are currently at logical block 10 (the last block accessed was
block 10) and want to access logical block 4, how many physical
blocks must be read from the disk?

One problem with contiguous allocation is that the user must preallocate
enough space for each file. If the file grows to be larger than the space
allocated for it, special actions must be taken. One solution is to define
a file structure consisting of an initial contiguous area (of a specified
size). If this area is filled, the operating system automatically defines
an overflow area that is linked to the initial contiguous area. If the
overflow area is filled, another overflow area is allocated. Compare
this implementation of a file with the standard contiguous and linked
implementations.

Fragmentation on a storage device could be eliminated by recompaction
of the information. Typical disk devices do not have relocation or base
registers (such as are used when memory is to be compacted), so how can
we relocate files? Give three reasons why recompacting and relocation of
files are often avoided.

How do caches help improve performance? Why do systems not use
more or larger caches if they are so useful?

In what situations would using memory as a RAM disk be more useful
than using it as a disk cache?

Why is it advantageous to the user for an operating system to dynami-
cally allocate its internal tables? What are the penalties to the operating
system for doing so?

Explain why logging metadata updates ensures recovery of a file system
after a file system crash.

Explain how the VFS layer allows an operating system easily to support
multiple types of file systems.
