510

CHAPTER THIRTEEN Multiprocessors

without cache coherence enforcement mechanisms. To illustrate the problem,
consider the three-processor configuration with private caches shown in
Fig. 13-12. Sometime during the operation an element X from main memory
is loaded into the three processors, Pi, P,, and P5, As a consequence, it is also
copied into the private caches of the three processors. For simplicity, we
assume that X contains the value of 52. The load on X to the three processors
results in consistent copies in the caches and main memory.

Ifone of the processors performsa store to X, the copies of X in the caches
become inconsistent. A load by the other processors will not return the latest,
value. Depending on the memory update policy used in the cache, the main
memory may also be inconsistent with respect to the cache. This is shown in
Fig. 13-13. A store to X (of the value of 120) into the cache of processor P;
updates memory to the new value ina write-through policy. A write-through
policy maintains consistency between memory and the originating cache, but
the other two caches are inconsistent since they still hold the old value. In a
write-back policy, main memory is not updated at the time of the store. The
copies in the other two caches and main memory are inconsistent. Memory is
updated eventually when the modified data in the cache are copied back into
memory.

‘Another configuration that may cause consistency problems is a direct
memory access (DMA) activity in conjunction with an IOP connected to the
system bus. In the case of input, the DMA may modify locations in main
memory that also reside in cache without updating the cache During a DMA.
output, memory locations may be read before they are updated from the cache
when using a write-back policy. /O-based memory incoherence can be over-
come by making the IOP a participant in the cache coherent solution that is
Adopted in the system.

Solutions to the Cache Coherence Problem

Various schemes have been proposed to solve the cache coherence problem in
shared memory multiprocessors. We discuss some of these schemes briefly
here. See references 3 and 10 for more detailed discussions.

simple scheme is todisallow private caches for each processorandhave
a shared cache memory associated with main memory. Every data access is
made to the shared cache. This method violates the principle of closeness of
CPU to cache and increases the average memory access time. In effect, this
scheme solves the problem by avoiding it.

For performance considerations it is desirable to attach a private cache to
each processor. One scheme that has been used allows only nonshared and
read-only data to be stored in caches. Such items are called cachable. Shared
writable data are noncachable. The compiler must tag data as either cachable or
noncachable, and the system hardware makes sure that only cachable data are
stored in caches. The noncachable data remain in main memory. This method
