390

Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming

the number of scalar multiplications. Does this problem exhibit optimal substruc-
ture?

153-4

As stated, in dynamic programming we first solve the subproblems and then choose
which of them to use in an optimal solution to the problem. Professor Capulet
claims that we do not always need to solve all the subproblems in order to find an
optimal solution. She suggests that we can find an optimal solution to the matrix-
chain multiplication problem by always choosing the matrix Ax at which to split
the subproduct A; A; +--+ A; (by selecting k to minimize the quantity p;—; Px Pj)
before solving the subproblems. Find an instance of the matrix-chain multiplica-
tion problem for which this greedy approach yields a suboptimal solution.

153-5
Suppose that in the rod-cutting problem of Section 15.1, we also had limit /; on the
number of pieces of length 7 that we are allowed to produce, fori = 1,2,..., n.

Show that the optimal-substructure property described in Section 15.1 no longer
holds.

15.3-6

Imagine that you wish to exchange one currency for another. You realize that
instead of directly exchanging one currency for another, you might be better off
making a series of trades through other currencies, winding up with the currency
you want. Suppose that you can trade n different currencies, numbered 1,2,..., n,
where you start with currency 1 and wish to wind up with currency n. You are
given, for each pair of currencies i and j, an exchange rate r;;, meaning that if
you start with d units of currency i, you can trade for drjj; units of currency j.
A sequence of trades may entail a commission, which depends on the number of
trades you make. Let cg be the commission that you are charged when you make k
trades. Show that, if c, = 0 for allk = 1,2,..., n, then the problem of finding the
best sequence of exchanges from currency | to currency 7 exhibits optimal sub-
structure. Then show that if commissions c, are arbitrary values, then the problem
of finding the best sequence of exchanges from currency | to currency 1 does not
necessarily exhibit optimal substructure.

 

15.4 Longest common subsequence

Biological applications often need to compare the DNA of two (or more) dif-
ferent organisms. A strand of DNA consists of a string of molecules called
