848

Chapter 29 Linear Programming

of the line x; + x2 = z and the feasible region is the set of feasible solutions that
have objective value z. Figure 29.2(b) shows the lines x; + x2 = 0, x1 +x2 =4,
and x; + X2 = 8. Because the feasible region in Figure 29.2 is bounded, there
must be some maximum value z for which the intersection of the line x; + x2 = Z
and the feasible region is nonempty. Any point at which this occurs is an optimal
solution to the linear program, which in this case is the point x; = 2 and x2 = 6
with objective value 8.

It is no accident that an optimal solution to the linear program occurs at a vertex
of the feasible region. The maximum value of z for which the line x; + ¥2 = Z
intersects the feasible region must be on the boundary of the feasible region, and
thus the intersection of this line with the boundary of the feasible region is either a
single vertex or a line segment. If the intersection is a single vertex, then there is
just one optimal solution, and it is that vertex. If the intersection is a line segment,
every point on that line segment must have the same objective value; in particular,
both endpoints of the line segment are optimal solutions. Since each endpoint of a
line segment is a vertex, there is an optimal solution at a vertex in this case as well.

Although we cannot easily graph linear programs with more than two variables,
the same intuition holds. If we have three variables, then each constraint corre-
sponds to a half-space in three-dimensional space. The intersection of these half-
spaces forms the feasible region. The set of points for which the objective function
obtains a given value z is now a plane (assuming no degenerate conditions). If all
coefficients of the objective function are nonnegative, and if the origin is a feasible
solution to the linear program, then as we move this plane away from the origin, in
a direction normal to the objective function, we find points of increasing objective
value. (If the origin is not feasible or if some coefficients in the objective function
are negative, the intuitive picture becomes slightly more complicated.) As in two
dimensions, because the feasible region is convex, the set of points that achieve
the optimal objective value must include a vertex of the feasible region. Simi-
larly, if we have n variables, each constraint defines a half-space in n-dimensional
space. We call the feasible region formed by the intersection of these half-spaces a
simplex. The objective function is now a hyperplane and, because of convexity, an
optimal solution still occurs at a vertex of the simplex.

The simplex algorithm takes as input a linear program and returns an optimal
solution. It starts at some vertex of the simplex and performs a sequence of itera-
tions. In each iteration, it moves along an edge of the simplex from a current vertex
to a neighboring vertex whose objective value is no smaller than that of the current
vertex (and usually is larger.) The simplex algorithm terminates when it reaches
a local maximum, which is a vertex from which all neighboring vertices have a
smaller objective value. Because the feasible region is convex and the objective
function is linear, this local optimum is actually a global optimum. In Section 29.4,
