Problems 483

entry in the page table may haveivs own protection field to desentbe the access
rights of each page. The protection information isset into the descriptor by the
master control program of the operating system. Some of the access cights of
interest that are used for protecting the programs residing in memory are:

. Ful read and write privileges
.. Read only (write protection)

. Execute only (program protection)

. System only (operating system protection)

Pere

Full read and write privileges are given toa program when it is executing
its own instructions. Write protection is useful for sharing system programs
suchas utility programs and other library routines. These sstem programsare
stored in an area of memory where they can be shared by many users. They
canbe read by all programs, butnowritingis allowed. This protects themfrom
being changed by other programs.

“The execute-only condition protects progyams from being copied. It re-
stricts thesegmentto be referenced only during the instruction fetch phase but
not during the execute phase. Thus it allows the users to execute the segment
program instructions but prevents them from reading the instructions as data
for the purpose of copying their content.

Portions of the operating system will reside in memory at any given time.
These system programs must be protected by making them inassessible to
unauthorized users. The operating system protection condition is placed in the
descriptors of all operating system programs to prevent the occasional user
from accessing operating system segments.

 

 

 

PROBLEMS

 

 

JRA. a, Howmany 128 x BRAM chips are needed to provides memory capacity
cof 2048 bytes?
bb. How many lines of theaddress bus must be used to ea-ess 2068 bytes of
memory? How meny of these lines will be common to all chips?
¢. How many lines must be decoded for chip select? Specify the size of the
decoders.
32.2. Acomputer uses RAM chips of 1024 x 1 capacity.
a. How many chips are needed, and how should their eddeess lines be
canneted to provide e memary ca pacity of 2024 bytes?
'b. How many chips are needed to provide a memory capacity of 16K bytes?
Explain in words how the chips are to be connected to the address bes.
323. AROMchipof1024 x Bbits has four selectinputsand operates froma S-volt
