29

Linear Programming

Many problems take the form of maximizing or minimizing an objective, given
limited resources and competing constraints. If we can specify the objective as
a linear function of certain variables, and if we can specify the constraints on
resources as equalities or inequalities on those variables, then we have a linear-
programming problem. Linear programs arise in a variety of practical applica-
tions. We begin by studying an application in electoral politics.

A political problem

Suppose that you are a politician trying to win an election. Your district has three
different types of areas—urban, suburban, and rural. These areas have, respec-
tively, 100,000, 200,000, and 50,000 registered voters. Although not all the reg-
istered voters actually go to the polls, you decide that to govern effectively, you
would like at least half the registered voters in each of the three regions to vote for
you. You are honorable and would never consider supporting policies in which you
do not believe. You realize, however, that certain issues may be more effective in
winning votes in certain places. Your primary issues are building more roads, gun
control, farm subsidies, and a gasoline tax dedicated to improved public transit.
According to your campaign staff’s research, you can estimate how many votes
you win or lose from each population segment by spending $1,000 on advertising
on each issue. This information appears in the table of Figure 29.1. In this table,
each entry indicates the number of thousands of either urban, suburban, or rural
voters who would be won over by spending $1,000 on advertising in support of a
particular issue. Negative entries denote votes that would be lost. Your task is to
figure out the minimum amount of money that you need to spend in order to win
50,000 urban votes, 100,000 suburban votes, and 25,000 rural votes.

You could, by trial and error, devise a strategy that wins the required number
of votes, but the strategy you come up with might not be the least expensive one.
For example, you could devote $20,000 of advertising to building roads, $0 to gun
control, $4,000 to farm subsidies, and $9,000 to a gasoline tax. In this case, you
