Section 10.3

Logic Programming Systems 309

 

METAREASONING

CHRONOLOGICAL
BACKTRACKING

BACKUMPING

DEPENDENCY-
DIRECTED
BACKTRACKING

This query will be expensive to compute, because it must enumerate all person/income pairs, then
fetch the spouse for each person (failing on those that are not married, and looping on anyone who
is married multiple times), and finally check for the one person whose occupation is president.
Conjunctive queries like this often can be answered more efficiently if we first spend some time
to reorder the conjuncts to reduce the expected amount of computation. For this query, a better
ordering is .

Occupation(p President) A Married(s,p) A Income(s, i)

This yields the same answer, but with no backtracking at all, assuming that the Occupation and
Married predicates are indexed by their second arguments.

This reordering process is an example ofmetareasoning, or reasoning about reasoning. As
with constraint satisfaction search (Section 3.7), the heuristic we are using for conjunct ordering
is to put the most constraining conjuncts first. In this case it is clear that only one p satisfies
Occupation(p,President), but it is not always easy to predict in advance how many solutions
there will be to a predicate. Even if it were, it would not be a good idea to try all n! permutations
of an n-place conjunction for large n. Languages such as MRS (Genesereth and Smith, 1981;
Russell, 1985)allow the programmer to write metarules to decide which conjuncts are tried first.
For example, the user could write a rule saying that the goal with the fewest variables should be
tried first.

Some systems change the way backtracking is done rather than attempting to reorder
conjuncts. Consider the problem of finding all people x who come from the same town as the
president. One inefficient ordering of this query is:

Resident(p, town) A Resident(x, town) A Occupation(p President)

Prolog would try to solve this by enumerating all residents p of any town, then enumerating all
residents x ofthat town, and then checking ifp is the president. When the Occupation(p,President)
goal fails, Prolog backtracks to the most recent choice point, which is the Resident(x, town) goal.
This is called chronological backtracking; although simple, it is sometimes inefficient. Clearly,
generating a new x cannot possibly help p become president!

The technique of backjumping avoids such pointless repetition. In this particular problem,
abackjumping search would backtrack two steps to Resident(p, town) and generate a new binding
forp. Discovering where to backjump to at compilation time is easy for a compiler that keeps
global dataflow information. Sometimes, in addition to backjumping to a reasonable spot, the
system will cache the combination of variables that lead to the dead end, so that they will
not be repeated again in another branch of the search. This is called dependency-directed
backtracking. In practice, the overhead of storing all the dead ends is usually too great—as with
heuristic search, memory is often a stronger constraint than time. In practice, there are many
more backjumping systems than full dependency-directed backtracking systems.

The final kind of metareasoning is the most complicated: being able to remember a
previously computed inference rather than having to derive it all over again. This is important
because most logical reasoning systems are given a series of related queries. For example, a
logic-based agent repeatedly ASKS its knowledge base the question "what should I do now?"
Answering this question will involve subgoals that are similar or identical to ones answered the
previous time around. The agent could just store every conclusion that it is able to prove, but
this would soon exhaust memory. There must be some guidance to decide which conclusions are
