Problems for Chapter 8 207

Your task is to find a grouping of the jugs into pairs of red and blue jugs that hold
the same amount of water. To do so, you may perform the following operation: pick
a pair of jugs in which one is red and one is blue, fill the red jug with water, and
then pour the water into the blue jug. This operation will tell you whether the red
or the blue jug can hold more water, or that they have the same volume. Assume
that such a comparison takes one time unit. Your goal is to find an algorithm that
makes a minimum number of comparisons to determine the grouping. Remember
that you may not directly compare two red jugs or two blue jugs.

a. Describe a deterministic algorithm that uses @(n?) comparisons to group the
jugs into pairs.

b. Prove a lower bound of Q(n 1g) for the number of comparisons that an algo-
rithm solving this problem must make.

c. Give a randomized algorithm whose expected number of comparisons is
O(n lgn), and prove that this bound is correct. What is the worst-case num-
ber of comparisons for your algorithm?

8-5 Average sorting

Suppose that, instead of sorting an array, we just require that the elements increase
on average. More precisely, we call an n-element array A k-sorted if, for all
i=1,2,..., n—k, the following holds:

. Kk .
Jl. Dain AU
~ k

a. What does it mean for an array to be 1-sorted?

 

b. Give a permutation of the numbers 1,2,..., 10 that is 2-sorted, but not sorted.

c. Prove that an n-element array is k-sorted if and only if A[i] < Aff + 4] for all
i=1,2...., n—k.

d. Give an algorithm that k-sorts an n-element array in O(n lg(n/k)) time.

We can also show a lower bound on the time to produce a k-sorted array, when k
is a constant.

e. Show that we can sort a k-sorted array of length n in O(n lgk) time. (Hint:
Use the solution to Exercise 6.5-9. )

Jf. Show that when k is a constant, k-sorting an n-element array requires Q(n lg n)
time. (Hint: Use the solution to the previous part along with the lower bound
on comparison sorts.)
