FT

502 Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

The replacement of a bad block generally is not a totally automatic process
because the data in the bad block are usually lost. Thus, whatever file was
using that block must be repaired (for instance, by restoration from a backup
tape), and that requires manual intervention.

14.4 = Swap-Space Management

Swap-space management is another low-level task of the operating system.
Virtual memory uses disk space as an extension of main memory. Since disk
access is much slower than memory access, using swap space significantly
decreases system performance. The main goal for the design and implemen-
tation of swap space is to provide the best throughput for the virtual-memory
system. In this section, we discuss how swap space is used, where swap space
is located on disk, and how swap space is managed.

14.4.1 Swap-Space Use

Swap space is used in various ways by different operating systems, depending
on the implemented memory-management algorithms. For instance, systems
that implement swapping may use swap space to hold the entire process image,
including the code and data segments. Paging systems may simply store pages
that have been pushed out of main memory. The amount of swap space needed
ona system can therefore vary depending on the amount of physical memory,
the amount of virtual memory it is backing, and the way in which the virtual
memory is used. It can range from a few megabytes of disk space to gigabytes.

Some operating systems, such as UNIX, allow the use of multiple swap
spaces. These swap spaces are usually put on separate disks, so the load placed
on the I/O system by paging and swapping can be spread over the system’s I/O
devices.

Note that it is safer to overestimate than to underestimate swap space,
because if a system runs out of swap space it may be forced to abort processes
or may crash entirely. Overestimation wastes disk space that could otherwise
be used for files, but does no other harm.

14.4.2 Swap-Space Location

A swap space can reside in two places: Swap space can be carved out of the
normal file system, or it can be in a separate disk partition. If the swap space
is simply a large file within the file system, normal file-system routines can be
used to create it, name it, and allocate its space. This approach, though easy
to implement, is also inefficient. Navigating the directory structure and the
disk-allocation data structures takes time and (potentially) extra disk accesses.
External fragmentation can greatly increase swapping times by forcing multiple
