S12 Charen nuRTEN Muliqnowsnn

restricts the type of data stored in caches and introduces an extra software
overhead that may degradate

A scheme tat allows wnitable data to exist in at least one cache is a
method that employs a azntralized global table in its compiler. The status of
memory blocks is stored in the certral global table. Each block is identified as
read-only (RO) oF read and write (RW). All caches can have copies of blocks
identified as RO. Only one cache can have a copy of an RW block. Thus if the
data are updated in the cache with an RW block, the other caches are not
affected because they do not have a copy of this block.

The cache coherence problem can be solved by means of a cumbination
of software and hardware or by means of hardware-only schemes. The two
methods mentioned previously use software-based proceduresthat require the
ability to tag information in order to disable caching of shared writable data.
Hardware-only solutions are handied by the hardware automatically and have
the advantage of higher speed and program transparency. in the hardware
solution, the cache controlleris speciay designed toaliow it tomonitor all bus
requests from CPUs and 1OPs. Als caches attached to the bus constantly
monitor the network for possible wnite operations. Depending on the method
used, they must then either update or invalidate their own cache copies when
a match is detected. The bus controller that maru'tors this action is referred to

‘snoopy cache as a eroopy cache controtier, This is basically a hardware unit designed to main-
‘controller tain a bus-watching mechanism over ali the caches attached tothe bus.

Various schemes have been proposed to solve the cache coherence prob-
Jem by maans of snoopy cache protocol. The simplest method is to adopt a
write.through policy and use the following procedure. All the snoopy con-
trollers watch the bus for memory store operations. When a word in a cache
is updated by writing into it, the corresponding location in main memory is
also updated. The local snoopy controllers in ai} other caches check their
memory to determine if they have a copy of the word that has been overwritten.
fa copy exists in a remote cache, that location is marked invalid. Because all
caches snoop on all bus writes, whenever a word is written, the net effect
is to update it in the original cache and main memory and remove it from
all other caches. If at some future time a processor accexses the invalid
item from ite cache, the response is equivalent toa cache miss, and the updated
itemis transferred from main memory. Inthis way, inconsistent versions are
prevented.

 

 

PROBLEMS

 

 

 

134. Discuss the difference between tightly coupled multipranssors and loasely
coupled multiproe-ears from the Viewpoint of hard ware anganization and
progremuning techniques.
