 

14.8 Tertiary-Storage Structure 521

another computer. If both machines are of the same type and have the same
kind of removable drive, the only difficulty is knowing the contents and data
layout on the cartridge. But if the machines or drives are different, many
additional problems can arise. Even if the drives are compatible, different
computers may store bytes in different orders, and may use different encodings
for binary numbers and even for letters (such as ASCII on PCs versus EBCDIC on
mainframes).

Today’s operating systems generally leave the name-space problem
unsolved for removable media, and depend on applications and users to figure
out how to access and interpret the data. Fortunately, a few kinds of removable
media are so well standardized that all computers use them the same way. One
example is the CD. Music CDs use a universal format that is understood by any
CD drive. Data CDs are available in only a few different formats, so it is usual
for a CD drive and the operating-system device driver to be programmed to
handle all the common formats. DVD formats are also well standardized.

14.8.2.3 Hierarchical Storage Management

A robotic jukebox enables the computer to change the removable cartridge in a
tape or disk drive without human assistance. Two major uses of this technology
are for backups and hierarchical storage systems. The use of a jukebox for
backups is simple: when one cartridge becomes full, the computer instructs the
jukebox to switch to the next cartridge. Some jukeboxes hold tens of drives and
thousands of cartridges, with robotic arms managing the movement of tapes to
the drives.

A hierarchical storage system extends the storage hierarchy beyond pri-
mary memory and secondary storage (that is, magnetic disk) to incorporate
tertiary storage. Tertiary storage is usually implemented as a jukebox of tapes
or removable disks. This level of the storage hierarchy is larger, cheaper, and
probably slower.

Although the virtual-memory system can be extended in a straightforward
manner to tertiary storage, this extension is rarely carried out in practice. The
reason is that a retrieval from a jukebox can take tens of seconds or even
minutes, and such a long delay is intolerable for demand paging and for other
forms of virtual-memory use.

The usual way to incorporate tertiary storage is to extend the file sys-
tem. Small and frequently used files remain on magnetic disk, while large
and old files that are not actively used are archived to the jukebox. In some
file-archiving systems, the directory entry for the file continues to exist, but
the contents of the file no longer occupy space in secondary storage. If an
application tries to open the file, the open system call is suspended until the
file contents can be staged in from tertiary storage. When the contents are again
available from magnetic disk, the open operation returns control to the appli-
cation, which proceeds to use the disk-resident copy of the data. Hierarchical
storage management (HSM) has been implemented in ordinary time-sharing
