464 Chapter 13 I/O Systems

ground processing in kernel and application routines. We illustrate this point
with the Solaris kernel. In Solaris, interrupt handlers are executed as kernel
threads. A range of high priorities is reserved for these threads. These pri-
orities give interrupt handlers precedence over application code and kernel
housekeeping, and implement the priority relationships among interrupt han-
dlers. The priorities cause the Solaris thread scheduler to preempt low-priority
interrupt handlers in favor of higher-priority ones, and the threaded imple-
mentation enables multiprocessor hardware to run several interrupt handlers
concurrently. We describe the interrupt architecture of UNIX and Windows NT
in Appendix A and Chapters 21, respectively.

In summary, interrupts are used throughout modern operating systems to
handle asynchronous events and to trap to supervisor-mode routines in the
kernel. To enable the most urgent work to be done first, modern computers
use a system of interrupt priorities. Device controllers, hardware faults, and
system calls all raise interrupts to trigger kernel routines. Because interrupts
are used so heavily for time-sensitive processing, efficient interrupt handling is
required for good system performance.

13.2.3 Direct Memory Access

For a device that does large transfers, such as a disk drive, it seems waste-
ful to use an expensive general-purpose processor to watch status bits and
to feed data into a controller register 1 byte at a time—a process termed pro-
grammed I/O (PIO). Many computers avoid burdening the main CPU with PIO
by offloading some of this work to a special-purpose processor called a direct-
memory-access (DMA) controller. To initiate a DMA transfer, the host writes a
DMA command block into memory. This block contains a pointer to the source
of a transfer, a pointer to the destination of the transfer, and a count of the
number of bytes to be transferred. The CPU writes the address of this command
block to the DMA controller, then goes on with other work. The DMA controller
proceeds to operate the memory bus directly, placing addresses on the bus to
perform transfers without the help of the main CPU. A simple DMA controller is
a standard component in PCs, and bus-mastering I/O boards for the PC usually
contain their own high-speed DMA hardware.

Handshaking between the DMA controller and the device controller is
performed via a pair of wires called DMA-request and DMA-acknowledge.
The device controller places a signal on the DMA-request wire when a word
of data is available for transfer. This signal causes the DMA controller to
seize the memory bus, to place the desired address on the memory-address
wires, and to place a signal on the DMA-acknowledge wire. When the device
controller receives the DMA-acknowledge signal, it transfers the word of data
to memory, and removes the DMA-request signal.

When the entire transfer is finished, the DMA controller interrupts the CPU.
This process is depicted in Figure 13.5. When the DMA controller seizes the
