510 Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

the disks. A parity block cannot store parity for blocks in the same disk,
because a disk failure would result in loss of data as well as of parity, and
hence would not be recoverable. By spreading the parity across all the disks
in the set, RAID 5 avoids the potential overuse of a single parity disk that
can occur with RAID 4.

© RAID Level 6: RAID level 6, also called the P+Q redundancy scheme, is
much like RAID level 5, but stores extra redundant information to guard
against multiple disk failures. Instead of using parity, error-correcting
codes such as the Reed-Solomon codes are used. In the scheme shown in
Figure 14.9g, 2 bits of redundant data are stored for every 4 bits of data—
unlike 1 parity bit in level 5—and the system can tolerate two disk failures.

© RAID level 0 + 1: RAID level 0 + 1 refers to a combination of RAID
levels 0 and 1. RAID 0 provides the performance, while RAID 1 provides
the reliability. Generally, it provides better performance than RAID 5. It
is common in environments where both performance and reliability are
important. Unfortunately, it doubles the number of disks needed for
storage, as does RAID 1, so it is also more expensive. In RAID 0 + 1, a set
of disks are striped, and then the stripe is mirrored to another, equivalent
stripe. Another RAID option that is becoming available commercially is
RAID 1 + 0, in which disks are mirrored in pairs, and then the resulting
mirror pairs are striped. This RAID has some theoretical advantages over
RAID 0 + 1. For example, if a single disk fails in RAID 0 + 1, the entire stripe
is inaccessible, leaving only the other stripe available. With a failure in RAID
1+ 0, the single disk is unavailable, but its mirrored pair is still available as
are all the rest of the disks (Figure 14.10).

Finally, we note that numerous variations have been proposed to the basic
RAID schemes described here. As a result, some confusion may exist about the
exact definitions of the different RAID levels.

14.5.4 Selecting a RAID Level

Ifa disk fails, the time to rebuild its data can be significant and will vary with the
RAID level used. Rebuilding is easiest for RAID level 1, since data can be copied
from another disk; for the other levels, we need to access all the other disks in
the array to rebuild data in a failed disk. The rebuild performance of a RAID
system may be an important factor if continuous supply of data is required, as
it is in high-performance or interactive database systems. Furthermore, rebuild
performance influences the mean time to failure.

RAID level 0 is used in high-performance applications where data loss is
not critical. RAID level 1 is popular for applications that require high reliability
with fast recovery. RAID 0 + 1 and 1 + 0 are used where performance and
reliability are important, for example for small databases. Due to RAID 1’s high
