520. Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

For most kinds of tape drives, it is possible to locate to any block that has
been written on a tape. Ina partly filled tape, however, it is not possible to
locate into the empty space beyond the written area, because most tape drives
manage their physical space differently from disk drives. For a disk drive, the
sectors have a fixed size, and the formatting process must be used to place
empty sectors in their final positions before any data can be written. Most tape
drives have a variable block size, and the size of each block is determined on
the fly, when that block is written. If an area of defective tape is encountered
during writing, the bad area is skipped and the block is written again. This
operation explains why it is not possible to locate into the empty space beyond
the written area—the positions and numbers of the logical blocks have not yet
been determined.

Most tape drives have a read position operation that returns the logical
block number where the tape head is. Many tape drives also support a space
operation for relative motion. So, for example, the operation space -2 would
locate backward over two logical blocks.

For most kinds of tape drives, writing a block has the side effect of logically
erasing everything beyond the position of the write. In practice, this side effect
means that most tape drives are append-only devices, because updating a block
in the middle of the tape also effectively erases everything beyond that block.
The tape drive implements this appending by placing an end-of-tape (EOT)
mark after a block that is written. The drive refuses to locate past the EOT
mark, but it is possible to locate to the EOT and then to start writing. Doing
so overwrites the old EOT mark, and places a new one at the end of the new
blocks just written.

In principle, a file system can be implemented on a tape. But many of the
file-system data structures and algorithms would be different from those used
for disks, because of the append-only property of tape.

14.8.2.2 File Naming

Another question that the operating system needs to handle is how to name
files on removable media. For a fixed disk, naming is not difficult. On a PC, the
file name consists of a drive letter followed by a path name. In UNIX, the file
name does not contain a drive letter, but the mount table enables the operating
system to discover on what drive the file is located. But if the disk is removable,
knowing a drive that contained the cartridge at some time in the past does not
mean knowing how to find the file. If every removable cartridge in the world
had a different serial number, the name of a file on a removable device could
be prefixed with the serial number, but to ensure that no two serial numbers
are the same would require each one to be about 12 digits in length. Who could
remember the names of her files if she had to memorize a 12-digit serial number
for each one?

The problem becomes even more difficult when we want to write data
on a removable cartridge on one computer, and then use the cartridge in
