LI Algorithms 7

Chapter 24), and using a search engine to quickly find pages on which particular
information resides (related techniques are in Chapters 11 and 32).

Electronic commerce enables goods and services to be negotiated and ex-
changed electronically, and it depends on the privacy of personal informa-
tion such as credit card numbers, passwords, and bank statements. The core
technologies used in electronic commerce include public-key cryptography and
digital signatures (covered in Chapter 31), which are based on numerical algo-
rithms and number theory.

Manufacturing and other commercial enterprises often need to allocate scarce
resources in the most beneficial way. An oil company may wish to know where
to place its wells in order to maximize its expected profit. A political candidate
may want to determine where to spend money buying campaign advertising in
order to maximize the chances of winning an election. An airline may wish
to assign crews to flights in the least expensive way possible, making sure that
each flight is covered and that government regulations regarding crew schedul-
ing are met. An Internet service provider may wish to determine where to place
additional resources in order to serve its customers more effectively. All of
these are examples of problems that can be solved using linear programming,
which we shall study in Chapter 29.

Although some of the details of these examples are beyond the scope of this

book, we do give underlying techniques that apply to these problems and problem
areas. We also show how to solve many specific problems, including the following:

We are given a road map on which the distance between each pair of adjacent
intersections is marked, and we wish to determine the shortest route from one
intersection to another. The number of possible routes can be huge, even if we
disallow routes that cross over themselves. How do we choose which of all
possible routes is the shortest? Here, we model the road map (which is itself
a model of the actual roads) as a graph (which we will meet in Part VI and
Appendix B), and we wish to find the shortest path from one vertex to another
in the graph. We shall see how to solve this problem efficiently in Chapter 24.

We are given two ordered sequences of symbols, ¥ = (x1, X2..... Xm) and
Y = (yi. yo.---s Yn), and we wish to find a longest common subsequence of
X and Y. A subsequence of X is just X with some (or possibly all or none) of
its elements removed. For example, one subsequence of (A, B,C, D, E, F, G)
would be (B, C, E, G). The length of a longest common subsequence of X
and Y gives one measure of how similar these two sequences are. For example,
if the two sequences are base pairs in DNA strands, then we might consider
them similar if they have a long common subsequence. If X has m symbols
and Y has n symbols, then X and Y have 2” and 2” possible subsequences,
