456 charter TWELVE Memory Organization

content addressable
memory

medium. Bits are recorded as magnetic spots on the tape along several tracks.
Usually, seven or nine bits are recorded simultaneously to form a character
together with a parity bit Read/write heads are mounted one in each track so
that data can be recorded and read as a sequence of characters.

‘Magnetic tape units can be stopped, started to move forward or in re-
verse, or can be rewound. However, they cannot be started or stopped fast
enoughbetweenindividualcharacters. For this reason, information is recorded
in blocks referred to as records. Gaps of unrecorded tape are inserted between
records where the tape can be stopped. The tape starts moving while in a gap
and attains its constant speed by the time it reaches the next record. Each
record on tape has an identification bit pattern at the beginning and end. By
reading the bit pattern at the beginning, the tape control identifies the record
number. By reading the bit pattern at the end of the record, the control
recognizes the beginning of a gap. A tape unit is addressed by specifying the
record number and the number of characters in the record. Records may be of,
fixed or variable length.

12-4 Associative Memory

Many data-processingapplications require the search of itemsin a table stored
inmemory. An assembler program searches the symboladdress table in order
to extract the symbol's binary equivalent. An account number may be searched
ina file to determine the holder's name and account status. The established
way to search a table is to store all items where they can be addressed in
sequence. The search procedure is a strategy for choosing a sequence of
addresses, reading the content of memory at each address, and comparing the
information read with the item being searched until a match occurs. The
number of accesses to memory depends on the location of the item and the
efficiency of the search algorithm. Many search algorithms have been devel-
‘oped to minimize the number of accesses while searching for an item in a
random or sequential access memory.

The time required to find an item stored in memory can be reduced
considerably ifstored data canbe identified foraccess by the content of the data
itself rather than by an address. A memory unit accessed by content is called
an associative memory or content addressable memory (CAM). This type of memory
is accessed simultaneously and in parallel on the basis of data content rather
than by specific address or location. When a word is written in an associative
memory, no address is given. The memory is capable of finding an empty
unused location to store the word. When a word is to be read from an associa-
tive memory, the content of the word, or part of the word, is specified. The
memory locates all words which match the specified content and marks them
for reading.

Because of its organization, the associative memory is uniquely suited to
do parallel searches by data association. Moreover, searches can be done on
