  

Section 11.5.

A Partial-Order Planning Example 349

 

     
    
 

SOLUTION

COMPLETE PLAN
ACHIEVED

CONSISTENT PLAN

Solutions

A solution is a plan that an agent can execute, and that guarantees achievement of the goal. If
we wanted to make it really easy to check that a plan is a solution, we could insist that only fully
instantiated, totally ordered plans can be solutions. But this is unsatisfactory for three reasons.
First, for problems like the one in Figure 11.5, it is more natural for the planner to return a
partial-order plan than to arbitrarily choose one of the many linearizations of it. Second, some
agents are capable of performing actions in parallel, so it makes sense to allow solutions with
parallel actions. Lastly, when creating plans that may later be combined with other plans to
solve larger problems, it pays to retain the flexibility afforded by the partial ordering of actions.
Therefore, we allow partially ordered plans as solutions using a simple definition: a solution is
a complete, consistent plan. We need to define these terms.

A complete plan is one in which every precondition of every step is achieved by some
other step. A step achieves a condition if the condition is one of the effects of the step, and
if no other step can possibly cancel out the condition. More formally, a step S, achieves a
precondition c of the step Sj if (1) 5;~<Sj and c G EFFECTS(S;); and (2) there is no step 5; such
that (+c) G EFFECTS(S,), where S; ~< 5; ~< Sj in some linearization of the plan.

A consistent plan is one in which there are no contradictions in the ordering or binding
constraints. A contradiction occurs when both S;~< Sj and S; <5; hold or both v= and v=B
hold (for two different constants 4 and B). Both ~ and = are transitive, so, for example, a plan
with S, < Sp, Sp < $3, and S; < S| is inconsistent.

The partial plan in Figure 11.5 is a solution because all the preconditions are achieved.
From the preceding definitions, it is easy to see that any linearization of a solution is also a
solution. Hence the agent can execute the steps in any order consistent with the constraints, and
still be assured of achieving the goal.

11.5 A PARTIAL-ORDER PLANNING EXAMPLE

In this section, we sketch the outline of a partial-order regression planner that searches through
plan space. The planner starts with an initial plan representing the start and finish steps, and
on each iteration adds one more step. If this leads to an inconsistent plan, it backtracks and
tries another branch of the search space. To keep the search focused, the planner only considers
adding steps that serve to achieve a precondition that has not yet been achieved. The causal links
are used to keep track of this.

We illustrate the planner by returning to the problem of getting some milk, a banana, and a
drill, and bringing them back home. We will make some simplifying assumptions. First, the Go
action can be used to travel between any two locations. Second, the description ofthe Buy action
ignores the question of money (see Exercise 11.2). The initial state is defined by the following
operator, where HWS means hardware store and SM means supermarket:

Op(ACTION:Start, EFFECT:AK Home). Sells(HWS, Drill)
A Sells(SM Milk), Sells(SM,Banana))
