360

Chapter 15 Dynamic Programming

rods of smaller length in way that maximizes their total value. Section 15.2 asks
how we can multiply a chain of matrices while performing the fewest total scalar
multiplications. Given these examples of dynamic programming, Section 15.3 dis-
cusses two key characteristics that a problem must have for dynamic programming
to be a viable solution technique. Section 15.4 then shows how to find the longest
common subsequence of two sequences via dynamic programming. Finally, Sec-
tion 15.5 uses dynamic programming to construct binary search trees that are opti-
mal, given a known distribution of keys to be looked up.

 

15.1 Rod cutting

Our first example uses dynamic programming to solve a simple problem in decid-
ing where to cut steel rods. Serling Enterprises buys long steel rods and cuts them
into shorter rods, which it then sells. Each cut is free. The management of Serling
Enterprises wants to know the best way to cut up the rods.

We assume that we know, fori = 1,2,..., the price p; in dollars that Serling
Enterprises charges for a rod of length i inches. Rod lengths are always an integral
number of inches. Figure 15.1 gives a sample price table.

The rod-cutting problem is the following. Given a rod of length n inches and a
table of prices p; fori = 1,2, n, determine the maximum revenue 1, obtain-
able by cutting up the rod and selling the pieces. Note that if the price p, for a rod
of length n is large enough, an optimal solution may require no cutting at all.

Consider the case when n = 4. Figure 15.2 shows all the ways to cut up a rod
of 4 inches in length, including the way with no cuts at all. We see that cutting a
4-inch rod into two 2-inch pieces produces revenue p2 + p2 = 5 +5 = 10, which
is optimal.

We can cut up a rod of length n in 2”~! different ways, since we have an in-
dependent option of cutting, or not cutting, at distance 7 inches from the left end,

 

 

length i
price pj | 158

10
30

 

Figure 15.1 A sample price table for rods. Each rod of length i inches earns the company pj
dollars of revenue.
