strobe

handshaking

timing diagram

SECTION 113 Asynchronous Daa Transfer 391

select one of the four registers in the interface as specified in the table accom-
panying the diagram. The content of the selected register is transfer into the
CPU via the data bus when the /O read signal is enabled. The CPU transfers
binary information into the selected register via the data bus when the /O write
input is enabled.

11-3 Asynchronous Data Transfer

The internal operations in a digital system are synchronized by means of clock
pulses supplied by a common pulse generator. Clock pulses are applied to all
registers within a unit and all data transfers among internal registers occur
simultaneously during the occurrence of a clock pulse. Two units, such as a
CPU and an I/O interface, are designed independently of each other. If the
registers in the interface share a common clock with the CPU registers, the
transfer between the two units is said to be synchronous. In most cases, the
internal timing in each unit is independent from the other in that each uses its
‘own private clock for internal registers. In that case, the two units are said to
be asynchronous to each other. This approach is widely used in most computer
systems.

‘Asynchronous data transfer between two independent units requires
that control signals be transmitted between the communicating units to indi
cate the time at which data is being transmitted. One way of achieving this is
by means of a strobe pulse supplied by one of the units to indicate to the other
unit when the transfer has to occur. Another method commonly used is to
accompany each data item being transferred with a control signal that indicates
the presence of data in the bus. The unit receiving the data item responds with
another control signal to acknowledge receipt of the data. This type of agree-
ment between two independent units is referred to as handshaking.

The strobe pulse method and the handshaking method of asynchronous
data transfer are not restricted to VO transfers. In fact, they are used extensively
on numerous occasions requiring the transfer of data between two indepen-
dent units. In the general case we consider the transmitting unit as the source
and the receiving unit as the destination. For example, the CPU is the source
unit during an output or a write transfer and it is the destination unit during
an inputor aread transfer. Itis customary to specify the asynchronous transfer
between two independent units by means of a timing diagram that shows the
timing relationship that must exist between the control signals and the data in
the buses. The sequence of control during an asynchronous transfer depends
on whether the transfer is initiated by the source or by the destination unit.

 

Strobe Control

The strobe control method of asynchronous data transfer employs a single
control line to time each transfer. The strobe may be activated by either the
source or the destination unit. Figure 11-3(a) shows a source-initiated transfer.
