Section 10.8.

Managing Retractions, Assumptions, and Explanations 325

 

This sounds wonderful in principle, until one realizes that it can only have one of two conse-
quences: hard problems either cannot be stated at all, or require exponentially large descriptions!
However, the tractability results do shed light on what sorts of constructs cause problems, and
thus help the user to understand how different representations behave. For example, description
logics usually lack negation and disjunction. These both force first-order logical systems to
essentially go through an exponential case analysis in order to ensure completeness. For the
same reason, they are excluded from Prolog. CLASSIC only allows a limited form of disjunction
in the Fills and OneOf constructs, which allow disjunction over explicitly enumerated individuals
but not over descriptions. With disjunctive descriptions, nested definitions can lead easily to an
exponential number of altemative routes by which one category can subsume another.

Practical uses of description logics

Because they combine clear semantics and simple logical operations, description logics have
become popular with both the theoretical and practical AI communities. Applications have
included financial management (Mays et al., 1987), database interfaces (Beck ef al., 1989), and
software information systems (Devanbu er al., 1991). Because ofthe gradual extension of the class
of tractable languages, and a better understanding of what kinds of constructs cause intractability,
the efficiency of description logic systems has improved by several orders of magnitude over the
last decade

10.8 MANAGING RETRACTIONS, ASSUMPTIONS, AND EXPLANATIONS

‘We have said a great deal about TELL and ASK, but so far very little about RETRACT. Most logical
reasoning systems, regardless of their implementation, have to deal with RETRACT. As we have
seen, there are three reasons for retracting a sentence. It may be that a fact is no longer important,
and we want to forget about it to free up space for other purposes. It may be that the system
is tracking the current state of the world (without worrying about past situations) and that the
world changes. Or it may be that the system assumed (or determined) that a fact was true, but
now wants to assume (or comes to determine) that it is actually false. In any case, we want to be
able to retract a sentence from the knowledge base without introducing any inconsistencies, and
we would like the interaction with the knowledge base as a whole (the cycle of TELL, ASK and
RETRACT requests) to be efficient.

It takes a little experience to appreciate the problem. First, it is important to understand
the distinction between RETRACT(KB,P) and TELL(KB, =P). Assuming that the knowledge base
already contains P, adding ~P with TELL will allow us to conclude both P and —P, whereas
removing P with RETRACT will allow us to conclude neither P nor =P. Second, if the system
does any forward chaining, then RETRACT has some extra work to do. Suppose the knowledge
base was told Pand P = Q, and used that to infer Q and add it to the knowledge base. Then
RETRACT(KB, P) must remove both P and Q to keep the knowledge base consistent. However, if
there is some other independent reason for believing Q (perhaps both R and R => Q have been
