36 carrer one Digital Logic Circuits

have no effect; that is, the state of the flip-flops will not change. Thus when
x = 0,allfour inputs of the flip-flops are equal to and the state of the flip-flops
remains unchanged even though clock pulses are applied continuously.

Design Procedure

The design of sequential circuits follows the outline described in the preceding
example. The behavior of the circuits first formulated in a state diagram. The
number of flip-flops needed for the circuit is determined from the number of
bits listed within the circles of the state diagram. The number of inputs for the
Circuits specified along the directed lines between the circles. We then assign
letters to designate all flip-flops and input and output variables and proceed
to obtain the state table.

For m flip-flops and n inputs, the state table will consist of m columns for
the present state, n columns for the inputs, and m columns for the next state.
‘The number of rows in the table will be up to 2"**, one row for each binary
combination of present state and inputs For each row we list the next state as
specified by the state diagram. Next, the flip-flop type to be used in the circuit
is chosen. The state table is then extended into an excitation table by including
columns for each input of each flip-flop. The excitation table for the type of
flip-flop in use can be found in Table 1-3. From the informationavailablein this
table and by inspecting presentstate-to-nextstate transitionsin the state table,
wwe obtain the information for the flop-flop input conditions in the excitation
table.

The truth table for the combinational circuit part of the sequential circuit
is available in the excitation table. The present-state and input columns consti-
tute the inputs in the truth table. The flip-flop input conditions constitute the
outputs in the truth table. By means of map simplification we obtain a set of
flip-flop input equations for the combinational circuit Each flip-flop input
equation specifies a logic diagram whose output must be connected to one of
the flip-flop inputs. The combinational circuit so obtained, together with the
flip-flops, constitutes the sequential circuit.

The outputs of flip-flops are often considered to be part of the outputs
of the sequential circuit. However, the combinational circuit may also contain
external outputs. In such a case the Boolean functions for the external outputs
are derived from the state table by combinational circuit design techniques.

Asset of flip-flop input equations specifies a sequentialcircuit in algebraic
form. The procedure for obtaining the logic diagram from a setof flip-flop input
equations is a straightforward process. First draw the flip-flops and label all
their inputs and outputs. Then draw the combinational circuit from the
Boolean expressions given by the flip-flop input equations. Finally, connect
outputs of flip-flops to inputs in the combinational circuit and outputs of the
combinational circuit to flip-flop inputs.
