pipeline conflicts

SECTION 94 Instruction Pipeline 313

 

 

 

 

Step: rf2tstetsfolrfelsfolul[rls
tosction 1 | 1 | pa] ro | ex
2 Ft | pal Fo | ex
(Brann) 3 Fi | pa| ro | ex
4 | - | - | # [pa] ro | ex

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9-8 Timing of instruction pipeline

ofa branch instruction, each segment operates on different instructions. Thus,
in step 4, instruction 1 is being executed in segment EX; the operand for
instruction 2 is being fetched in segment FO; instruction 3 is being decoded in
segment DA; and instruction 4 is being fetched from memory in segment FI.

‘Assume now that instruction 3 is a branch instruction. As soon as this
instruction is decoded in segment DA in step 4, the transfer from FI to DA of
the other instructions is halted until the branch instruction is executed in step
6. If the branch is taken, a new instruction is fetched in step 7. If the branch
is not taken, the instruction fetched previously in step 4 can be used. The
pipeline then continues until a new branch instruction is encountered.

Another delay may occur in the pipeline if the EX segment needs tostore
the result of the operation in the data memory while the FO segment needs
to fetch an operand. In that case, segment FO must wait until segment EX has
finished its operation.

In general, there are three major difficulties that cause the instruction
pipeline to deviate from its normal operation.

1. Resource conflicts caused by access to memory by two segments at the
same time. Most of these conflicts can be resolved by using separate
instruction and data memories.

2. Data dependency conflicts arise when an instruction depends on the
result of a previous instruction, but this result is not yet available.

3. Branch difficulties arise from branch and other instructions that change
the value of PC.

Data Dependency
A difficulty that may caused a degradation of performance in an instruction
pipeline is due to possible collision of data or address. A collision occurs when
