SECTION 11-6 Direct Memory Access 415

programmer can use any bit configuration for the mask register. The interrupt
status bit must be cleared so it can be set again when a higher-priority interrupt
occurs. The contents of processor registers are saved because they may be
needed by the program that has been interrupted aftercontrol returns toit. The
interrupt enable IEN is then set to allow other (higher-priority) interrupts and
the computer proceeds to service the interrupt request

The final sequence in each interrupt service routine must have instruc-
tions to control the interrupt hardware in the following manner:

1. Clear interrupt enable bit IEN.

2. Restore contents of processor registers

3. Clear the bit in the interrupt register belonging to the source that has
been serviced.

4. Set lower-level priority bits in the mask register.

5. Restore return address into PC and set IEN.

The bit in the interrupt register belonging to the source of the interrupt
must be cleared so that it will be available again for the source to interrupt. The
lower-priority bits in the mask register (including the bit of the source being
interrupted) are set so they can enable the interrupt. The return to the inter-
rupted program is accomplished by restoring the return address to PC. Note
that the hardwaremust be designed so that nointerrupts occur while executing
steps 2 through 5; otherwise, the return address may be lost and the informa-
tion in the mask and processor registers may be ambiguous if an interrupt
is acknowledged while executing the operations in these steps. For this reason
IEN is initially cleared and then set after the return address is transferred into
PC.

The initial and final operations listed above are referred to as overhead
operations or housekeeping chores. They are not part of the service program
proper but are essential for processing interrupts. All overhead operations can
be implemented by software. This is done by inserting the proper instructions
at the beginning and at the end of each service routine. Some of the overhead
operations can be done automatically by the hardware. The contents of proces-
sor registers can be pushed into a stack by the hardware before branching to
the service routine. Other initial and final operations can be assigned to the
hardware. In this way, it is possible to reduce the time between receipt of an
interrupt and the execution of the instructions that service the interrupt source.

11-6 Direct Memory Access (DMA)

The transfer of data between a fast storage device such as magnetic disk and
memory is often limited by the speed of the CPU. Removing the CPU from the
path and letting the peripheral device manage the memory buses directly
