450

(CHAPTER TWELVE Memory Organization

address and an 8-bit bidirectional data bus. The read and write inputs spec:

the memory operation and the two chips select (CS) control inputs are ic:
enabling the chip only when itis selected by the microprocessor. The availa:
ity of more than one control input to select the chip facilitates the decoding <
the address lines when multiple chips are used in the microcomputer. The rea
and write inputs are sometimes combined intooneline labeled R/W. When th
chip is selected, the two binary states in this line specify the two operation:
of read or write.

The function table listed in Fig. 12-2(b) specifies the operation of theRAN
chip. The unit is in operation only when CS1 = 1 and CS2 = 0. The bar on top
of the second select variable indicates that this input is enabled when it is equa:
to 0. If the chip select inputs are not enabled, orf they are enabled but theread
or write inputs are not enabled, the memory is inhibited and its data bus is in
a high-impedance state. When CS1 = 1 and C52 = 0, the memory can be
placed in a write or read mode. When the WR input is enabled, the memory
stores a byte from the data bus into a location specified by the address input
lines. When the RD input is enabled, the content of the selected byte is placed
into the data bus. The RDand WRsignals control the memory operation as well
as the bus buffers associated with the bidirectional data bus.

AROM chip is organized externally in a similar manner. However, since
aROMcan only read, the data bus can only be in an output mode. The block
diagram of a ROM chip is shown in Fig. 12-3. For the same-size chip, it is
possible to have more bits of ROM than of RAM, because the internal binary
cells in ROM occupy less space than in RAM. For this reason, the diagram
specifies a 512-byte ROM, while the RAM has only 128 bytes.

The nineaddress lines in the ROM chip specify any one of the 512 bytes
stored in it. The two chip select inputs must be CS1 = 1 and C32 = 0 for the
unit to operate. Otherwise, the data bus is in a high-impedance state. There
isnoneed fora read or write control because the unit can only read. Thus when
the chip is enabled by the two select inputs, the byte selected by the address
lines appears on the data bus.

    
 

  

Memory Address Map
The designer of a computer system must calculate the amount of memory
required for the particular ap plication and assign it to either RAM or ROM. The
interconnection between memory and processor is then established from
knowledge of the size of memory needed and the type of RAM and ROM chips
available. The addressing of memory can be established by means of a table
that specifies the memory address assigned to each chip. The table, called a
memory address map, is a pictorial representation of assigned address space for
each chip in the system.

To demonstrate with a particular example, assume that a computer sys-
tem needs 512 bytes of RAM and 512 bytes of ROM. The RAM and ROM chips
