24.2. Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs 657

cess the vertices in topologically sorted order, we relax the edges on p in the

order (Vo, V1), (V1, V2),---, (v1, Ve). The path-relaxation property implies that
v;.d = 6(s,v;) at termination for i = 0,1,..., k. Finally, by the predecessor-
subgraph property, Gz is a shortest-paths tree. .

An interesting application of this algorithm arises in determining critical paths
in PERT chart’ analysis. Edges represent jobs to be performed, and edge weights
represent the times required to perform particular jobs. If edge (u,v) enters ver-
tex v and edge (v, x) leaves v, then job (uw, v) must be performed before job (v, x).
A path through this dag represents a sequence of jobs that must be performed in a
particular order. A critical path is a longest path through the dag, corresponding
to the longest time to perform any sequence of jobs. Thus, the weight of a critical
path provides a lower bound on the total time to perform all the jobs. We can find
a critical path by either
* negating the edge weights and running DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS, or
* running DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS, with the modification that we replace “oo”

by “—oo” in line 2 of INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE and “>” by “<” in the
RELAX procedure.

Exercises

24.2-1
Run DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS on the directed graph of Figure 24.5, using vertex r
as the source.

24.2-2
Suppose we change line 3 of DAG-SHORTEST-PATHS to read

3 for the first |V| — 1 vertices, taken in topologically sorted order
Show that the procedure would remain correct.

24,2-3

The PERT chart formulation given above is somewhat unnatural. In a more natu-
ral structure, vertices would represent jobs and edges would represent sequencing
constraints; that is, edge (wu, v) would indicate that job u must be performed before
job v. We would then assign weights to vertices, not edges. Modify the DAG-
SHORTEST-PATHS procedure so that it finds a longest path in a directed acyclic
graph with weighted vertices in linear time.

 

2“PERT” is an acronym for “program evaluation and review technique.”
