SECTION 9.7 Array Processors 327

high performance by means of parallel processing with multiple functional
units, It includes an arithmeticunit containing one or more pipelined floating-
point adders and multipliers. The array processor can be programmed by the
user to accommodate a variety of complex arithmetic problems.

Figure 9-14 shows the interconnection of an attached array processor to
a host computer. The host computer is a general-purpose commercial com-
puter and the attached processor is a back-end machine driven by the host
computer. The array processor is connected through an input-output con-
troller to the computer and the computer treatsit like an external interface. The
data for the attached processor are transferred from main memory to a local
memory through a high-speed bus. The general-purpose computer without
the attached processor serves the users that need conventional data process-
ing. The system with the attached processor satisfies the needs for complex
arithmetic applications.

‘Some manufacturers of attached array processors offer a model that can
be connected to a variety of different host computers. For example, when
attached toa VAX 11 computer, the FSP-164/MAX from Floating-Point Systems
increases the computing power of the VAX to 100 megaflops. The objective of
the attached array processor is to provide vector manipulation capabilities to
a conventional computer at a fraction of the cost of supercomputers.

SIMD Array Processor

‘An SIMD array processor is a computer with multiple processing units oper-
ating in parallel. The processing units are synchronized to perform the same
operation under the control ofa common control unit, thus providing a single
instruction stream, multiple data stream (SIMD) organization. A general block
diagram of an array processor is shown in Fig. 9-15. It contains a set of identical
processing elements (PEs), each having a local memory M. Each processor
clement includes an ALU, a floating-point arithmetic unit, and working regis-
ters. The master control unit controls the operations in the processor elements.
The main memory is used for storage of the program. The function of the
master control unit is to decode the instructions and determine how the
instruction is to be executed. Scalar and program control instructions are

Figure 9-14 Attached array processor with host computer.
‘General:purpose Tnpu output “Atached aay
aa | ee | SEE

pees

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
