Chapter 29 Linear Programming 849

we shall use a concept called “duality” to show that the solution returned by the
simplex algorithm is indeed optimal.

Although the geometric view gives a good intuitive view of the operations of the
simplex algorithm, we shall not refer to it explicitly when developing the details
of the simplex algorithm in Section 29.3. Instead, we take an algebraic view. We
first write the given linear program in slack form, which is a set of linear equalities.
These linear equalities express some of the variables, called “basic variables,” in
terms of other variables, called “nonbasic variables.’ We move from one vertex
to another by making a basic variable become nonbasic and making a nonbasic
variable become basic. We call this operation a “pivot” and, viewed algebraically,
it is nothing more than rewriting the linear program in an equivalent slack form.

The two-variable example described above was particularly simple. We shall
need to address several more details in this chapter. These issues include iden-
tifying linear programs that have no solutions, linear programs that have no finite
optimal solution, and linear programs for which the origin is not a feasible solution.

Applications of linear programming

Linear programming has a large number of applications. Any textbook on opera-
tions research is filled with examples of linear programming, and linear program-
ming has become a standard tool taught to students in most business schools. The
election scenario is one typical example. Two more examples of linear program-
ming are the following:

 

* An airline wishes to schedule its flight crews. The Federal Aviation Admi
tration imposes many constraints, such as limiting the number of consecutive
hours that each crew member can work and insisting that a particular crew work
only on one model of aircraft during each month. The airline wants to schedule
crews on all of its flights using as few crew members as possible.

* An oil company wants to decide where to drill for oil. Siting a drill at a particu-
lar location has an associated cost and, based on geological surveys, an expected
payoff of some number of barrels of oil. The company has a limited budget for
locating new drills and wants to maximize the amount of oil it expects to find,
given this budget.

With linear programs, we also model and solve graph and combinatorial prob-
lems, such as those appearing in this textbook. We have already seen a special
case of linear programming used to solve systems of difference constraints in Sec-
tion 24.4. In Section 29.2, we shall study how to formulate several graph and
network-flow problems as linear programs. In Section 35.4, we shall use linear
programming as a tool to find an approximate solution to another graph problem.
