byte

interface

SECTION 11-2 Input-Output Interface 385,

the familiar typewriter controls, such as backspace (BS), horizontal tabulation
(HT), and carriage return (CR). Information separators are used to separate the
data into divisions like paragraphs and pages. They include characters such as
record separator (RS) and file separator (FS). The communication control char-
acters are useful during the transmission of text between remote terminals.
Examples of communication control characters are STX (start of text)and ETX
(end of text), whichare used toframea text message when transmitted through
a communication medium.

ASCII is a7-bit code, but most computers manipulate an 8-bit quantity
asa single unit called a byte. Therefore, ASCII characters most often are stored
one per byte. The extra bit is sometimes used for other purposes, depending
on the application. For example, some printers recognize &-bit ASCII characters
with the most significant bit set to 0. Additional 128 8-bit characters with the
most significant bit set to 1 are used for other symbols, such as the Greek
alphabet or italic type font. When used in data communication, the eighth bit
may be employed to indicate the parity of the binary-coded character.

11-2 Input-Output Interface

Input-output interface provides a method for transferring information be-
tween internal storage and external /O devices. Peripherals connected to a
computer need special communication links for interfacing them with the
central processing unit. The purpose of the communication link is to resolve
the differences that exist between the central computer and each peripheral.
The major differences are:

1. Peripherals are electromechanical and electromagnetic devices and their
manner of operation is different from the operation of the CPU and
memory, which are electronicdevices. Therefore, a conversion ofsignal
values may be required.

2. The data transfer rate of peripherals is usually slower than the transfer
rate of the CPU, and consequently, a synchronization mechanism may
be needed.

3. Data codes and formats in peripherals differ from the word format in
the CPU and memory.

4, The operating modes of peripherals are different from each other and
each must be controlled so as not to disturb the operation of other
peripherals connected to the CPU.

To resolve these differences, computer systems include special hardware
components between the CPU and peripherals to supervise and synchronize
all input and output transfers. These components are called interface units
because they interface between the processor bus and the peripheral device.
