oa.

3

9-4,

9.

99.

9:10.

SATION ST Acray Process 329

   

PROBLEMS

 

 

 

In certain scientific computations it is necessacy to perform the arithmetic

operation (A; + B.)(C: + D}) with a straam of numbers. Spexify a pipaline

configuration #0 carry out this task. List the contents of all registers in the

pipeline for i = 1 through 6.

Draw @ space-time diagram for @ six-segment pipeline showing the time it

takes to process eight tasks.

Determine the number of dock cydes that it takes to process 200 tasks in 3

six segment pipeline.

A nonpipetine sy stem takes 90 ns to prosess a task. The same task con be

processed ina six-segment pipeline with a clock cyte of 107s. Determine

the speedup ratio of the pipaline for 100 tasks. What is the maximum
speedup that can be achieved?

The pipeline of Fig, 9-2 has the folowing propagation times: 40 ms for the

operands 10 be read from mercy into registers R1 and R2, 45 ns for the

signal to propagete through the multiplier, 51ns for the transfer into R3, and

15 ns to add the two numbers into RS.

2, Wiut is the minimum clack cyde time that can be used?

. A ronpipaline system can pestormn the sane operation by removing R3
and R4, How long willit take to multiply and add the operands without
‘using the pipeline?

«¢. Calculate the speedup of the pipeline far 10 tasks and again for 100 tasks.

d. What is the macmum speedup that can be aehieved?

Itis necessary to designa pipeline fora fixed-point multiplier thot multiplies

‘two &-bit binary integers, Each segment consists of a number of AND gates

and a binaty adder similar to an array multiplier as shown in Fig, 10:10.

a. Howmeny AND gates are there ineach segment, and what size of adder
asneeded?

b. How many segments are there in the pipeline?

¢. Uf the propagation delay in each segment is 30ns, whatiis the averege time
‘hut it kes to multiply two fixed-point numbers in the papebine?

‘Tre time delay of the four segments in the pipeline of Fig, 46 are as follows:

tis SOns,fr = 30ns.ta= 95 ns, andl, = 45ns, Theinterface registers delay

time f, = S ns.

a. How long would it take to add 100 pairs of numbers in the pipeline?

b. Howcan we reduce the total time to about one-half of the time calculated
in part (a)?

How would you use the floating-point pipetine adder of Fig, 96 to add 100

Rosting-point numbers Xs + Xs + Xa o++ + Xia?

Formulate a six-segment instruction pipéline for a computer. Specy the

operations tobe pesformed in each segment.

€xptain four possible hardware schemes that can be used in an instmuctioa

Pipeline in order to cninimize the pecformance degradation crused by i

struction branching.

  

 

 

 
