pipelining

SECTION 88 Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) 285

memory takes more time than register operations. Efficient pipelining, as well
asa few other characteristics, are sometimes attributed to RISC, although they
may exist innon-RISC architectures as well. Other characteristicsattributed to
RISC architecture are:

1. A relatively large number of registers in the processor unit

2. Use of overlapped register windows to speed-up procedure call and
return

3. Efficient instruction pipeline

4. Compiler support for efficient translation of high-level language pro-
grams into machine language programs

A large number of registers is useful for storing intermediate results and
for optimizing operand references. The advantage of register storage as op-
posed to memory storage is that registers can transfer information to other
registers much faster than the transfer of information to and from memory.
‘Thus register-to-memory operations can be minimized by keeping the most
frequent accessed operands in registers. Studies that showimproved perform-
ance for RISC architecture do not differentiate between the effects of the
reduced instruction set and the effects of a large register file. For this reason
a large number of registers in the processing unit are sometimes associated
with RISC processors. The use of overlapped register windows when trans-
ferring program control after a procedure call is explained below. Instruction
pipeline in RISC is presented in Sec. 9-5 after we explain the concept of
pipelining,

Overlapped Register Windows
Procedure call and return occurs quite often in high-level programming lan-
guages. When translatedinto machine language, a procedure call produces a
sequence of instructions that save register values, pass parameters needed for
the procedure, and then calls a subroutine to execute the body of the proce-
dure. After a procedure return, the program restores the old register values,
passes results to the calling program, and returnsfrom the subroutine. Saving
and restoring registers and passing of parameters and results involve time-
consuming operations. Some computers provide multiple-register banks, and
each procedure is allocated its own bank of registers. This eliminates the need
forsavingandrestoring register values. Some computers use thememory stack
to store the parameters that are needed by the procedure, but this requires a
memory access every time the stack is accessed.

A characteristic of some RISC processors is their use of overlapped register
windows to provide the passing of parameters and avoid the need for saving
and restoring register values. Each procedure call results in the allocation of
