 

528 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

removable cartridge is a combination of a drive name and a file name within
that drive. This convention is simpler but potentially more confusing than is
using a name that identifies a specific cartridge.

For tapes, the operating system generally just provides a raw interface.
Many operating systems have no built-in support for jukeboxes. Jukebox
support can be provided by a device driver or by a privileged application
designed for backups or for HSM.

Three important aspects of performance are bandwidth, latency, and relia-
bility. A wide variety of bandwidths is available for both disks and tapes, but
the random-access latency for a tape is generally much slower than that for a
disk. Switching cartridges in a jukebox is also relatively slow. Because a jukebox
has a low ratio of drives to cartridges, reading a large fraction of the data ina
jukebox can take a long time. Optical media, which protect the sensitive layer
by a transparent coating, are generally more robust than magnetic media, which
expose the magnetic material to a greater possibility of physical damage.

= Exercises
14.1 None of the disk-scheduling disciplines, except FCFS, are truly fair (star-
vation may occur).
a. Explain why this assertion is true.

b. Describe a way to modify algorithms such as SCAN to ensure fair-
ness.

c. Explain why fairness is an important goal in a time-sharing system.

d. Give three or more examples of circumstances in which it is impor-
tant that the operating system be unfair in serving I/O requests.

14.2 Suppose that a disk drive has 5,000 cylinders, numbered 0 to 4999. The
drive is currently serving a request at cylinder 143, and the previous
request was at cylinder 125. The queue of pending requests, in FIFO
order, is

86, 1470, 913, 1774, 948, 1509, 1022, 1750, 130.

Starting from the current head position, what is the total distance (in
cylinders) that the disk arm moves to satisfy all the pending requests
for each of the following disk-scheduling algorithms?

a. FCFS
b. SSTF
c. SCAN

 
