2
ta

Section 2..

r

Structure of Intelligent Agents 35

 

AUTONOMY

 

the ideal mapping for much more general situations: agents that can solve a limitless variety of
tasks in a limitless variety of environments. Before we discuss how to do this, we need to look
at one more requirement that an intelligent agent ought to satisfy.

Autonomy

There is one more thing to deal with in the definition of an ideal rational agent: the "built-in
knowledge" part. Ifthe agent's actions are based completely on built-in knowledge, such that it
need pay no attention to its percepts, then we say that the agent lacks autonomy. For example,
if the clock manufacturer was prescient enough to know that the clock’s owner would be going
to Australia at some particular date, then a mechanism could be built in to adjust the hands
automatically by six hours atjust the right time. This would certainly be successful behavior, but
the intelligence seems to belong to the clock's designer rather than to the clock itself.

An agent's behavior can be based on both its own experience and the built-in knowledge
used in constructing the agent for the particular environment in which it operates. A system is
autonomous* to the extent that its behavior is determined by its own experience. It would be
too stringent, though, to require complete autonomy from the word go: when the agent has had
little or no experience, it would have to act randomly unless the designer gave some assistance.
So, just as evolution provides animals with enough built-in reflexes so that they can survive long
al intelligent agent

 

enough to leam for themselves, it would be reasonable to provide an art
with some initial knowledge as well as an ability to leam.

Autonomy not only fits in with our intuition, but it is an example of sound engineering
practices. An agent that operates on the basis of built-in assumptions will only operate success-
fully when those assumptions hold, and thus lacks flexibility. Consider, for example, the lowly
dung beetle. After digging its nest and laying its eggs, it fetches a ball ofdung from a nearby heap
to plug the entrance; ifthe ball ofdung is removed from its grasp en route, the beetle continues
on and pantomimes plugging the nest with the nonexistent dung ball, never noticing that it is
missing. Evolution has built an assumption into the beetle's behavior, and when it is violated,
unsuccessful behavior results. A truly autonomous intelligent agent should be able to operate
successfully in a wide variety of environments, given sufficient time to adapt.

2.3 STRUCTURE OF INTELLIGENT AGENTS

AGENT PROGRAM

ARCHITECTURE

So far we have talked about agents by describing their behavior—the action that is performed
after any given sequence of percepts. Now, we will have to bite the bullet and talk about how
the insides work. The job of AI is to design the agent program: a function that implements
the agent mapping from percepts to actions. We assume this program will run on some sort of
computing device, which we will call the architecture. Obviously, the program we choose has

 

4 The word "autonomous" has also come to mean something like "not under the immediate control ofa human,” as in
"autonomous land vehicle.” We are using it ina stronger sense.

‘Al beh am aad 6

 
