444 Chapter 12 File-System Implementation

A mount operation includes the name of the remote directory to be
mounted and the name of the server machine storing it. The mount request
is mapped to the corresponding RPC and is forwarded to the mount server
running on the specific server machine. The server maintains an export list
—the /etc/dfs/dfstab in Solaris, which can be edited only by a superuser—which
specifies local file systems that it exports for mounting, along with names of
machines that are permitted to mount them. The specification can also include
access rights, such as read only. To simplify the maintenance of export lists and
mount tables, a distributed naming scheme can be used to hold this information
and make it available to appropriate clients.

Recall that any directory within an exported file system can be mounted
remotely by an accredited machine. Hence, a component unit is such a direc-
tory. When the server receives a mount request that conforms to its export list,
it returns to the client a file handle that serves as the key for further accesses
to files within the mounted file system. The file handle contains all the infor-
mation that the server needs to distinguish an individual file it stores. In UNIX
terms, the file handle consists of a file-system identifier and an inode number
to identify the exact mounted directory within the exported file system.

The server also maintains a list of the client machines and the correspond-
ing currently mounted directories. This list is used mainly for administrative
purposes—for instance, for notifying all clients that the server is going down.
Addition and deletion of entries in this list are the only ways that the server
state can be affected by the mount protocol.

Usually, a system has a static mounting preconfiguration that is established
at boot time (/etc/vfstab in Solaris); however, this layout can be modified. In
addition to the actual mount procedure, the mount protocol includes several
other procedures, such as unmount and return export list.

12.9.3 The NFS Protocol

The NES protocol provides a set of RPCs for remote file operations. The proce-
dures support the following operations:

¢ Searching for a file within a directory

e Reading a set of directory entries

Manipulating links and directories

e Accessing file attributes

Reading and writing files

These procedures can be invoked only after a file handle for the remotely
mounted directory has been established.
