364 Chapter 11. Planning

 

undecidability) of various formulations of the planning problem and its subcomponents. The
POP algorithm described in the chapter is based on the SNLP algorithm (Soderland and Weld,
1991), which is an implementation of the planner described by McAllester and Rosenblitt (1991),
Weld contributed several useful suggestions to the presentation in this chapter.

A number of important papers on planning were presented at the Timberline workshop in
1986, and its proceedings (Georgeff and Lansky, 1986) are an important source. Readings in
Planning (Alien el al., 1990) is a comprehensive anthology of many of the best articles in the
field, including several good survey articles. Planning and Control (Dean and Wellman, 1991)
is a good general introductory textbook on planning, and is particularly remarkable because it
makes a particular effort to integrate classical Al planning techniques with classical and modern ;
control theory, metareasoning, and reactive planning and execution monitoring. Weld (1994),
provides an excellent survey of modem planning algorithms.

Planning research has been central to AI since its inception, and papers on planning are
a staple of mainstream AI journals and conferences, but there are also specialized conferences
devoted exclusively to planning, like the Timberline workshop, the 1990 DARPA Workshop on
Innovative Approaches to Planning, Scheduling, and Control, or the International Conferences
on AI Planning Systems.

   
    
   

 

EXERCISES

11.1 Define the operator schemata for the problem of putting on shoes and socks and a hat and 4
coat, assuming that there are no preconditions for putting on the hat and coat. Give a partial-order.
plan that is a solution, and show that there are 180 different linearizations of this solution.

11.2 Let us consider a version of the milk/banana/drill shopping problem in which money is
included, at least in a simple way.
a. Let CC denote a credit card that the agent can use to buy any object. Modify the description]
of Buy so that the agent has to have its credit card in order to buy anything.
b. Write a PickUp operator that enables the agent to Have an object if it is portable and at the
same location as the agent. 4
c. Assume that the credit card is at home, but Have(CC)is initially false. Construct a partially,
ordered plan that achieves the goal, showing both ordering constraints and causal links.
d. Explain in detail what happens during the planning process when the agent explores @
partial plan in which it leaves home without the card.

11.3. There are many ways to characterize planners. For each of the following dichotomies,
explain what they mean, and how the choice between them affects the efficiency and completeness

ofa planner.
a. Situation space vs. plan space.
b. Progressive vs. regressive.
