Problems = 439

request that it initiate transmission. 1t is used by: the secondary station to
indicate the final transmitted frame. Thus the P/F field is cated P (poll) when
the primary station is transmitting but is designated as F (final) when a sec-
ondary station is transmitting. Each frame sent to the secondary station fom
the primary station has a P bit set to. When the primary station is finished
and ready for the secondary station to respond, the P bit is set to 1. The
secondary station then responds with a number of frames in which the F bit
is set to 0, When the secondary station sends the last frame, it sets the F bit
to 1. Therefore, the P/F bit is used to determine when data transmission from
a Station is finished.

‘Thesupervisory formatof the control fieldis recognized from the firsttwo
bits being 1 and0. Thenexttwobitsindicate the type ofcommand. This follows
by a PIF bit and a receive sequence framecount. The frames of the supervisory
formatdo not carry an information field. They are used to assist in the transfer
ofinfermation in that they confirm the acceptance of preceding frames carry ing,
information, convey ready'or busy conditions. and report ame numbering
errors.

‘The unnumbered format is recognized from the first two bits being 11.
‘The Five code bits available in this format can specify up to 32 commands and
responses. The primary station uses the control field to specify a command for
a secondary station. The secondary station uses the control field to transmit
a response to the ptimaiy station. Unnumbeted format frames are employed
forieitialization of ink functions, reporting procedural errors, placing stations
in a disconnected mode, and other data link control operation:

 

   

PROBLEMS

 

 

 

Ut. The addresses assigned to the four registers of the VO interface of Fig. 11-2
are equal to the birisry equivalent of 12, 13, 16, and 15. Show the exteenal
Gircuit thet must be connected between an bit YO address fromthe CPU
and the CS, RS1, end RSO inputs of the Interface.

11-2, Sicinterfase unuts of the type shown inFig. 11-2 areconnevted toa CPU that
uses on UO address of eight bits. Each one of the six chip select (CS) inputs
is connected to a different address line. Thus the high-order addvess line is
connected to the CS input of the first Interfase unitand the sixth address ine
is connected to the CS input of the sixth interface unit. The two low-order
address lines are connected to the RS1 ond R50 of all six interface units.
Determine the 8.bit address of each register in each interface.

113. _List four peripheral devices that produse an acceptable output for a persan
fo understand

11-4. Write your full namein ASCH usingeight bits per character withtheteftmrast
bit always 0. Indude a space between names and a period after a middle
initial,
