498 Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

directory entry is on the first cylinder and a file’s data are on the final cylinder.
In this case, the disk head has to move the entire width of the disk. If the
directory entry were on the middle cylinder, the head would have to move,
at most, one-half the width. Caching the directories and index blocks in main
memory can also help to reduce the disk-arm movement, particularly for read
requests.

Because of these complexities, the disk-scheduling algorithm should be
written as a separate module of the operating system, so that it can be replaced
with a different algorithm if necessary. Either SSTF or LOOK is a reasonable
choice for the default algorithm.

The scheduling algorithms described here consider only the seek distances.
For modern disks, the rotational latency can be nearly as large as the average
seek time. But it is difficult for the operating system to schedule for improved
rotational latency because modern disks do not disclose the physical location
of logical blocks. Disk manufacturers have been alleviating this problem by
implementing disk-scheduling algorithms in the controller hardware built into
the disk drive. If the operating system sends a batch of requests to the controller,
the controller can queue them and then schedule them to improve both the seek
time and the rotational latency. If I/O performance were the only consideration,
the operating system would gladly turn over the responsibility of disk schedul-
ing to the disk hardware. In practice, however, the operating system may have
other constraints on the service order for requests. For instance, demand paging
may take priority over application I/O, and writes are more urgent than reads if
the cache is running out of free pages. Also, it may be desirable to guarantee the
order of a set of disk writes to make the file system robust in the face of system
crashes. Consider what could happen if the operating system allocated a disk
page toa file, and the application wrote data into that page before the operating
system had a chance to flush the modified inode and free-space list back to disk.
To accommodate such requirements, an operating system may choose to do its
own disk scheduling and to spoon-feed the requests to the disk controller, one
by one, for some types of I/O.

14.3. = Disk Management

The operating system is responsible for several other aspects of disk manage-
ment, too. Here we discuss disk initialization, booting from disk, and bad-block
recovery.

14.3.1 Disk Formatting

A new magnetic disk is a blank slate: It is just platters of a magnetic recording
material. Before a disk can store data, it must be divided into sectors that the
disk controller can read and write. This process is called low-level formatting
