 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Section 10.6. Frame Systems and Semantic Networks 319
Link Type Semantics Example
A Subset B ACB Cats C Mammals
A Menber B AEB Bill G Cats
ARB R(A,B) Bill Ase 12
AZ B YxxeA = ROB) Birds!
aGls Vx dy x€A = yEBAR(x,y) Birds!" \ Birds
Figure 108 Link types in semantic networks, and their meanings.

DEFAULT VALUE

 

 

 

Inheritance with exceptions

As we saw in Chapter 8, natural kinds are full ofexceptions. The diagram in Figure 10.7 says that
mammals have 4 legs, but it also says that bats, which are mammals, have 2 legs. According to
the straightforward logical semantics, this is a contradiction. To fix the problem, we will change
the semantic translation of a boxed-R link from A to B to mean that every member ofA must have
an R relation to B unless there is some intervening A! for which Rel(R, A’, B'). Then Figure 10.7
will unambiguously mean that bats have 2 legs, not 4. Notice that Rel(R, A, B) no longer means
that every 4 is related by R to B; instead it means that B is a default value for the R relation for
members of 4, but the default can be overridden by other information.

It may be intuitive to think of inheritance with exceptions by following links in a diagram,
but it is also possible—and instructive—to define the semantics in first-order logic. The first step
in the logical translation is to reify relations: arelation R becomes an object, not a predicate. That
means that Rel(R,A, B) is just an ordinary atomic sentence, not an abbreviation for a complex
sentence. It also means that we can no longer write R(x, B), because R is an object, not a predicate.
We will use Val(R.x,B)to mean that the equivalent of an R(x, B) relation is explicitly asserted
in the semantic network, and Holds(R,x, B)to mean that R(x, B) can be inferred. We then can
define Holds by saying that a relation R holds between x and b if either there is an explicit Val
predication or there is a Ref on some parent class p of which x is an element, and there is no Re/
on any intervening class i. (A class i is intervening ifx is an element of i and 7 is a subset of p.)
In other words:

Vr.x,b Holds(r,x,b) =
Val(r,x,b) V (3p x pA Rel(r,p, b) A sInterveningRel(x, p,r))
Vx,p.r InterveningRel(x,p,r) =
3 Intervening(x,i,p) A 35! Rel(r, i, b')
Va,i,p Intervening(x,i,p) <= (xi) ACC py
Note that the C symbol means proper subset (e.g., / C p means that z is a subset of p and is
not equal to p). The next step is to recognize that it is important not only to know what Rel
and Val relations hold, but also what ones do not hold. Suppose we are trying to find the 7
that satisfies Holds(Legs, Opus, n). We know Rel(Legs, Birds, 2) and we know Opus is a bird,
but the definition of Holds does not allow us to infer anything unless we can prove there is no
Rel(Legs,i, b) for 1= Penguins or any other intervening category. If the knowledge base only
