EBCDIC

parity bit

parity generator

parity checker

SECTION 3.6 Error Detection Codes 87

space The other 10 characters are used to direct the data communication flow
and report its status.

Another alphanumeric (sometimes called alphameric) code used in IBM
equipments the EBCDIC (Extended BCD Interchange Code) Ituses eight bits
for each character and a ninth bit for parity). EBCDIC has the same character
symbols as ASCII but the bit assignment to characters is different.

When alphanumeric characters are used internally ina computer for data
processing (not for transmission purposes) it is more convenient to use a 6-bit
Code to represent 64 characters. A 6-bit code can specify the 26 uppercase letters
of the alphabet, numerals zero to nine, and up to 28 special characters. This
set of characters isusually sufficient for data-processing purposes. Using fewer
bits to code characters has the advantage of reducing the memory space needed
to store large quantities of alphanumeric data.

3-6 Error Detection Codes

Binaryinformation transmitted through some form of communication medium
is subject to external noise that could change bits from 1 to 0, and vice versa.
An error detection code is a binary code that detects digital errors during
transmission. The detected errors cannot be corrected but their presence is
indicated. The usual procedure is to observe the frequency of errors. If errors
occurinfrequently at random, the particular erroneous information is transmit-
ted again. If the error occurs too often, the systems checked for malfunction.

‘The most common error detection code used is the parity bit. A parity bit
is an extra bit included with a binary message to make the total number of 1's
either odd or even. A message of three bits and two possible parity bits is
shownin Table3-7. The P(odd) bit is chosen in such away as to make the sum
of Ys (in all four bits) odd. The P(even) bit is chosen to make the sum of all
Ys even. In either case, the sum is taken over the message and the P bit. In
any particular application, one or the other type of parity will be adopted. The
ever-parity scheme has the disadvantage of having abit combination of all 0’s,
while in the odd parity there is always one bit (of the four bits that constitute
the message and P) that is 1. Note that the P(odd) is the complement of the
Pleven).

Dunng transfer of information from one location to another, the parity
bit is handled as follows. At the sending end, the message (in this case three
bits) is applied to a parity generator, where the required parity bit is generated.
The message, including the parity bit, is transmitted to its destination At the
receiving end, all the incoming bits (in this case, four) are applied to a parity
checker that checks the proper parity adopted (odd or even). An erroris detected
if the checked parity does not conform to the adopted parity. The parity
method detects the presence of one, three, or any odd number of errors. An
even number of errors is not detected.
