340

 

 

Chapter 11. Planning

 

 

Talk to Parrot

Go To Pet Store / BuyaDog

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

“| ee
y | .
[ Go To School Go To Class.
Yo te
Sat Go To Supermarket Buy Tuna Fish
| aes
Go To Sleep \\\ Buy Arugula
nr
Read A Book Buy Milk r
- \ | moe Finish
Sit in Chair Sit Some More
aE ee
Read A Book
—a—ees

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 112 Solving a shopping problem with forward search through the space of situations
inthe world.

 

 

 

make direct connections between states and actions. For example, if the agent knows that the
goal is a conjunction that includes the conjunct Have(Milk), and that Buy(x) achieves Have(x),
then the agent knows that it is worthwhile to consider a plan that includes Buy(Milk).It need not
consider irrelevant actions such as Buy(WhippingCream)or GoToSleep.

The second key idea behind planning is that the planner is free to add actions to the plan
wherever they are needed, rather than in an incremental sequence starting at the initial state. For
example, the agent may decide that it is going to have to Buy(Milk),even before it has decided
where to buy it, how to get there, or what to do afterwards. There is no necessary connection
between the order of planning and the order of execution. By making "obvious" or "important"
decisions first, the planner can reduce the branching factor for future choices and reduce the need
to backtrack over arbitrary decisions. Notice that the representation of states as sets of logical
sentences plays a crucial role in making this freedom possible. For example, when adding the
action Buy(Milk)to the plan, the agent can represent the state in which the action is executed as,
say, At(Supermarket). This actually represents an entire class of states—states with and without
bananas, with and without a drill, and so on. Search algorithms that require complete state
descriptions do not have this option.

The third and final key idea behind planning is that most parts ofthe world are independent
ofmost other parts. This makes it feasible to take a conjunctive goal like "get a quart of milk and
a bunch of bananas and a variable-speed cordless drill" and solve it with a divide-and-conquer
strategy. A subplan involving going to the supermarket can be used to achieve the first two

 
