406) cHaPTERELEVEN Input-Output Organization

vectored interrupt

10 routines

data at an average rate of 100 bytes per second. This is equivalent to one byte
every 10,000 us. This means that the CPU will check the flag 10,000 times
between each transfer. The CPU is wasting time while checking the flag instead
of doing some other useful processing task.

Interrupt-Initiated VO

An alternative to the CPU constantly monitoring the flag is to let the interface
inform the computer when it is ready to transfer data This mode of transfer
uses the interrupt facility. While the CPU is running a program, it does not
check the flag. However, when the flag is set, the computer is momentarily
interrupted from proceeding with the current program and is informed of the
fact that the flag has been set The CPU deviates from what it is doing to take
care of the input or output transfer. After the transfer is completed, the
computer returns to the previous program to continue what it was doing before
the interrupt.

The CPU responds to the interrupt signal by storing the return address
from the program counter into a memory stack and then control branches to
a service routine that processes the required U/O transfer. The way that the
Processor chooses the branch address of the service routine varies from one
unit to another. In principle, there are two methods for accomplishing this
One is called vectored interrupt and the other, nonvectored interrupt. In a nonvec-
tored interrupt, the branch address is assigned to a fixed location in memory.
Ina vectoredinterrupt, the source that interrupts supplies the branch informa-
tion to the computer. This information is called the interrupt vector. In some
computers the interrupt vector is the first address of the I/O service routine.
In other computers the interrupt vector is an address that points to a location
in memory where the beginning address of the /O service routine is stored.
A system with vectored interrupt is demonstrated in Sec. 11-5.

Software Considerations

The previous discussion was concerned with the basic hardware needed to
interface VO devices to a computer system. A computer must also have soft-
‘ware routines for controlling peripherals and for transfer of data between the
processor and peripherals. I/O routines must issue control commands to acti-
vate the peripheral and to check the device status to determine when it is ready
for data transfer. Once ready, information is transferred item by item until all
the data are transferred. In some cases, a control command is then given to
execute a device function such as stop tape or print characters. Error checking
and other useful steps often accompany the transfers. In interrupt-controlled
transfers, the /O software must issue commands to the peripheral to interrupt
when ready and to service the interrupt when it occurs. In DMA transfer, the
LO software must initiate the DMA channel to start its operation.
