472 cuarren Tweive Memory Organization

pages and blocks

page frame

takes space from main memory and two accesses to memory are required with
the program running at half speed. A third alternative is to use an associative
memory as explained below.

Address Mapping Using Pages

The tableimplementation of the address mapping is simplified if the informa-
tion in the address space and the memory space are each divided into groups
of fixed size. The physical memory is broken down into groups of equal size
called blocks, which may range from 64 to 40% words each. The term page refers
to groups of address space of the same size. For example, if a page or block
consists of 1K words, then, using the previous example, address space is
divided into 1024 pages and main memory is divided into 32 blocks. Although
both a page and a block are split into groups of 1K words, a page refers to the
organization of address space, while a block refers to the organization of
memory space. The programs are also considered to be split into pages.
Portions of programs are moved from auxiliary memory to main memory in
records equal to the size of a page. The term “page frame” is sometimes used
to denote a block.

Consider a computer with an address space of 8K and a memory space
of 4K. If we split each into groups of 1K words we obtain eight pages and four
blocks as shown in Fig. 12-18. At any given time, up to four pages of address
space may reside in main memory in any one of the four blocks.

‘The mapping from address space to memory space is facilitated if each
virtual address is considered to be represented by two numbers: a page number
address and a line within the page. In a computer with 2 words per page, p
bits are used to specify a line address and the remaining high-order bits of the
virtual address specify the page number. In the example of Fig. 12-18, a virtual
address has 13 bits. Since each page consists of 2" = 1024 words, the high-
order three bits of a virtual address will specify one of the eight pages and the
low-order 10 bits give the line address within the page. Note that the line
address in address space and memory space is the same; the only mapping
required is from a page number to a block number.

The organization of the memory mapping table in a paged system is
shown in Fig. 12-19. The memory-page table consists of eight words, one for
each page. The address in the page table denotes the page number and the
content of the word gives the block number where that page is stored in main
memory. The table shows that pages 1, 2, 5, and 6 are now available in main
memory in blocks 3, 0, 1, and 2, respectively. A presence bit in each location
indicates whether the page has been transferred from auxiliary memory into
main memory. A 0 in the presence bit indicates that this page is not available
inmain memory. The CPU references a word in memory witha virtual address
of 13 bits. The three high-order bits of the virtual address specify a page
number and also an address for the memory-page table. The content of the

 
