852

Chapter 29 Linear Programming

Converting linear programs into standard form

It is always possible to convert a linear program, given as minimizing or maxi-
mizing a linear function subject to linear constraints, into standard form. A linear
program might not be in standard form for any of four possible reasons:

1. The objective function might be a minimization rather than a maximization.
2. There might be variables without nonnegativity constraints.

3. There might be equality constraints, which have an equal sign rather than a
less-than-or-equal-to sign.

4. There might be inequality constraints, but instead of having a less-than-or-
equal-to sign, they have a greater-than-or-equal-to sign.

When converting one linear program L into another linear program L’, we would
like the property that an optimal solution to L’ yields an optimal solution to L. To
capture this idea, we say that two maximization linear programs L and L’ are
equivalent if for each feasible solution ¥ to L with objective value z, there is
a corresponding feasible solution x’ to L’ with objective value z, and for each
feasible solution x’ to L’ with objective value z, there is a corresponding feasible
solution ¥ to L with objective value z. (This definition does not imply a one-to-
one correspondence between feasible solutions.) A minimization linear program L
and a maximization linear program L’ are equivalent if for each feasible solution ¥
to L with objective value z, there is a corresponding feasible solution x’ to L’ with
objective value —z, and for each feasible solution x’ to L’ with objective value z,
there is a corresponding feasible solution X to L with objective value —z.

We now show how to remove, one by one, each of the possible problems in the
list above. After removing each one, we shall argue that the new linear program is
equivalent to the old one.

To convert a minimization linear program L into an equivalent maximization lin-
ear program L’, we simply negate the coefficients in the objective function. Since
L and L’ have identical sets of feasible solutions and, for any feasible solution, the
objective value in L is the negative of the objective value in L’, these two linear
programs are equivalent. For example, if we have the linear program

minimize —2x,; + 3X2
subject to

xX + % = 7
X;) — 2% << 4
x1 2 0,

and we negate the coefficients of the objective function, we obtain
