Section 9.8.

Summary 295

9.5 In this question we will use the sentences you wrote in Exercise 9.4 to answer a question
using a backward-chaining algorithm.
a. Draw the prooftree generated by an exhaustive backward-chaining algorithm for the query
Fh Horse(h).
b. What do you notice about this domain?
How many solutions for h actually follow from your sentences?
d. Can you think ofa way to find all ofthem? (Hint: You might want to consult (Smith et a/.,
1986).)

°

9.6 Apopular children's riddle is "Brothers and sisters have I none, but that man's father is my
father's son." Use the rules of the family domain (Chapter 7) to show who that man is. You may
use any of the inference methods described in this chapter.

97 How can resolution be used to show that a sentence is
a. Valid?
b. Unsatisfiable?

98 From “Horses are animals," it follows that "The head ofa horse is the head of an animal."
Demonstrate that this inference is valid by carrying out the following steps:
a. Translate the premise and the conclusion into the language of first-order logic. Use three
predicates: HeadOf(h,x),Horse(x), and Animal(x).
b. Negate the conclusion, and convert the premise and the negated conclusion into conjunctive
normal form.
c. Use resolution to show that the conclusion follows from the premise.

99 Here are two sentences in the language of first-order logic:
(A): Wx Sy @>y)
(B): dy Vx @2Zy)

a. Assume that the variables range over all the natural numbers 0, 1,2,...,00, and that the
“>” predicate means "greater than or equal to." Under this interpretation, translate these
sentences into English.

Is (A) true under this interpretation?

Is (B) true under this interpretation?

. Does (A) logically entail (B)?

Does (B) logically entail (A)?

. Try to prove that (A) follows from (B) using resolution. Do this even if you think that (B)
does not logically entail (A); continue until the proofbreaks down and you cannot proceed
Gf it does break down). Show the unifying substitution for each resolution step. If the
proof fails, explain exactly where, how, and why it breaks down.

g. Now try to prove that (B) follows from (A).

mepaos
