Section 9.8 Summary 291

 

ee
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Logical inference was studied extensively in Greek mathematics. The type of inference most

syLLOGISM carefully studied by Aristotle was the syllogism. The syllogism is divided into "figures" and
"moods," depending on the order of the terms (which we would call predicates) in the sentences,
the degree of generality (which we would today interpret through quantifiers) applied to each
term, and whether each term is negated. The most fundamental syllogism is that of the first mood
of the first figure:

All Sare M.
All Mare P.
Therefore, all S are P.

Aristotle tried to prove the validity of other syllogisms by "reducing" them to those of the first
figure. He was much less precise in describing what this "reduction" should involve than he was
in characterizing the syllogistic figures and moods themselves.

Rigorous and explicit analysis of inference rules was one of the strong points of Megarian.
and Stoic propositional logic. The Stoics took five basic inference rules as valid without proof
and then rigorously derived all others from these five. The first and most important of the five
tules was the one known today as Modus Ponens. The Stoics were much more precise about
what was meant by derivation than Aristotle had been about what was meant by reduction of one
syllogism to another. They also used the "Principle of Conditionalization,” which states that if
q can be inferred validly from p, then the conditional “p = q” is logically true. Both these
principles figure prominently in contemporary logic.

Inference rules, other than logically valid schemas, were not a major focus either for Boole
or for Frege. Boole's logic was closely modeled on the algebra of numbers. It relied mainly
on the equality substitution inference rule, which allows one to conclude P(t) given P(s) and
s=t. Logically valid schemas were used to obtain equations to which equality substitution could
be applied. Whereas Frege's logic was much more general than Boole's, it too relied on an
abundance of logically valid schemas plus a single inference rule that had premises—in Frege's
case, this rule was Modus Ponens. Frege took advantage of the fact that the effect of an inference
tule of the form "From p infer g” can be simulated by applying Modus Ponens to p along with a
logically valid schemap = g. This "axiomatic" style of exposition, using Modus Ponens plus
a number of logically valid schemas, was employed by a number of logicians after Frege; most
notably, it was used in Principia Mathematica (Whitehead and Russell, 1910).

One of the earliest types of systems (after Frege) to focus prominently on inference rules was
natural deduction, introduced by Gerhard Gentzen (1934) and by Stanistaw Jaskowski (1934).
Natural deduction is called "natural" because it does not require sentences to be subjected to
extensive preprocessing before it can be applied to them (as many other proof procedures do) and
because its inference rules are thought to be more intuitive than, say, the resolution rule. Natural
deduction makes frequent use of the Principle of Conditionalization. The objects manipulated
by Gentzen's inference rules are called sequents, A sequent can be regarded either as a logical
argument (a pair ofa set ofpremises and a set of alternative conclusions, intended to be an instance
of some valid rule of inference) or as a sentence in implicative normal form. Prawitz (1965)

 
