482

(CHAPTERTWELVE Memory Organization

12-24(b) shows that pages Zand 4 of segment 6have been referenced previously
and therefore their corresponding block numbers are stored in the associative
memory.

From this example it should be evident that the memory management
system can assign any number of pages to each segment. Each logical page can
be mapped into any block in physical memory. Pages can move to different
blocks in memory depending on memory space requirements. The only updat-
ing required is the change of the block number in the page table. Segments can
grow or shrink independently without affecting each other. Different seg-
ments can use the same block of memory if it is required to share a program
by many users. For example, block number 12 in physical memory can be
assigned asecond logical address F0000 through FOOFF. This specifies segment
number 15 and page 0, which maps to block 12 as shown in Fig. 12-24(a).

Memory Protection

Memory protection can be assigned to the physical address or the logical
address. The protection of memory through the physical address can be done
by assigning to each block in memory a number of protection bits that indicate
the type of access allowed to its corresponding block. Every time a page is
moved from one block to another it would be necessary to update the block
protection bits A much better place to apply protectionis in the logical address
space rather than the physical address space. This can be done by including
protection information within the segment table or segment register of the
memory management hardware.

The content of each entry in the segment table or a segment register is
called a descriptor. A typical descriptor would contain, in addition to a base
address field, one or two additional fields for protection purposes. A typical
format for a segment descriptor is shown in Fig. 12-25. The base address field
gives the base of the page table address in a segmented-page organization or
the block base address in a segment register organization. This is the address
used in mapping from a logical to the physical address. The length field gives
the segment size by specifying the maximum number of pages assigned to the
segment. The length field is compared against the page number in the logical
address. A size violation occurs if the page number falls outside the segment
length boundary. Thusa given program andits data cannot access memory not
assigned to it by the operating system.

The protection field in a segment descriptor specifies the access rights
available to the particular segment. In a segmented-page organization, each

 

Figure 12-25 Format of a typical segment descriptor.

Base address Length _| Protection

 
