388 cuarren even Input-Output Organization

10P

isolated HO

memory-mapped

Inthe first method, the computer has independent sets of data, address,
and controlbuses, one for accessingmemory and the otherfor /O. Thisis done
in computers that provide a separate /O processor (IOP) in addition to the
central processing unit (CPU). The memory communicates with both the CPU
and the IOP through amemory bus. The IOP communicates also withthe input
and output devices through a separate /O bus with its own address, data and
control lines. The purpose of the IOP is to provide an independent pathway
for the transfer of information between external devices and internal memory.
The /O processor is sometimes called a data channel. In Sec. 11-7 we discuss
the function of the IOP in more detail.

Isolated versus Memory-Mapped /O

Many computers use one common bus to transfer information between mem-
ory or /O and the CPU. The distinction between a memory transfer and /O
transfer is made through separate read and write lines. The CPU specifies
whether the address on the address lines is for a memory word or for an
interface register by enabling one of two possible read or write lines. The I/O
read and I/O write control lines are enabled during an UO transfer. The memory
read and memory write control lines are enabled during a memory transfer. This,
configuration isolates all /O interface addresses from the addresses assigned
to memory and is referred to as the isolated I/O method for assigning addresses
in a common bus.

In the isolated VO configuration, the CPU has distinct input and output
instructions, and each of these instructions is associated with the address of
an interface register. When the CPU fetches and decodes the operation code
of an input or output instruction, it places the address associated with the
instruction into the common address lines. At the same time, it enables the /O
read (for input) or UO write (for output) control line. This informs the external
components that are attached to the common bus that the address in the
address lines is for an interface register and not for a memory word. On the
other hand, when the CPU is fetching an instruction or an operand from
memory, it places the memory address on the address lines and enables the
memory read or memory write control line. This informs the external compo-
nents that the address is fora memory word and not for an U/O interface.

The isolated JO method isolates memory and LO addresses so that
memory address values are not affected by interface address assignment since
each has its ownaddress space. The other alternativeis to use the same address
space forboth memory and VO. This is the case in computers that employ only
ne set of read and write signals and do not distinguish between memory and
VO addresses. This configuration is referred to as memory-mapped 1/0. The
computer treats an interface register as being part of the memory system. The
assigned addresses for interface registers cannot be used for memory words,
which reduces the memory address range available.
