4840 cunrrer TWELVE Memory Organization

124.

125.

12-6,

127.

128.

129,

12-10,

we.

12-12.

powersupply. How many pins are needed for the IC package? Draw a block
diagram and label all input and output terminals in the ROM.

Extend the memory system of Fig. 12-4 to 4096 bytes of RAM and 4096 bytes
‘of ROM. List the memory-address map and indicate what size decoders are
needed.

Acomputeremploys RAM chips of 256 x 8and ROM chips of 1024 x 8. The
‘computer system needs 2K bytes of RAM, 4K bytes of ROM, and four
interface units, each with four registers. A memory-mapped U/O configura-
tion is used. The two highest-order bits of the address bus are assigned 00
for RAM, 01 for ROM, and 10 for interface registers.

a. How many RAM and ROM chips are needed?

b. Draw a memory-address map for the system.

¢. Give the address range in hexadecimal for RAM, ROM, and interface.
‘An &bit computer has a 16-bitaddress bus. The first 15 lines of the address
are used to select a bank of 32K bytes of memory. The high-order bit of the
address is used to select a register which receives the contents of the data
‘bus. Explain how this configuration can be used to extend the memory
capacity of the system to eight banks of 32K bytes each, for a total of 256K
bytes of memory.

‘A magnetic disk system has the following parameters:

rz
R = rotation speed of disk in revolutions per second
1N, = number of bits per track

N,

 

average time to position the magnetic head over a track

 

 

number of bits per sector

Calculate the average time T, that it will take to read one sector.

‘What is the transfer rate of an eight-track magnetic tape whose speed is 120

inches per second and whose density is 1600 bits per inch?

Obtain the complement function for the match logic of one word in an

associative memory. In other words, show that M/ is the sum of exclusive-

OR functions. Draw the logic diagram for M/ and terminate it with an

inverter to obtain M,.

Obtain the Boolean function forthe match logic of one wordin an associative

‘memory taking into consideration a tag bit that indicates whether the word

is active or inactive.

‘What additional logic is required to give a no-match result for a word in an

associative memory when all key bits are zeros?

. Draw the logic diagram of all the cells of one word in an associative
‘memory. Include the read and write logic of Fig. 12-8 and the match logic
of Fig, 12-9.

'b. Draw the logicdiagram of all cells along one vertical column (column j)
in an associative memory. Include a common output line for all bits in
the same column.
