SECTIONS Redused (necruccon Sec Compures (RISC) 291

Theload and store instructions move data between a register and mem-
ory. The load instructions aecommodate signed or unsigned data of eight bits
(byte) or 16 bits (short word). The long-word instructions operate on 32-bit
data. Although there appears to be a register plus displacement addressing
mode in data transfer instructions, register indirect addressing and direct
addressing is also possible. The folowing are examples of load long instruc-
tions with different addressing modes.

LDL (R22)#1SO,RS = RSe-M[ R22] + 350
LDL (R22)#0,R5 RS M[ REZ)
LDL (RO) #S0D,RS RS+-m[S00)

Theeffective addressin the firstinstruction s evaluated from the contents of
register R22 plus a displacement of 150. The second instruction uses a 0
displacement, which reduces it toa register indirect mode. The third instruc-
tion uses all 0's from register RO to Producea direct address type of instruction.

The program conércl instructions operate with the program counter PC
tocontrol the progeam sequence. Thereare twojump and two callinstructions.
One uses an index plus displacement addressing; the second uses a relative
to PC mode with the 19-bit Y value as the relative address. The call and ecturn
instructions use a 3-bit CWP (current window pointer) register whieh points
to the currently active register window. Every time the program calls a new
procedure, CWP is decremented by one to point to the next-lower register
window, Alter a return instruction CWP isincremented by one to return to the
previous register window.

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROBLEMS

81, Abus organized CCU slumlario Fig 8-2 has 16 registers with 32 bits in each,
an ALU, and a destination decoder.
4 How many multiplexers are there in the A bus, and what is the size of
each multplexer?
b. How many selection inputs are ceeded for MUX A and MUX B?
¢. How many inputs and outputs are there in the decnder?
4. How many inputs and outputs are there in the ALU for data, including,
‘input and output corres?
¢. Formulate a control word for the system assuming that the ALU has 35
operations.
82 The bus system of Fig. 8:2 has the fallowing propagation delay times: 30.ns
for the signals to propagate through the multipleers, 80 ns to pesfarm the
ADD operation inthe ALU, 20 ns delay inthe destination decoder, and 10
1s to clock the data into the destination register. Wiatis the minimum cyde
time that can be used for the clock?
