16.1 An activity-selection problem 417

Making the greedy choice

What if we could choose an activity to add to our optimal solution without having
to first solve all the subproblems? That could save us from having to consider all
the choices inherent in recurrence (16.2). In fact, for the activity-selection problem,
we need consider only one choice: the greedy choice.

What do we mean by the greedy choice for the activity-selection problem? Intu-
ition suggests that we should choose an activity that leaves the resource available
for as many other activities as possible. Now, of the activities we end up choos-
ing, one of them must be the first one to finish. Our intuition tells us, therefore,
to choose the activity in S with the earliest finish time, since that would leave the
resource available for as many of the activities that follow it as possible. (If more
than one activity in S has the earliest finish time, then we can choose any such
activity.) In other words, since the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing
order by finish time, the greedy choice is activity a;. Choosing the first activity
to finish is not the only way to think of making a greedy choice for this problem;
Exercise 16.1-3 asks you to explore other possibilities.

If we make the greedy choice, we have only one remaining subproblem to solve:
finding activities that start after a, finishes. Why don’t we have to consider ac-
tivities that finish before a, starts? We have that s; < f;, and /f; is the earliest
finish time of any activity, and therefore no activity can have a finish time less than
or equal to s,. Thus, all activities that are compatible with activity a, must start
after a, finishes.

Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection problem ex-
hibits optimal substructure. Let S, = {a; € S : 5; = fx} be the set of activities that
start after activity a; finishes. If we make the greedy choice of activity a,, then S;
remains as the only subproblem to solve.! Optimal substructure tells us that if a,
is in the optimal solution, then an optimal solution to the original problem consists
of activity a; and all the activities in an optimal solution to the subproblem S,.

One big question remains: is our intuition correct? Is the greedy choice—in
which we choose the first activity to finish—always part of some optimal solution?
The following theorem shows that it is.

 

1We sometimes refer to the sets Sy as subproblems rather than as just sets of activities. It will always
be clear from the context whether we are referring to Sj as a set of activities or as a subproblem
whose input is that set.
