104 — cuarrer rour Register Transfer and Microoperations

full-adder

‘adder-subtr actor

 

po a

S S s So

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4-6 4-it binary adder.

nected in cascade, with the output carry from one full-adder connected to the
input carry of the next full-adder. Figure 46 shows the interconnections of four
full-adders (FA) to provide a 4-bit binary adder. The augend bits of A and the
addend bits of B are designated by subscript numbers from right to left, with
subscript 0 denoting the low-order bit. The carries are connected in a chain
through the full-adders. The input carry to the binary adder is Co and the
output carry is C, The S outputs of the full-adders generate the required sum
bits.

An r-bit binary adder requires n full-adders. The output carry from each
full-adderis connected to the inputcarry of the next-high-order full-adder. The
n data bits for the A inputs come from one register (such as R1), and the n data
bits for the B inputs come from another register (such as R2). The sum can be
transferred to a third register or to one of the source registers (R1 or R2),
replacing its previous content.

Binary Adder-Subtractor

The subtraction of binary numbers can be done most conveniently by means
of complements as discussed in Sec. 3-2. Remember that the subtraction A — B
can be done by taking the 2’s complement of B and adding it to A. The 2’s
complement can be obtained by taking the 1’s complement and adding one to
the least significant pair of bits. The 1’s complement can be implemented with
inverters and a one can be added to the sum through the input carry.

The addition and subtraction operations can be combined into one com-
mon circuit by including an exclusive-OR gate with each full-adder. A 4-bit
adder-subtractor circuit is shown in Fig, 4-7. The mode input M controls the
operation. When M = 0 the circuit is an adder and when M = 1 the circuit
becomes a subtractor. Each exclusive-OR gate receives input M and one of the
inputs of B. When M = 0, we have B @ 0 = B. The full-adders receive the
value of B, the input carry is0, and the circuit performs A plus B. When M = 1,
we have B ® 1 = B’ and Cy= 1. The B inputs are all complemented and a 1
is added through the input carry. The circuit performs the operation A plus the
