segment

logical address

SECTION 12.7 Memory Management Hardware 477

memory system causes certain difficulties with respect to program size and the
logical structure of programs. It is more convenient to divide programs and
data into logical parts called segments. A segment is a set of logically related
instructions or data elements associated with a given name. Segments may be
generated by the programmer or by the operating system. Examples of seg-
ments are a subroutine, an array of data, a table of symbols, or a user's
program.

‘The sharing of common programs is an integral part of a multiprogram-
ming system. For example, several users wishing to compile their Fortran
programs shouldbe able to share asingle copy of the compiler rather than each
user having a separate copy in memory. Other system programs residing in
memory are also shared by all users in a multiprogramming system without
having to produce multiple copies.

The third issue in multiprogramming is protecting one program from.
unwanted interaction with another. An example of unwanted interaction is
one user's unauthorized copying of another user’s program. Another aspect
of protection isconcerned with preventing the occasional user from performing
operating system functions and thereby interrupting the orderly sequence of
operations in a computer installation. The secrecy of certain programs must be
kept from unauthorized personnel to prevent abuses in the confidential activ-
ities of an organization.

The address generated by a segmented program is called a logical address.
This is similar toa virtual address except that logical address space is associated
with variable-length segments rather than fixed-length pages. The logical
address may be larger than the physical memory address as in virtual memory,
but it may also be equal, and sometimes even smaller than the length of the
physical memory address. In addition to relocation information, each segment
has protection information associated with it. Shared programs are placed in
a unique segment in each user’s logical address space so that a single physical
copy can be shared. The function of the memory management unit is to map
logical addresses into physical addresses similar to the virtual memory map-
ping concept

Segmented-Page Mapping

It was already mentioned that the property of logical space is that it uses
variable-length segments, The length of each segment is allowed to grow and
contract according to the needs of the program being executed. One way of
specifying the length of a segment is by associating with it a number of
equal-size pages. To see how this is done, consider the logical address shown
in Fig. 12-21. The logical address is partitioned into three fields. The segment
field specifies a segment number. The page field specifies the page within the
segment and the word field gives the specific word within the page. A page
field of k bits can specify up to 2 pages. A segment number may be associated
