synchronous bus

‘asynchronous bus

SECTION 133 Interprocessor Arbitration 501

‘The data lines provide a path for the transfer of data between processors
and common memory. The number of data lines s usually a multiple of 8, with
16 and 32being most common. The address lines are used to identify amemory
address or any other source or destination, such as input or output ports. The
number of address lines determines the maximum possible memory capacity
inthe system. For example, an address of 24 lines can access up to 2* (16 mega)
words of memory. The data and address lines are terminated with three-state
buffers (see Fig. 4-5). The address buffers are unidirectional from processor to
memory. The data lines are bidirectional (see Fig. 123), allowing the transfer
of data in either direction.

Data transfers over the system bus may be synchronous orasynchronous.
In asynchronous bus, each data item is transferred during a time slice known
in advance to both source and destination units. Synchronization is achieved
by driving both units from a common clock source. An alternative procedure
is to have separate clocks of approximately the same frequency in each unit.
Synchronization signals re transmitted periodically in order to keep all clocks
in the system in step with each other. In an asynchronous bus, each data item
being transferred is accompanied by handshaking control signals (see Fig. 11-9)
to indicate when the data are transferred from the source and received by the
destination.

‘The control lines provide signals for controlling the information transfer
between units Timing signals indicate the validity of data and address infor-
mation. Command signals specify operations to be performed. Typical control
lines include transfer signals such as memory read and write, acknowledge of
a transfer, interrupt requests, bus control signals such as bus request and bus
grant, and signals for arbitration procedures.

Table 13-1 lists the 86 lines that are available in the IEEE standard 796
multibus. It includes 16 data lines and 24 address lines. All signals in the
multibus are active or enabled in the low-level state The data transfer control
signals include memory read and write as well as I/O read and write. Conse-
quently, the address lines can be used to address separate memory and /O
spaces. The memory or /O responds witha transfer acknowledge signal when
the transfer is completed. Each processor attached to the multibus has up to
eight interrupt request outputs and one interrupt acknowledge input line.
They are usually applied to a priority interrupt controller similar to the one
described in Fig. 11-21. The miscellaneous control signals provide timing and
initialization capabilities. In particular, the bus lock signal is essential for
multiprocessor applications. This processor-activated signal serves to prevent
other processors from getting hold of the bus while executing a test and set
instruction. This instruction is needed for proper processor synchronization
(see Sec. 13-4). .

The six bus arbitration signals are used for interprocessor arbitration
These signals will be explained later after a discussion of the serial and parallel
arbitration procedures.

 

   
