Section 11.4. Basic Representations for Planning 345

 

except for those that are negative literals in Effect(o)For example, if the initial situation includes
the literals

At(Home), Path(Home, Supermarket), ... |
then the action Go(Supermarket)is applicable, and the resulting situation contains the literals |

Situation Space and Plan Space

In Figure 11.2, we showed a search space of situations in the world (in this case the shopping
world). A path through this space from the initial state to the goal state constitutes a plan for
the shopping problem. If we wanted, we could take a problem described in the STRIPS language
and solve it by starting at the initial state and applying operators one at a time until we reached
a state that includes all the literals in the goal. We could use any of the search methods of Part
IL An algorithm that did this would clearly be considered a problem solver, but we could also

SITUATION SPACE consider it a planner. We would call it a situation space planner because it searches through

PROGRESSION the space of possible situations, and a progression planner because it searches forward from the
initial situation to the goal situation. The main problem with this approach is the high branching
factor and thus the huge size of the search space.

One way to try to cut the branching factor is to search backwards, from the goal state to the

REGRESSION initial state; such a search is called regression planning. This approach is possible because the
operators contain enough information to regress from a partial description of a result state to a
partial description of the state before an operator is applied. We cannot get complete descriptions
of states this way, but we don'tneed to. The approach is desirable because in typical problems the
goal state has only a few conjuncts, each of which has only a few appropriate operators, whereas
the initial state usually has many applicable operators. (An operator is appropriate to a goal ifthe
goal is an effect of the operator.) Unfortunately, searching backwards is complicated somewhat
by the fact that we often have to achieve a conjunction of goals, notjust one. The original STRIPS
algorithm was a situation-space regression planner that was incomplete (it could not always find
a plan when one existed) because it had an inadequate way of handling the complication of
conjunctive goals. Fixing this incompleteness makes the planner very inefficient.

In summary, the nodes in the search tree of a situation-space planner correspond to sit-
uations, and the path through the search tree is the plan that will be ultimately returned by
the planner. Each branch point adds another step to either the beginning (regression) or end
(progression) of the plan.

An alternative is to search through the space of plans rather than the space of situations.

PARTIAL PLAN That is, we start with a simple, incomplete plan, which we call a partial plan. Then we consider
ways of expanding the partial plan until we come up with a complete plan that solves the problem.
The operators in this search are operators on plans: adding a step, imposing an ordering that puts
one step before another, instantiating a previously unbound variable, and so on. The solution is

ese the final plan, and the path taken to reach it is irrelevant. .

OPERRORS Operations on plans come in two categories. Refinement operators take a partial plan
and add constraints to it. One way of looking at a partial plan is as a representation for a set

—=At(Home), At(Supermarket), Path(Home, Supermarket), ...
