section 2.2

How Agents Should Act 33

 

PERCEPT SEQUENCE

IDEAL RATIONAL
AGENT

 

street." Rather, this points out that rationality is concerned with expected success given what has
been perceived. Crossing the street was rational because most of the time the crossing would be
successful, and there was no way I could have foreseen the falling door. Note that another agent
that was equipped with radar for detecting falling doors or a steel cage strong enough to repel
them would be more successful, but it would not be any more rational.

In other words, we cannot blame an agent for failing to take into account something it could
not perceive, or for failing to take an action (such as repelling the cargo door) that it is incapable
oftaking. But relaxing the requirement of perfection is not just a question of being fair to agents.
The point is that if we specify that an intelligent agent should always do what is actually the right
thing, it will be impossible to design an agent to fulfill this specification—unless we improve the
performance of crystal balls.

In summary, what is rational at any given time depends on four things:

+ The performance measure that defines degree of success.

+ Everything that the agent has perceived so far. We will call this complete perceptual history
the percept sequence.

* What the agent knows about the environment.
+ The actions that the agent can perform.

This leads to a definition of an ideal rational agent: For each possible percept sequence, an
ideal rational agent should do whatever action is expected to maximize its performance measure,
on the basis of the evidence provided by the percept sequence and whatever built-in knowledge
the agent has.

We need to look carefully at this definition. At first glance, it might appear to allow an
agent to indulge in some decidedly underintelligent activities. For example, ifan agent does not
look both ways before crossing a busy road, then its percept sequence will not tell it that there is
a large truck approaching at high speed. The definition seems to say that it would be OK for it to
cross the road. In fact, this interpretation is wrong on two counts. First, it would not be rational
to cross the road: the risk of crossing without looking is too great. Second, an ideal rational
agent would have chosen the "looking" action before stepping into the street, because looking
helps maximize the expected performance. Doing actions in order to obtain usefil information
is an important part of rationality and is covered in depth in Chapter 16.

The notion of an agent is meant to be a tool for analyzing systems, not an absolute
characterization that divides the world into agents and non-agents. Consider a clock. It can be
thought of as just an inanimate object, or it can be thought of as a simple agent. As an agent,
most clocks always do the right action: moving their hands (or displaying digits) in the proper
fashion. Clocks are a kind of degenerate agent in that their percept sequence is empty; no matter
what happens outside, the clock's action should be unaffected.

Well, this is not quite true. Ifthe clock and its owner take a trip from California to Australia,
the right thing for the clock to do would be to turn itself back six hours. We do not get upset at
our clocks for failing to do this because we realize that they are acting rationally, given their lack
of perceptual equipment.*

3° One of the authors still gets a small thrill when his computer successfully resets itself at daylight savings time
