SECTION 11-7 Input-Output Processor 427

 

the transfer and stores it in location 64. Upon interruption, the CPU can refer
to memory location 64 for the status word.

Intel 8089 IOP

The Intel 8089 LO processoris contained in a40-pinintegrated circuit package.
Within the 8089 are two independent units called channels. Each channel
combines the general characteristics of a processor unit with those of a direct
memory access controller. The 8089 is designed to function as an IOP in a
microcomputer system where the Intel 8086 microprocessor is used as the
CPU. The 8086 CPUinitiates an LO operation by building a message in memory
that describes the function to be performed. The 8089 IOP reads the message
from memory, carries out the operation, and notifies the CPU when it has
finished.

In contrast to the IBM 370 channel, which has only six basic /O com-
mands, the 8089 IOP has 50 basic instructions that can operate on individual
bits, on bytes, or 16-bit words The IOP can execute programs in a manner
similar to a CPU except that the instruction set is specifically chosen to provide
efficient input-output processing. The instruction set includes general data
transfer instructions, basic arithmetic and logic operations, conditional and
unconditional branch operations, and subroutine call and return capabilities.
The set also includes special instructions to initiate DMA transfers and issue
an interruptrequestto the CPU. It provides efficient datatransferbetween any
‘two components attached to the system bus, such as /O to memory, memory
to memory, or /O to VO.

‘A microcomputer system using the Intel 8086/8089 pair of integrated
circuits is shown in Fig. 11-23. The 8086 functions as the CPU and the 8089 as
the IOP. The two units share a common memory through a bus controller
connected to a system bus, which iscalled a “multibus” by Intel. The IOP uses
a local bus to communicate with various interface units connected to JO
devices The CPU communicates with the IOP by enabling the chanel attention
line. The select lineis used by the CPU to select one of twochannels in the 8089.
The IOP gets the attention of the CPU by sending an interrupt request.

The CPU and IOP communicate with each other by writing messages for
one another in system memory. The CPU prepares the message area and
signals the IOP by enabling the channel attention line. The IOP reads the
message, performs the required I/O functions, and executes the appropriate
channel program. When the channel has completed its program, it issues an
interrupt request to the CPU.

The communication scheme consists of program sections called “blocks,”
which are storedin memory as shown in Fig. 11-24. Each blockcontainscontrol
and parameterinformation as well asan address pointer to its successor block.
The address of the control block is passed to each IOP channel during initial-
ization. The busy flag indicates whether the IOP is busy or ready to perform

 
