34 curren one Digital Logic Circuits

required state transitions, The flip-flop input conditions are a function of the
type of flip-flop used. If we employ JK flip-flops, we need columns for the |
and K inputs of each flip-flop. We denote the inputs of flip-flop A by J, and
K,, and those of flip-flop B by Jy and Ky.

The excitation table for the JK flip-flop specified in Table 1-3 is now used
to derive the excitation table of the sequential circuit. For example, in the first
row of Table 1-5, we have a transition for flip-flop A from in the present state
to in the next state. In Table 1-3 we find that a transition of states from Q(t) = 0
to Q(t + 1) = 0 ina]k flip-flop requires that input J = 0 and input K = x. So
Oand x are copied in the firstrow under, and K,, respectively. Since the first
row also shows a transition for flip-flop B from 0 in the present state to 0 in
the next state, 0 and x are copied in the first row under Jy and Ky. The second
row of Table 1-5 shows a transition for flip-flop B from 0 in the present state
to lin the next state. From Table 1-3 we find that a transition from Q(t) = 0
to Q(t + 1) = 1 requires that input J = 1 and input K = x. So 1 and x are
copied in the second row under J, and Ky, respectively. This process is contin-
ued for each row of the table and for each flip-flop, with the input conditions
as specified in Table 1-3 being copied into the proper row of the particular
flip-flop being considered.

Let us now consider the information available in an excitation table such
as Table 1-5. We know that a sequential circuit consists of anumber of flip-flops
and a combinational circuit From the block diagram of Fig. 1-24, we note that
the outputs of the combinational circuit must go to the four flip-flop inputs J,,
Ky Ja, and Ky. The inputs to the combinational circuit are the external input
x and the present-state values of flip-flops A and B. Moreover, the Boolean
functions thatspecify a combinational circuit are derived from a truth table that
shows the input-output relationship of the circuit. The entries that list the
combinational circuit inputs are specified under the “present state” and “in-
put” columns in the excitation table. The combinational circuit outputs are
specified under the “flip-flop inputs” columns. Thus an excitation table trans-
formsa state diagram to a truth table needed for the design of the combina-
tional circuit part of the sequential circuit.

The simplified Boolean functions for the combinational circuit can now
be derived. The inputs are the variables A, B, and x. The outputs are the
variables J4, Ks, Js, and Ky. The information from the excitation table is trans-
ferred into the maps of Fig. 1-28, where the four simplified flip-flop input
equations are derived:

 

Ja = Bx Ky = Br
In=x  Ky=x
The logic diagram is drawn in Fig, 1-29 and consists of two JK flip-flops and

an AND gate. Note that inputs J and K determine the next state of the counter
when a clock signal occurs. If both J and K are equal to 0, a clock signal will
