42 > cuarrer Two Digital Components

to the pins in the package. The number of gates is usually less than 10 and is.
limited by the number of pins available in the IC.

MSI Mediumscale integration (MSI) devices have a complexity of approximately
10 to 200 gates in a single package. They usually perform specific elementary
digital functions such as decoders, adders, and registers.

Ist Large-scale integration (LSI) devices contain between 200 and a few thou-
sand gates in a single package. They include digital systems, such as proces-
sors, memory chips, and programmable modules.

VLSI Very-large-scale integration (VLSI) devices contain thousands of gates
within a single package Examples are large memory arrays and complex
microcomputer chips. Because of their small size and low cost, VLSI devices
have revolutionized the computer system design technology, giving designers
the capability to create structures that previously were not economical.

Digital integrated circuits are classified not only by their logic operation
but also by the specific circuit technology to which they belong. The circuit
technology is referred to as a digital logic family. Each logic family has its own
basic electronic circuit upon which more complex digital circuits and functions
are developed. The basic circuit in each technology is either a NAND, a NOR,
or an inverter gate. The electronic components that are employed in the
construction of the basic circuit are usually used for the name of the technol-
ogy. Many different logic families of integrated circuits have been introduced
commercially. The following are the most popular.

TIL Transistor-transistor logic
ECL Emitter-coupled logic
Mos Metal-oxide semiconductor

CMOS Complementary metal-oxide semiconductor

TIL is a widespread logic family that has been in operation for many
years and is considered as standard. ECL has an advantage in systems requir-
ing high-speed operation. MOS is suitable for circuits that need high compo-
nent density, and CMOS is preferable in systems requiring low power
consumption.

™ The transistor-transistor logic family was an evolution of a previous
technology that used diodes and transistors for the basic NAND gate. This
technology was called DTL, for “diode-transistor logic.” Later the diodes were
replaced by transistors to improve the circuit operation and the name of the
logic family was changed to “transistor-transistor logic.” This is the reason for
mentioning the word “transistor” twice. There are several variations of the TTL
family besides the standard TTL, such as high-speed TTL, low-power TTL,
Schottky TTL, low-power Schottky TTL, and advanced Schottky TTL. The
