6 © cuarrer one Digital Logic Circuits

OR

inverter

NAND

NOR

exclusive-OR

concatenate the variables without an operation symbol between them. AND
gates may have more than two inputs, and by definition, the output is 1if and
only if all inputs are 1.

The OR gate produces the inclusive-OR function; that is, the output is 1
if input A or input B or both inputs are 1; otherwise, the output is 0. The
algebraic symbol of the OR function is +, similar to arithmetic addition, OR
gates may have more than two inputs, and by definition, the outputis 1 if any
input is 1.

The inverter circuit inverts the logicsense of a binary signal. It produces
the NOT, or complement, function. The algebraic symbol used for the logic
complement is either a prime or a bar over the variable symbol. In this book
we use a prime for the logic complement of a binary variable, while a bar over
the letter is reserved for designating a complement microoperation as defined
in Chap. 4.

The small circle in the output of the graphic symbol of an inverter desig-
nates a logic complement. A triangle symbol by itself designates a buffer
Gircuit. A buffer does not produce any particular logic function since the binary
value of the output is the same as the binary value of the input. This circuit
is used merely for power amplification. For example, a buffer that uses 3 volts
forbinary 1 will produce an output of 3 volts when its input is 3 volts. However,
the amount of electrical power needed at the input of the buffer is much less
than the power produced at the output of the buffer. The main purpose of the
buffer is to drive other gates that require a large amount of power.

‘The NAND function is the complement ofthe AND function, as indicated
by the graphic symbol, which consists of an AND graphic symbol followed by
a small circle. The designation NAND is derived from the abbreviation of
NOT-AND. The NOR gate is the complement of the OR gate and uses an OR
graphic symbol followed by a small drcle, Both NAND and NOR gates may
have more than two inputs, and the output is always the complement of the
AND or OR function, respectively.

The exclusive-OR gate has a graphic symbol similar to the OR gate except
for the additional curved line on the input side. The output of this gate is 1 if
any input is 1 but excludes the combination when both inputs are 1. The
exclusive-OR function has its own algebraic symbol or can be expressed in
terms of AND, OR, and complement operations as shown in Fig. 1-2. The
exclusive-NOR is the complement of the exclusive-OR, as indicated by the
small circlein the graphicsymbol. The output of this gate s 1 only if both inputs
are equal to 1 or both inputs are equal to 0. A more fitting name for the
exclusive-OR operation would be an odd function; that is, its output is 1 if an
odd number of inputs are 1. Thus in a three-input exclusive-OR (odd) function,
the output is 1 ifonly one inputis 1 or if all three inputs are 1. The exclusive-OR
and exclusive-NOR gates are commonly available with two inputs, and only
seldom are they found with three or more inputs.
