56 — cuarrer Two Digital Components

parallel into a shift register and then transmits the data from the serial output
line. The receiver accepts the data serially into a shift register through its serial
input line. When the entire n bits are accumulated they can be taken from the
outputs of the register in parallel. Thus the transmitter performs a parallel-to-
serial conversion of data and the receiver convertsthe incoming serial data back
to parallel data transfer.

2-6 Binary Counters

A register that goes through a predetermined sequence of states upon the
application of input pulses is called a counter. The input pulses may be clock
pulses or may originate from an external source. They may occur at uniform
intervals of time or at random. Counters are found in almost all equipment
containing digital logic. They are used for counting the number of occurrences
of anevent and are useful for generating timing signals to control the sequence
of operations in digital computers,

Of the various sequences a counter may follow, the straight binary se-
quence is the simplest and most straightforward. A counter that follows the
binary number sequence is called a binary counter. An n-bit binary counter is
a register of n flip-flops and associated gates that follows a sequence of states
according to the binary count of n bits, from 0to 2" ~ 1. The design of binary
counters can be carried out by the procedure outlined in Sec. 1-7 for sequential
Gircuits A simpler alternative design procedure may be carried out from a
direct inspection of the sequence of states that the register must undergo to
achieve a straight binary count.

Going through a sequence of binary numbers such as 0000, 0001, 0010,
0011, and so on, we note that the lower-order bit is complemented after every
count and every other bit is complemented from one count to the next if and
only if all its lower-order bits are equal to 1. For example, the binary count from
0111 (7) to 1000 (8) is obtained by (a) complementing the low-order bit, (b)
complementing the second-order bit because the first bit of O11 is 1, (6)
complementing the third-order bit because the first two bits of 0111 are 1’s, and
(d) complementing the fourth-order bit because the first three bits of 011] are
all I's.

‘A counter circuit will usually employ flip-flops with complementing
capabilities. Both T and JK flip-flops have this property. Remember that a JK
flip-flop is complemented if both its J and K inputs are 1 and the clock goes
through a positive transition. The output of the flip-flop does not change if
] = K = 0. Inaddition, the counter may be controlled with an enable input that
tums the counter on or off without removing the clock signal from the flip-
flops.

P* synchronous binary countershave aregularpattem, as can be seen from
the4-bitbinarycounter shownin Fig. 2-10. The C inputs ofall flip-flops receive
the common clock. If the count enable is 0, all J and K inputs are maintained
