SECTION 102 Addition and Subtraction 339

as 00100001 and —33 as 11011111. Note that 11011111 isthe 2's complement of
00100001, and vice versa.

The addition of two numbers in signed-2's complement form consists of
adding the numbers with the sign bits treated the same as the other bits of the
number. A carry-out of the sign-bit position is discarded. The subtraction
consists of first taking the 2's complement of the subtrahend and then adding
it to the minuend.

Whentwonumbers of n digits each areaddedandthesum occupies + 1
digits, we say that an overflow occurred. The effect of an overflow on the sum
of two signed-2’s complement numbers is discussed in Sec. 3-3. An overflow
can be detected by inspecting the last two carries out of the addition. When
the two carries are applied to an exclusive-OR gate, the overflow is detected
when the output of the gate is equal to 1.

The register configuration for the hardware implementation is shown in
Fig. 10-3. This is the same configuration as in Fig. 10-1 except that the sign bits
are not separated from the rest of the registers. We name the A register AC
(accumulator) and the B register BR. The leftmost bit in AC and BR represent
the sign bits of the numbers. The two sign bits are added or subtracted together
with the other bits in the complementer and parallel adder. The overflow
flip-flop V is set to 1 if there is an overflow. The output carry in this case is
discarded.

The algorithm foradding and subtracting two binary numbers in signed-
2's complement representation is shown in the flowchart of Fig. 10-4. The sum
is obtained by adding the contents of AC and BR (including their sign bits). The
overflow bit V is set to 1 if the exclusive-OR of the last two carries is 1, and it
is cleared to 0 otherwise. The subtraction operation is accomplished by adding
the content of AC to the 2’s complement of BR. Taking the 2's complement of
BR has the effect of changing a positive number to negative, and vice versa.
‘An overflow must be checked during this operation because the two numbers
added could have the same sign. The programmer must realize that if an
overflow occurs, there will be an erroneous result in the AC register.

Figure 10-3 Hardware for signed-2s complement addition and subtraction.

 

BR register

|

‘Complementer and
Vv parallel adder

mm |

AC register

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
