programmed 110

interrupt

DMA

IOP

SECTION 11-4 Modes of Transfer 403

Programmed /O operations are the result of LO instructions written in
the computer program. Each data item transfer is initiated by an instruction
in the program. Usually, the transfer is to and from a CPU register and
peripheral. Otherinstructions are needed to transferthe data to and from CPU
and memory. Transferring data under program control requires constant mon-
itoringof the peripheral by the CPU. Once a data transfer is initiated, the CPU
is required to monitor the interface to see when a transfer can again be made.
Itis up to the programmed instructions executed in the CPU to keepclose tabs
on everything that is taking place in the interface unit and the UO device.

In the programmed LO method, the CPU stays in a program loop until
the /O unit indicates that it is ready for data transfer. This is a time-consuming
process since it keeps the processor busy needlessly. It can be avoided by using
an interrupt facility and special commands to inform the interface to issue an
interrupt request signal when the data are available from the device. In the
meantime the CPU can proceed to execute another program. The interface
meanwhile keeps monitoring the device. When the interface determines that
the device is ready for data transfer, it generates an interrupt request to the
computer. Upon detecting the external interrupt signal, the CPU momentarily
stops the task itis processing, branches to a service program to process the /O
transfer, and then returns to the task it was originally performing.

Transfer of data under programmed I/O is between CPU and peripheral.
Indirect memory access (DMA), the interface transfers data into and out of the
memory unit through the memory bus. The CPU initiates the transfer by
supplying the interface with the starting address and the number of words
needed to be transferred and then proceeds to execute other tasks. When the
transferis made, the DMA requests memory cycles through the memory bus.
When the requestiis granted by the memory controller, the DMA transfers the
data directly intomemory. The CPU merely delays its memory access operation
to allow the direct memory /O transfer. Since peripheral speed is usually
slower than processor speed, I/O-memory transfers are infrequent compared
to processor access to memory. DMA transfer is discussed in more detail in
Sec. 114.

Many computers combine the interface logic with the requirements for
direct memory access into one unit and cal it an /O processor (IOP). The IOP
can handle many peripherals through a DMA and interrupt facility. In such
a system, the computer is divided into three separate modules: the memory
unit, the CPU, and the IOP. /O processors are presented in Sec. 11-7.

Example of Programmed /O

In the programmed I/O method, the /O device does not have direct access to
memory. A transfer from an /O device to memory requires the execution of
severalinstructions by the CPU, including an input instruction to transfer the
data from the device to the CPU and astoreinstruction to transfer the data from
the CPU to memory. Other instructions may be needed to verify that the data
are available from the device and to count the numbers of words transferred.
