476

FIFO

(CHAPTER TWELVE Memory Organization.

first-out (FIFO) and the least recently used (LRU). The FIFO algorithm selects for
replacement the page that has been in memory the longest time. Each time a
page is loaded into memory, its identification number is pushed into a FIFO
stack. FIFO will be full whenever memory has no more empty blocks. When
anew page must be loaded, the page least recently brought in is removed. The
page to be removed is easily determined because its identification number is
at the top of the FIFO stack. The FIFO replacement policy has the advantage
of being easy to implement. It has the disad vantage that under certain circum-
stances pages are removed and loaded from memory too frequently.

The LRU policy is more difficult to implement but has been more attrac-
tive on the assumption that the least recently used page is a better candidate
for removal than the least recently loaded page as in FIFO. The LRU algorithm
can be implemented by associating a counter with every page that is in main
memory. When a page is referenced, its associated counter is set to zero. At
fixed intervals of time, the counters associated with all pages presently in
memory are incremented by 1. The least recently used page is the page with
the highest count. The counters are often called aging registers, as their count
indicates their age, that is, how long ago their associated pages have been
referenced.

12-7_Memory Management Hardware

 

Ina multiprogramming environment where many programs reside in memory
it becomes necessary to move programs and data around the memory, to vary
the amount of memory in use by a given program, and to prevent a program
from changing other programs. The demands on computer memory brought
about by multiprogramming have created theneed fora memory management
system. A memory management system is a collection of hardware and soft-
ware procedures for managing the various programs residing in memory. The
memory management software is part of an overall operating system available
in many computers, Here we are concerned with the hardware unit associated
with the memory management system.
The basic components of a memory management unit are:

1. A facility for dynamic storage relocation that maps logical memory
references into physical memory addresses

2. A provision for sharing common programs stored in memory by differ-
ent users

3. Protection of information against unauthorized access between users
and preventing users from changing operating system functions

‘The dynamic storage relocation hardware is a mapping process similar to
the paging system described in Sec. 12-6. The fixed page size used in the virtual
