Section 12.3

Analysis of Hierarchical Decomposition 379

 

cRITICS

it is worthwhile to do some preprocessing of the decomposition methods to put them in a form
that satisfies the unique main subaction condition so that we can freely cut off search when we
hit an inconsistent abstract plan without fear of missing any solutions.

It is important to remember that even when the upward solution property fails to hold, it is
still a reasonable heuristic to prefer applications of decomposition to consistent plans rather than
inconsistent ones. Similarly, even when the downward solution property is violated, it makes
more sense to pursue the refinement of abstract solutions than that of inconsistent plans, even
though the abstract solution may not lead to a real solution. (Exercise 12.4 asks you to find an
example of the violation of the downward solution property.)

Decomposition and sharing

In CHOOSE-DECOMPOSITION, We just merge each step ofthe decomposition into the existing plan.
This is appropriate for a divide-and-conquer approach—we solve each subproblem separately,
and then combine it into the rest ofthe solution. But often the only solution to a problem involves
combining the two solutions by sharing steps rather than by joining distinct sets of steps. For
example, consider the problem "enjoy a honeymoon and raise a baby." A planner might choose
the decomposition "get married and go on honeymoon" for the first subproblem and "get married
and have a baby" for the second, but the planner could get into a lot of trouble ifthe two "get
married" steps are different. Indeed, if a precondition to "get married" is "not married," and
divorce is not an option, then there is no way that a planner can merge the two subplans without
sharing steps. Hence a sharing mechanism is required for a hierarchical planner to be complete

Sharing can be implemented by adding a choice point in CHOOSE-DECOMPOSITION for
every operator in a decomposition: either a new step is created to instantiate the operator or an
existing step is used. This is exactly analogous tothe existing choice pointin CHOOSE-OPERATOR.
Although this introduces a lot of additional choice points, many of them will have only a single
alternative if no operators are available for sharing. Furthermore, it is a reasonable heuristic to
prefer sharing to non-sharing.

Many hierarchical planners use a different mechanism to handle this problem: they merge
decompositions without sharing but allow critics to modify the resulting plan. A critic is a
function that takes a plan as input and returns a modified plan with some conflict or other
anomaly corrected. Theoretically, using critics is no more or less powerful than putting in all the
choice points, but it can be easier to manage the search space with a well-chosen set of critics.

Note that the choice of sharing versus merging steps has an effect on the efficiency of
planning, as well as on completeness. An interesting example of the costs and benefits of sharing
occurs in optimizing compilers. Consider the problem of compiling sin(x)+cos(x) for a sequential
computer. Most compilers accomplish this by merging two separate subroutine calls in a trivial
way: all the steps of sin come before any ofthe steps of cos (or vice versa). If we allowed sharing
instead of merging, we could actually get a more efficient solution, because the two computations
have many steps in common. Most compilers do not do this because it would take too much
time to consider all the possible shared plans. Instead, most compilers take the critic approach:
a peephole optimizer is just a kind of critic.
