SIMD

MIMD

SECTION 911 Parallel Processing 301

tion associated with the operands, The operation performed in each functional
unitis indicated in each block of the diagram. The adder and integer multiplier
perform the arithmetic operations with integer numbers. The floating-point
operations are separated into three circuits operating in parallel. The logic,
shift, and increment operations can be performed concurrently on different
data. All units are independent of each other, so one number can be shifted
while another number is being incremented. A multifunctional organization
is usually associated with a complex control unit to coordinate all the activities
among the various components.

There are a variety of ways that parallel processing can be classified. It
can be considered from the internal organization of the processors, from the
interconnection structure between processors, or from the flow of information
through the system. One classification introduced by M. J. Flynn considers the
organization of a computer system by the number of instructions and data
items that are manipulated simultaneously. The normal operation of a com-
puter is to fetch instructions from memory and execute them in the processor.
The sequence of instructions read from memory constitutes an instruction
stream. The operations performed on the data inthe processor constitutes data
stream. Parallel processing may occur in the instruction stream, in the data
stream, or in both. Flynn's classification divides computers into four major
groups as follows:

Single instruction stream, single data stream (SISD)
Single instruction stream, multiple data stream (SIMD)
Multiple instruction stream, single data stream (MISD)
Multiple instruction stream, multiple data stream (MIMD)

SISD represents the organization of a single computer containing a con-
trol unit, a processor unit, and a memory unit. Instructions are executed
sequentially and the system may or may not have internal parallel processing
capabilities. Parallel processing in this case may be achieved by means of
multiple functional units or by pipeline processing.

SIMD represents an organization that includes many processing units
under the supervision of a common control unit. All processors receive
the same instruction from the control unit but operate on different items of
data. The shared memory unit must contain multiple modules so that it can
communicate with all the processors simultaneously. MISD structure is only
of theoretical interest since no practical system has been constructed using this
organization MIMD organization refers to a computer system capable of
processing several programsat the same time. Most multiprocessor and multi-
computer systems can be classified in this category.

Flynn’s classification depends on the distinction between the perform-
ance of the control unit and the data-processing unit. It emphasizes the be-
