392

CHAPTER ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

—— Data bus -——“
Source Destination
unit Strobe unit

(a) Block diagram

 

 

Data Valid data +

Strobe

(b) Timing diagram

Figure 11-3 Source:nitiated strobe or data transfer.

‘The data bus carries the binary information from source unit to the destination
unit. Typically, the bus has multiple lines to transfer an entire byte or word.
The strobe is a single line that informs the destination unit when a valid data
word is available in the bus.

‘As shownin the timing diagram of Fig. 11-3(b), the source unitfirstplaces
the data on the data bus. After a brief delay to ensure that the data settle to
a steady value, the source activates the strobe pulse. The information on the
data bus and the strobe signal remain in the active state for a sufficient time
period to allow the destination unit to receive the data. Often, the destination
unit uses the falling edge of the strobe pulse to transfer the contents of the data
businto one of ts internal registers. The source removes the data from the bus
a brief period after it disables its strobe pulse. Actually, the source does not
have tochange the information in the data bus. The fact that the strobe signal
is disabled indicates that the data bus does not contain valid data. New valid
data will be available only after the strobe is enabled again.

Figure 11-4 shows a data transfer initiated by the destination unit. In this
case the destination unit activates the strobe pulse, informing the source to
provide the data. The source unit responds by placing the requested binary
information on the data bus. The data must be valid and remain in the bus long
enough for the destination unit to accept it. The falling edge of the strobe pulse
can be used again to trigger a destination register. The destination unit then
disables the strobe. The source removes the data from the bus after a predeter-
mined time interval.

In many computers the strobe pulse is actually controlled by the clock
pulses in the CPU. The CPU is always in control of the buses and informs the
external units how to transfer data. For example, the strobe of Fig, 11-3 could
bea memory-write control signal from the CPU to a memory unit. The source,
being the CPU, places a word on the data bus and informs the memory unit,
