10.3 Implementing pointers and objects 243

 

12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Il 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

key | prev
next

Figure 10.6 The linked list of Figures 10.3(a) and 10.5 represented in a single array A. Each list
element is an object that occupies a contiguous subarray of length 3 within the array. The three
attributes key, next, and prev correspond to the offsets 0, 1, and 2, respectively, within each object.
A pointer to an object is the index of the first element of the object. Objects containing list elements
are lightly shaded, and arrows show the list ordering.

Allocating and freeing objects

To insert a key into a dynamic set represented by a doubly linked list, we must al-
locate a pointer to a currently unused object in the linked-list representation. Thus,
it is useful to manage the storage of objects not currently used in the linked-list
representation so that one can be allocated. In some systems, a garbage collec-
tor is responsible for determining which objects are unused. Many applications,
however, are simple enough that they can bear responsibility for returning an un-
used object to a storage manager. We shall now explore the problem of allocating
and freeing (or deallocating) homogeneous objects using the example of a doubly
linked list represented by multiple arrays.

Suppose that the arrays in the multiple-array representation have length m and
that at some moment the dynamic set contains n < m elements. Then 1 objects
represent elements currently in the dynamic set, and the remaining m—n objects are
free; the free objects are available to represent elements inserted into the dynamic
set in the future.

We keep the free objects in a singly linked list, which we call the free list. The
free list uses only the next array, which stores the next pointers within the list.
The head of the free list is held in the global variable free. When the dynamic
set represented by linked list L is nonempty, the free list may be intertwined with
list L, as shown in Figure 10.7. Note that each object in the representation is either
in list L or in the free list, but not in both.

The free list acts like a stack: the next object allocated is the last one freed. We
can use a list implementation of the stack operations PUSH and PoP to implement
the procedures for allocating and freeing objects, respectively. We assume that the
global variable free used in the following procedures points to the first element of
the free list.
