 

6 Chapter 1. Introduction

TOTALTURINGTEST the so-called total Turing Test includes a video signal so that the interrogator can test the
subject's perceptual abilities, as well as the opportunity for the interrogator to pass physical
objects "through the hatch." To pass the total Turing Test, the computer will need

COMPUTER VISION ~ computer vision to perceive objects, and

ROBOTICS © robotics to move them about

COGNITIVE SCIENCE

SYLLOGISMS.

Within AT, there has not been a big effort to try to pass the Turing test. The issue of acting
like a human comes up primarily when AI programs have to interact with people, as when an
expert system explains how it came to its diagnosis, or a natural language processing system has
a dialogue with a user. These programs must behave according to certain normal conventions of
human interaction in order to make themselves understood. The underlying representation and
reasoning in such a system may or may not be based on a human model.

Thinking humanly: The cognitive modelling approach

If we are going to say that a given program thinks like a human, we must have some way of
determining how humans think. We need to get inside the actual workings of human minds.
There are two ways to do this: through introspection—trying to catch our own thoughts as they
go by—or through psychological experiments. Once we have a sufficiently precise theory of
the mind, it becomes possible to express the theory as a computer program. Ifthe program's
input/output and timing behavior matches human behavior, that is evidence that some of the
program's mechanisms may also be operating in humans. For example, Newell and Simon, who
developed GPS, the "General Problem Solver" (Newell and Simon, 1961), were not content to
have their program correctly solve problems. They were more concerned with comparing the
trace of its reasoning steps to traces of human subjects solving the same problems. This is in
contrast to other researchers of the same time (such as Wang (1960)), who were concerned with
getting the right answers regardless ofhow humans might do it. The interdisciplinary field of
cognitive science brings together computer models from AI and experimental techniques from
psychology to try to construct precise and testable theories of the workings of the human mind.

Although cognitive science is a fascinating field in itself, we are not going to be discussing
itall that much in this book. We will occasionally comment on similarities or differences between
Al techniques and human cognition. Real cognitive science, however, is necessarily based on
experimental investigation of actual humans or animals, and we assume that the reader only has
access to a computer for experimentation. We will simply note that AI and cognitive science
continue to fertilize each other, especially in the areas of vision, natural language, and learning.
The history of psychological theories of cognition is briefly covered on page 12.

Thinking rationally: The laws of thought approach

The Greek philosopher Aristotle was one of the first to attempt to codify "right thinking," that is,
irrefutable reasoning processes. His famous syllogisms provided patterns for argument structures
that always gave correct conclusions given correct premises. For example, "Socrates is a man;
