40

Chapter 2. Intelligent Agents

 

CONDITION-ACTION
RULE

What performance measure would we like our automated driver to aspire to? Desirable
qualities include getting to the correct destination; minimizing fuel consumption and wear and
tear; minimizing the trip time and/or cost; minimizing violations of traffic laws and disturbances
to other drivers; maximizing safety and passenger comfort; maximizing profits. Obviously, some
of these goals conflict, so there will be trade-offs involved.

Finally, were this a real project, we would need to decide what kind of driving environment
the taxi will face. Should it operate on local roads, or also on freeways? Will it be in Southern
California, where snow is seldom a problem, or in Alaska, where it seldom is not? Will it always
be driving on the right, or might we want it to be flexible enough to drive on the left in case we
want to operate taxis in Britain or Japan? Obviously, the more restricted the environment, the
easier the design problem.

Now we have to decide how to build a real program to implement the mapping from
percepts to action. We will find that different aspects of driving suggest different types of agent
program. We will consider four types of agent program:

* Simple reflex agents

+ Agents that keep track of the world
* Goal-based agents

* Utility-based agents

Simple reflex agents

The option of constructing an explicit lookup table is out of the question. The visual input from
a single camera comes in at the rate of 50 megabytes per second (25 frames per second, 1000 x
1000 pixels with 8 bits of color and 8 bits of intensity information). So the lookup table for an
hour would be 2* °° entries.

However, we can summarize portions of the table by noting certain commonly occurring
input/output associations. For example, if the car in front brakes, and its brake lights come on,
then the driver should notice this and initiate braking. In other words, some processing is done on
the visual input to establish the condition we call "The car in front is braking"; then this triggers
some established connection in the agent program to the action "initiate braking". We call such
a connection a condition-action rule’ written as

if car-in-front-is-brakingthen initiate-braking

Humans also have many such connections, some of which are learned responses (as for driving)
and some of which are innate reflexes (such as blinking when something approaches the eye).
In the course of the book, we will see several different ways in which such connections can be
learned and implemented.

Figure 2.7 gives the structure of a simple reflex agent in schematic form, showing how
the condition-action rules allow the agent to make the connection from percept to action. (Do
not worry if this seems trivial; it gets more interesting shortly.) We use rectangles to denote

7 Also called situation-action rules, productions, or if-then rules. The last term is also used by some authors for
logical implications, so we will avoid it altogether
