 

14.4 Swap-Space Management 503

seeks during reading or writing of a process image. We can improve perfor-
mance by caching the block location information in physical memory, and by
using special tools to allocate physically contiguous blocks for the swap file, but
the cost of traversing the file-system data structures still remains.

Alternatively, swap space can be created in a separate disk partition. No
file system or directory structure is placed on this space. Rather, a separate
swap-space storage manager is used to allocate and deallocate the blocks. This
manager uses algorithms optimized for speed, rather than for storage efficiency.
Internal fragmentation may increase, but this tradeoff is acceptable because
data in the swap space generally live for much shorter amounts of time than
do files in the file system, and the swap area may be accessed much more
frequently. This approach creates a fixed amount of swap space during disk
partitioning. Adding more swap space can be done only via repartitioning
of the disk (which involves moving or destroying and restoring the other file-
system partitions from backup), or via adding another swap space elsewhere.

Some operating systems are flexible and can swap both in raw partitions
and in file-system space. Solaris 2 is an example. The policy and implementa-
tion are separate, allowing the machine’s administrator to decide which type to
use. The tradeoff is between the convenience of allocation and management in
the file system, and the performance of swapping in raw partitions.

14.4.3 Swap-Space Management: An Example

To illustrate the methods used to manage swap space, we now follow the
evolution of swapping and paging in UNIX. As discussed fully in Appendix A,
UNIX started with an implementation of swapping that copied entire processes
between contiguous disk regions and memory. UNIX evolved to a combination
of swapping and paging, as paging hardware became available.

In 4.3 BSD, swap space is allocated to a process when the process is started.
Enough space is set aside to hold the program, known as the text pages or the
text segment, and the data segment of the process. Preallocating all the needed
space in this way generally prevents a process from running out of swap space
while it executes. When a process starts, its text is paged in from the file system.
These pages are written out to swap when necessary, and are read back in from
there, so the file system is consulted only once for each text page. Pages from
the data segment are read in from the file system, or are created (if they are
uninitialized), and are written to swap space and paged back in as needed.
One optimization (for instance, when two users run the same editor) is that
processes with identical text pages share these pages, both in physical memory
and in swap space.

Two per-process swap maps are used by the kernel to track swap-space
use. The text segment is a fixed size, so its swap space is allocated in 512 KB
chunks, except for the final chunk, which holds the remainder of the pages, in
1 KB increments (Figure 14.7).
