354 = cHArTER TEN Computer Arithmetic

integer declaration
statement

tracted and then added to restore A. The next time around the loop, this
number is shifted left (or multiplied by 2) and B subtracted again. This gives
2(A ~ B + B)~ B=2A ~B. This result is obtained in the nonrestoring
method by leaving A — Bas is. The next time around the loop, the number is
shiftedleft and B aided to give 2(A — B) + B = 2A ~ B, whichis the same as
before Thus, in thenonrestoring method, B is subtracted ifthe previous value
of Q, wasa 1, but Bis added if the previous value of Q, was a0 andno restoring
of the partial remainder is required. This process saves the step of adding the
divisor if A is less than B, but it requires special control logic to remember the
previous result. The first time the dividend is shifted, B must be subtracted.
‘Also, if the last bit of the quotient is 0, the partial remainder must be restored
to obtain the correct final remainder.

10-5 Floating-Point Arithmetic Operations

Many high-level programming languages havea facility for specifying floating-
point numbers. The most common way is to specify them by a real declaration
statement as opposed to fixed-point numbers, which are specified by an integer
declaration statement Any computer that has a compiler for such high-level
programming language must have a provision for handling floating-point
arithmetic operations. The operations are quite often included in the internal
hardware. Ifno hardware is available for the operations, the compiler must be
designed with a package of floating-point software subroutines. Although the
hardware method is more expensive, it is so much more efficient than the
software method that floating-point hardware is included in’most computers
and is omitted only in very small ones.

Basic Considerations

Floating-point representation of data was introduced in Sec. 3-4. A floating-
point number in computer registers consists of two parts: a mantissa m and an
exponent e, The two parts represent a number obtained from multiplying m
times a radix r raised to the value of e; thus

mx

The mantissa may be a fraction or an integer. The location of the radix point
and the value of the radix r are assumed and are not included in the registers.
For example, assume a fraction representation and a radix 10. The decimal
number 537.25 is represented in a register with m = 53725 and e = 3 and is
interpreted to represent the floating-point number

53725 x 10°
