Notes for Chapter 8 2i1

couple of definitions will help you apply the 0-1 sorting lemma. We say that an area
of an array is clean if we know that it contains either all Os or all 1s. Otherwise,
the area might contain mixed Os and Is, and it is dirty. From here on, assume that
the input array contains only Os and 1s, and that we can treat it as an array with r
rows and s columns.

d. Prove that after steps 1—3, the array consists of some clean rows of Os at the top,
some clean rows of Is at the bottom, and at most s dirty rows between them.

e. Prove that after step 4, the array, read in column-major order, starts with a clean
area of Os, ends with a clean area of 1s, and has a dirty area of at most Ss
elements in the middle.

J. Prove that steps 5-8 produce a fully sorted 0-1 output. Conclude that column-
sort correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.

g. Now suppose that s does not divide r. Prove that after steps 1-3, the array
consists of some clean rows of Os at the top, some clean rows of Is at the
bottom, and at most 2s — | dirty rows between them. How large must r be,
compared with s, for columnsort to correctly sort when s does not divide r?

h. Suggest a simple change to step 1 that allows us to maintain the requirement
that r > 25? even when s does not divide r, and prove that with your change,
columnsort correctly sorts.

 

Chapter notes

The decision-tree model for studying comparison sorts was introduced by Ford
and Johnson [110]. Knuth’s comprehensive treatise on sorting [211] covers many
variations on the sorting problem, including the information-theoretic lower bound
on the complexity of sorting given here. Ben-Or [39] studied lower bounds for
sorting using generalizations of the decision-tree model.

Knuth credits H. H. Seward with inventing counting sort in 1954, as well as with
the idea of combining counting sort with radix sort. Radix sorting starting with the
least significant digit appears to be a folk algorithm widely used by operators of
mechanical card-sorting machines. According to Knuth, the first published refer-
ence to the method is a 1929 document by L. J. Comrie describing punched-card
equipment. Bucket sorting has been in use since 1956, when the basic idea was
proposed by E. J. Isaac and R. C. Singleton [188].

Munro and Raman [263] give a stable sorting algorithm that performs O(n'**)
comparisons in the worst case, where 0 < € < 1 is any fixed constant. Although
