454

(CHAPTER TWELVE Memory Organization

though the physical properties of these storage devices can be quite complex,
their logical properties can be characterized and compared by a few parame-
ters. The important characteristics of any device are its access mode, access
time, transfer rate, capacity, and cost.

The average time required to reach a storage location in memory and
obtain its contents is called the access time. In electromechanical devices with
moving parts such as disks and tapes, the access time consists of a seek time
required to position the read-write head to a location and a transfer time
required to transfer data to or from the device. Because the seek time is usually
much longer than the transfer time, auxiliary storage is organized in records
or blocks. A record is a specified number of characters or words. Reading or
writing is always done on entire records. The transfer rate is the number of
characters or words that the device can transfer per second, after it has been
positioned at the beginning of the record.

Magnetic drums and disks are quite similar in operation. Both consist of
high-speed rotating surfaces coated with a magnetic recording medium. The
rotating surface of the drumis acylinder and that of the disk, around flat plate.
The recording surface rotates at uniform speed and is not started or stopped
during access operations. Bits are recorded as magnetic spots on the surface
asiit passesa stationary mechanism called a write head. Stored bits are detected
by a change in magnetic field produced by a recorded spot on the surface as
it passes through a read head. The amount of surface available for recording in
a disk is greater than in a drum of equal physical size. Therefore, more
information can be stored on a disk than on a drum of comparable size. For
this reason, disks have replaced drums in more recent computers.

Magnetic Disks

A magnetic disk is a circular plate constructed of metal or plastic coated with
magnetized material. Often both sides of the disk are used and several disks
may bestacked on one spindle with read/write heads available on each surface.
Alldisks rotate togetherat high speed andare not stopped or started for access
purposes. Bits are stored in the magnetized surface in spots along concentric
Grcles called tracks. The tracks are commonly divided into sections called
sectors. In most systems, the minimum quantity of information which can be
transferred is a sector. The subdivision of one disk surface into tracks and
sectors is shown in Fig. 12-5.

Some units use a single read/write head foreach disk surface. In this type
of unit, the track address bits are used by a mechanical assembly to move the
head into the specified track position before reading or writing. In other disk
systems, separate read/write heads are provided for each track in each surface
The address bits can then select a particular track electronically through a
decoder circuit This type of unit is more expensive and is found only in very
large computer systems.

Permanent timing tracks are used in disks to synchronize the bits and

  
