290

Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

 

98

complementary literals in C\ and C:. From the lifting lemma, it is easy to derive a similar
statement about any sequence of applications of the resolution rule:

For any clause C’ in the resolution closure of S’, there is a clause C in the resolution
closure of S, such that C’ is a ground instance of C and the derivation of C is the
same length as the derivation of C’,

From this fact, it follows that ifthe clause False appears in the resolution closure of S’, it must
also appear in the resolution closure of S. This is because False cannot be a ground instance
of any other clause. To recap: we have shown that if 5 is unsatisfiable, then there is a finite
derivation of the clause False using the resolution rule

The lifting of theorem proving from ground clauses to first-order clauses provided a vast
increase in power. This derives from the fact that the first-order proof need instantiate variables
only as far as necessary for the proof, whereas the ground-clause methods were required to
examine a huge number of arbitrary instantiations.

SUMMARY

 

We have presented an analysis of logical inference in first-order logic, and a number of algorithms
for doing it.

+ A simple extension of the propositional inference rules allows the construction of proofs
for first-order logic. Unfortunately, the branching factor for the quantifier is huge.

The use of unification to identify appropriate substitutions for variables eliminates the 5
instantiation step in first-order proofs, making the process much more efficient

A generalized version of Modus Ponens uses unification to provide a natural and powerful
inference rule, which can be used in a backward-chaining or forward-chaining algorithm.

The canonical form for Modus Ponens is Horn form:
p\A...Ap, => q where p; and g are atoms.

This form cannot represent all sentences, and Modus Ponens is not a complete proofsystem-

The generalized resolution inference rule provides a complete system for proof by refuta-
tion. It requires a normal form, but any sentence can be put into the form

Resolution can work with either conjunctive normal form—each sentence is a disjunction
of literals—or implicative normal form—each sentence is of the form

P\A... Apn = Q\ V...V dm, Where p; and g; are atoms.

Several strategies exist for reducing the search space of a resolution system without com-
promising completeness.
