Oe

512 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

14.5.5 Extensions

The concepts of RAID have been generalized to other storage devices, including
arrays of tapes, and even to the broadcast of data over wireless systems. When
applied to arrays of tapes, the RAID structures are able to recover data even if
one of the tapes in an array of tapes is damaged. When applied to broadcast of
data, a block of data is split into short units and is broadcast along with a parity
unit; if one of the units is not received for any reason, it can be reconstructed
from the other units. Commonly, tape-drive robots containing multiple tape
drives will stripe data across all the drives to increase throughput and decrease
backup time.

14.6 = Disk Attachment

Computers access disk storage in two ways. One way is via 1/O ports (or host-
attached storage); this is common on small systems. The other way is via a
remote host via a distributed file system; this is referred to as network-attached
storage.

14.6.1 Host-Attached Storage

Host-attached storage is storage accessed via local I/O ports. These ports are
available in several technologies. The typical desktop PC uses an 1/O bus
architecture called IDE or ATA. This architecture supports a maximum of two
drives per I/O bus. High-end workstations and servers generally use more
sophisticated I/O architectures such as SCSI and fibre channel (FC).

SCSI is a bus architecture. Its physical medium is usually a ribbon cable
having a large number of conductors (typically 50 or 68). The SCSI protocol
supports a maximum of 16 devices on the bus. Typically this consists of one
controller card in the host (the SCSI initiator), and up to 15 storage devices (the
SCSI targets). A SCSI disk is a typical SCSI target, but the protocol provides
the ability to address up to 8 logical units in each SCSI target. A typical use of
logical unit addressing is to direct commands to components of a RAID array,
or components of a removable media library (such as a CD jukebox sending
commands to the media changer mechanism or to one of the drives).

FC is a high-speed serial architecture. This architecture can operate over
optical fiber or over a 4-conductor copper cable. It has two variants. One
is a large switched fabric having a 24-bit address space. This method is
expected to dominate in the future, and is the basis of storage-area networks
(SANs). Because of the large address space and the switched nature of the
communication, multiple hosts and storage devices can attach to the fabric,
allowing great flexibility in I/O communication. The other is an arbitrated loop
(FC-AL) that can address 126 devices (drives and controllers).
