456

Chapter 17 Amortized Anal

 

Exercises

171-1

If the set of stack operations included a MULTIPUSH operation, which pushes k
items onto the stack, would the O(1) bound on the amortized cost of stack opera-
tions continue to hold?

17.1-2
Show that if a DECREMENT operation were included in the k-bit counter example,
1 operations could cost as much as ©(nk) time.

17.1-3

Suppose we perform a sequence of 7 operations on a data structure in which the ith
operation costs i if 7 is an exact power of 2, and | otherwise. Use aggregate analysis
to determine the amortized cost per operation.

 

17.2. The accounting method

In the accounting method of amortized analysis, we assign differing charges to
different operations, with some operations charged more or less than they actu-
ally cost. We call the amount we charge an operation its amortized cost. When
an operation’s amortized cost exceeds its actual cost, we assign the difference to
specific objects in the data structure as credit. Credit can help pay for later oper-
ations whose amortized cost is less than their actual cost. Thus, we can view the
amortized cost of an operation as being split between its actual cost and credit that
is either deposited or used up. Different operations may have different amortized
costs. This method differs from aggregate analysis, in which all operations have
the same amortized cost.

We must choose the amortized costs of operations carefully. If we want to show
that in the worst case the average cost per operation is small by analyzing with
amortized costs, we must ensure that the total amortized cost of a sequence of oper-
ations provides an upper bound on the total actual cost of the sequence. Moreover,
as in aggregate analysis, this relationship must hold for all sequences of opera-
tions. If we denote the actual cost of the ith operation by c; and the amortized cost
of the ith operation by ¢;, we require

ya=ye (17.1)

for all sequences of n operations. The total credit stored in the data structure
is the difference between the total amortized cost and the total actual cost, or

   
