 

The Foundations of Artificial Intelligence 15

 

and subtracting machine called the Pascaline. Leibniz improved on this in 1694. building a
mechanical device that multiplied by doing repeated addition. Progress stalled for over a century
unti 1 Charles Babbage (1792-1871) dreamed that logarithm tables could be computed by machine.
He designed a machine for this task. but never completed the project. Instead. he turned to the
design of the Analytical Engine. for which Babbage invented the ideas of addressable memory.
stored programs. and conditional jumps. Although the idea of programmable machines was
not new—in 1805. Joseph Marie Jacquard invented a loom that could be programmed using
punched cards—Babbage’s machine was the first artifact possessing the characteristics necessary
for universal computation. Babbage's colleague Ada Lovelace, daughter of the poet Lord Byron.
wrote programs forthe Analytical Engine and even speculated that the machine could play chess
or compose music. Lovelace was the world's first programmer. and the first of many to endure
massive cost overruns and to have an ambitious project ultimately abandoned.'! Babbage's basic
design was proven viable by Doron Swade and his colleagues. who built a working model using
only the mechanical techniques available at Babbage's time (Swade. 1993). Babbage had the
right idea, but lacked the organizational skills to get his machine built.

AI also owes a debt to the software side of computer science. which has supplied the
operating systems. programming languages, and tools needed to write modern programs (and
papers about them). But this is one area where the debt has been repaid: work in AI has pioneered
many ideas that have made their way back to "mainstream" computer science. including time
sharing, interactive interpreters. the linked list data type. automatic storage management. and
some of the key concepts of object-oriented programming and integrated program development
environments with graphical user interfaces.

Linguistics (1957—present)

In 1957. B. F. Skinner published Verbal Behavior. This was a comprehensive. detailed account
of the behaviorist approach to language learning. written by the foremost expert in the field. But
curiously, a review of the book became as well-known as the book itself. and served to almost kill
off interest in behaviorism. The author of the review was Noam Chomsky. who had just published
a book on his own theory. Syntactic Structures. Chomsky showed how the behaviorist theory did
not address the notion of creativity in language—it did not explain how a child could understand
and make up sentences that he or she had never heard before. Chomsky"s theory—based on
syntactic models going back to the Indian linguist Panini (c. 350 B.C.)—could explain this, and
unlike previous theories. it was formal enough that it could in principle be programmed.

Later developments in linguistics showed the problem to be considerably more complex
than it seemed in 1957. Language is ambiguous and leaves much unsaid. This means that
understanding language requires an understanding of the subject matter and context. not just an
understanding ofthe structure of sentences. This may seem obvious, but it was not appreciated
until the early 1950s. Much ofthe early work in knowledge representation (the study of how to
put knowledge into a form that a computer can reason with) was tied to language and informed
by research in linguistics. which was connected in turn to decades of work on the philosophical
analysis of language.

MU She also gave her name to Ada. the U.S. Department of Defense’s all-purpore programming language.

 
