Problems for Chapter 15 405

(a) (b)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 15.11 Seven points in the plane, shown on a unit grid. (a) The shortest closed tour, with
length approximately 24.89. This tour is not bitonic. (b) The shortest bitonic tour for the same set of
points, Its length is approximately 25.58.

15-2 Longest palindrome subsequence
A palindrome is a nonempty string over some alphabet that reads the same for-
ward and backward. Examples of palindromes are all strings of length 1, civic,
racecar, and aibohphobia (fear of palindromes).

Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest palindrome that is a subsequence
of a given input string. For example, given the input character, your algorithm
should return carac. What is the running time of your algorithm?

15-3 Bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman problem

In the euclidean traveling-salesman problem, we are given a set of n points in
the plane, and we wish to find the shortest closed tour that connects all 7 points.
Figure 15.11(a) shows the solution to a 7-point problem. The general problem is
NP-hard, and its solution is therefore believed to require more than polynomial
time (see Chapter 34).

J. L. Bentley has suggested that we simplify the problem by restricting our at-
tention to bitonic tours, that is, tours that start at the leftmost point, go strictly
rightward to the rightmost point, and then go strictly leftward back to the starting
point. Figure 15.11(b) shows the shortest bitonic tour of the same 7 points. In this
case, a polynomial-time algorithm is possible.

Describe an O(n7)-time algorithm for determining an optimal bitonic tour. You
may assume that no two points have the same x-coordinate and that all operations
on real numbers take unit time. (Hint: Scan left to right, maintaining optimal pos-
sibilities for the two parts of the tour.)

15-4 Printing neatly
Consider the problem of neatly printing a paragraph with a monospaced font (all
characters having the same width) on a printer. The input text is a sequence of n
