SECTION 9-6 Vector Processing 319

The compiler for a processor that uses delayed branches is designed to
analyze the instructions before and after the branch and rearrange the program
sequence by inserting useful instructions in the delay steps. For example, the
compiler can determine that the program dependencies allow one or more
instructions preceding the branch to be moved into the delay steps after the
branch. These instructions are then fetched from memory and executed
through the pipeline while the branch instruction is being executed in other
segments, The effect is the same as if the instructions were executed in their
original order, except that the branch delay is removed. It is up to the compiler
to find useful instructions to put after the branch instruction. Failing that, the
compiler can insert no-op instructions.

‘An example of delayed branch is shown in Fig. 9-10. The program for this,
example consists of five instructions:

Load from memory to R1
Increment R2

Add R3 to R4

Subtract RS from R6
Branch to address X

In Fig. 9-10(a) the compiler inserts two no-op instructions after the branch.
The branch address X is transferred to PC in clock cycle 7. The fetching of the
instruction at X is delayed by two clock cycles by the no-op instructions. The
instruction at X starts the fetch phase at clock cycle8afterthe program counter
PC has been updated.

The program in Fig. 9-10(b) isrearranged by placing the add and subtract
instructions after the branch instruction instead of before as in the original
program. Inspection of the pipeline timing shows that PC is updated to the
value of X in clock cycle 5, but the add and subtract instructions are fetched
from memory and executed in the proper sequence. In other words, if the load
instruction is at address 101 and X is equal to 350, the branch instruction is
fetched fromaddress 103, The add instruction is fetched from address 104 and
executed in clock cycle 6. The subtract instruction is fetched from address 105
and executed inclockcycle7. Sincethe value of Xis transferred to PC with clock
cycle 5 in the E segment, the instruction fetched from memory at clock cycle
6's from address 350, which is the instruction at the branch address.

9-6 Vector Processing

There is a class of computational problems that are beyond the capabilities of
a conventional computer. These problems are characterized by the fact that
they require a vast number of computations that will take a conventional
computer days or even weeks to complete. In many science and engineering
