Problems for Chapter 15 4il

a. The problem, as stated, allows you to invest your money in multiple investments
in each year. Prove that there exists an optimal investment strategy that, in
each year, puts all the money into a single investment. (Recall that an optimal
investment strategy maximizes the amount of money after 10 years and is not
concerned with any other objectives, such as minimizing risk.)

b. Prove that the problem of planning your optimal investment strategy exhibits
optimal substructure.

c. Design an algorithm that plans your optimal investment strategy. What is the
running time of your algorithm?

d. Suppose that Amalgamated Investments imposed the additional restriction that,
at any point, you can have no more than $15,000 in any one investment. Show
that the problem of maximizing your income at the end of 10 years no longer
exhibits optimal substructure.

15-11 Inventory planning
The Rinky Dink Company makes machines that resurface ice rinks. The demand
for such products varies from month to month, and so the company needs to de-
velop a strategy to plan its manufacturing given the fluctuating, but predictable,
demand. The company wishes to design a plan for the next n months. For each
month i, the company knows the demand d;, that is, the number of machines that
it will sell. Let D = )7/_, d; be the total demand over the next n months. The
company keeps a full-time staff who provide labor to manufacture up to m ma-
chines per month. If the company needs to make more than m machines in a given
month, it can hire additional, part-time labor, at a cost that works out to c dollars
per machine. Furthermore, if, at the end of a month, the company is holding any
unsold machines, it must pay inventory costs. The cost for holding j machines is
given as a function h(j) for j = 1,2,..., D, where h(j) > 0 for 1 < j < Dand
h(j) <hG +1)forl <j < D-1.

Give an algorithm that calculates a plan for the company that minimizes its costs
while fulfilling all the demand. The running time should be polyomial inn and D.

15-12 Signing free-agent baseball players

Suppose that you are the general manager for a major-league baseball team. During
the off-season, you need to sign some free-agent players for your team. The team
owner has given you a budget of $X to spend on free agents. You are allowed to
spend less than $X altogether, but the owner will fire you if you spend any more
than $X.
