SECTION 134 Interprocessor Communication and Synchronization 507

an operating system service, it must request it by interrupting the master and
waiting until the current program can be interrupted.

In the separate operating system organization, each processor can exe-
cute the operating system routines it needs. This organization is more suitable
for loosely coupled systems where every processor may have its own copy of
the entire operating system.

In the distributed operating system organization, the operating system
routines aredistributedamong the available processors. However, each partic-
ular operating system function is assigned to only one processor ata time. This
type of organization is also referred to as a floating operating system since the
routines float from one processor to another and the execution of the routines
may be assigned to different processors at different times.

In a loosely coupled multiprocessor system the memory is distributed
among the processors and there is no shared memory for passing information.
The communication between processors is by means of message passing
through /O channels. The communication is initiated by one processor calling
a procedure that resides in the memory of the processor with which it wishes
to communicate. When the sending processor and receiving processor name
each other as a source and destination, a channel of communication is estab-
lished. A message is then sent with a header and various data objects used to
communicate between nodes. There may be a number of possible paths avail-
able to send the message between any two nodes. The operating system in each
node contains routing information indicating the alternative paths that can be
used to send a message to other nodes. The communication efficiency of the
interprocessor network depends on the communication routing protocol, pro-
cessor speed, data link speed, and the topology of the network.

Interprocessor Synchronization
The instruction set of a multiprocessor contains basic instructions that are used
to implement communication and synchronization between cooperating pro-
cesses. Communication refers to the exchange of data between different
processes. For example, parameters passed to a procedure in a different pro-
cessor constitute interprocessor communication. Synchronization refers to the
special case where the data used to communicate between processors is control
information. Synchronization is needed to enforce the correct sequence of
processes and to ensure mutually exclusive access to shared writable data
‘Multiprocessorsy stemsusually include various mechanisms todeal with
the synchronization of resources. Low-level primitives are implemented di-
rectly by the hardware. These primitives are the basic mechanisms that enforce
mutual exclusion for more complex mechanisms implemented in software. A
number of hardware mechanisms for mutual exclusion have been developed.
One of the most popular methods is through the use of a binary semaphore.
