14.8 Tertiary-Storage Structure 523

into the drive, many seconds can be required for the drive to calibrate itself
to the tape and to prepare for I/O. Although a slow tape jukebox can have a
tape switch time of 1 or 2 minutes, this time is not enormously larger than the
random-access time within one tape.

So, to generalize, we say that random access in a disk jukebox has a latency
of tens of seconds, whereas random access in a tape jukebox has a latency of
hundreds of seconds; switching disks is expensive, but switching tapes is not.
Be careful not to overgeneralize: Some expensive tape jukeboxes can rewind,
eject, load a new tape, and fast forward to a random item of data all in less than
30 seconds.

If we pay attention to only the performance of the drives ina jukebox, the
bandwidth and latency seem reasonable. But if we focus our attention on the
cartridges instead, there is a terrible bottleneck. Consider first the bandwidth.
By comparison with a fixed disk, the bandwidth-to-storage-capacity ratio of a
robotic library is much less favorable. To read all the data stored ona large hard
disk could take about an hour. To read all the data stored in a large tape library
could take years. The situation with respect to access latency is nearly as bad.
To illustrate this, if 100 requests are queued for a disk drive, the average waiting
time will be about 1 second. If 100 requests are queued for a tape library, the
average waiting time could be over 1 hour. The low cost of tertiary storage
results from having many cheap cartridges share a few expensive drives. But
a removable library is best devoted to the storage of infrequently used data,
because the library can satisfy only a relatively small number of 1/0 requests
per hour.

14.8.3.2. Reliability

Although we often think good performance means high speed, another important
aspect of performance is reliability. If we try to read some data and are unable
to do so because of a drive or media failure, for all practical purposes the access
time is infinitely long and the bandwidth is infinitely small. So it is important
to understand the reliability of removable media.

Removable magnetic disks are somewhat less reliable than are fixed hard
disks because the cartridge is more likely to be exposed to harmful environ-
mental conditions such as dust, large changes in temperature and humidity,
and mechanical forces such as shock and bending. Optical disks are considered
very reliable, because the layer that stores the bits is protected by a transparent
plastic or glass layer. The reliability of magnetic tape varies widely, depending
on the kind of drive. Some inexpensive drives wear out tapes after a few dozen
uses; other kinds are gentle enough to allow millions of reuses. By comparison
with a magnetic disk, the head in a magnetic-tape drive is a weak spot. A disk
head flies above the media, but a tape head is in close contact with the tape.
The scrubbing action of the tape can wear out the head after a few thousands or
tens of thousands of hours.
