 

14.7 Stable-Storage Implementation 515

consistent and correct value, even if another failure occurs during the recovery.
In the remainder of this section, we discuss how to meet our needs.
A disk write results in one of three outcomes:

1. Successful completion: The data were written correctly on disk.

2. Partial failure: A failure occurred in the midst of transfer, so only some of
the sectors were written with the new data, and the sector being written
during the failure may have been corrupted.

3. Total failure: The failure occurred before the disk write started, so the
previous data values on the disk remain intact.

We require that, whenever a failure occurs during writing of a block, the
system detects it and invokes a recovery procedure to restore the block to a
consistent state. To do that, the system must maintain two physical blocks for
each logical block. An output operation is executed as follows:

1. Write the information onto the first physical block.

2. When the first write completes successfully, write the same information
onto the second physical block.

3. Declare the operation complete only after the second write completes suc-
cessfully.

During recovery from a failure, each pair of physical blocks is examined.
If both are the same and no detectable error exists, then no further action is
necessary. If one block contains a detectable error, then we replace its contents
with the value of the other block. If both blocks contain no detectable error,
but they differ in content, then we replace the content of the first block with
the value of the second. This recovery procedure ensures that a write to stable
storage either succeeds completely or results in no change.

We can extend this procedure easily to allow the use of an arbitrarily large
number of copies of each block of stable storage. Although a large number of
copies further reduces the probability of a failure, it is usually reasonable to
simulate stable storage with only two copies. The data in stable storage are
guaranteed to be safe unless a failure destroys all the copies.

Because waiting for disk writes to complete (synchronous I/O) is time
consuming, many storage arrays add NVRAM as a cache. Because the memory
is non-volatile (usually it has battery power as a backup to the unit’s power), it
can be trusted to store the data on its way to the disks. It is thus considered part
of the stable storage. Writes to it are much faster than to disk, so performance
is greatly improved.
