850 Chapter 29 Linear Programming

Algorithms for linear programming

This chapter studies the simplex algorithm. This algorithm, when implemented
carefully, often solves general linear programs quickly in practice. With some
carefully contrived inputs, however, the simplex algorithm can require exponential
time. The first polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming was the ellipsoid
algorithm, which runs slowly in practice. A second class of polynomial-time algo-
rithms are known as interior-point methods. In contrast to the simplex algorithm,
which moves along the exterior of the feasible region and maintains a feasible solu-
tion that is a vertex of the simplex at each iteration, these algorithms move through
the interior of the feasible region. The intermediate solutions, while feasible, are
not necessarily vertices of the simplex, but the final solution is a vertex. For large
inputs, interior-point algorithms can run as fast as, and sometimes faster than, the
simplex algorithm. The chapter notes point you to more information about these
algorithms.

If we add to a linear program the additional requirement that all variables take
on integer values, we have an integer linear program. Exercise 34.5-3 asks you
to show that just finding a feasible solution to this problem is NP-hard; since
no polynomial-time algorithms are known for any NP-hard problems, there is no
known polynomial-time algorithm for integer linear programming. In contrast, we
can solve a general linear-programming problem in polynomial time.

In this chapter, if we have a linear program with variables x = (X),X2.....Xn)
and wish to refer to a particular setting of the variables, we shall use the notation
¥ = (X1.¥o,...4%y)-

 

29.1 Standard and slack forms

This section describes two formats, standard form and slack form, that are use-
ful when we specify and work with linear programs. In standard form, all the
constraints are inequalities, whereas in slack form, all constraints are equalities
(except for those that require the variables to be nonnegative).

Standard form

In standard form, we are given n real numbers ¢;,C2,...,Cn; m real numbers
by, bo,....bm; and mn real numbers aj; fori = 1,2,...,m and j = 1,2,....n.
We wish to find n real numbers x), X2,...,X, that
