370

Chapter 12 Practical Planning

 

expensive and sometimes contain humans, and any mistake can be costly and irrevocable. Second,
space missions take place in space, which does not contain many other agents to mess up the
expected effects of actions. Planners have been used by the ground teams for the Hubble space
telescope and at least three spacecraft: Voyager, Uosat-II, and ERS-1. In each case, the goal is
to orchestrate the observational equipment, signal transmitters, and attitude- and velocity-control
mechanisms, in order to maximize the value of the information gained from observations while
obeying resource constraints on time and energy.

Mission scheduling often involves very complex temporal constraints, particularly those
involving periodic events. For example, ERS-1, the European Earth Resource Observation
satellite, completes an orbit every 100minutes, and returns to the same point every 72 hours. An
observation of a particular point on the earth's surface thus can be made at any one of a number of.
times, each separated by 72 hours, but at no other time. Satellites also have resource constraints
on their power output: they cannot exceed a fixed maximum output, and they must be sure not
to discharge too much power over a period of time. Other than that, a satellite can be considered
as ajob-shop scheduling problem, where the telescopes and other instruments are the machines,
and the observations are the products. PlanERS-1 is a planner based on O-PLAN that produces
observation plans for the ERS-1.

The Hubble space telescope (HST) is a good example of the need for automated planning
tools. After it was launched in April 1990, the primary mirror was found to be out of focus.
Using Bayesian techniques for image reconstruction (see Chapter 24), the ground team was
able to compensate for the defect to a degree, enabling the HST to deliver novel and important {
data on Pluto, a gravitational lens, a supemova, and other objects. In 1993, shuttle astronauts
repaired most of the problems with the primary mirror, opening up the possibility ofa new set of
observations. The ground team is constantly learning more about what the HST can and cannot
do, and it would be impossible to update the observation plans to reflect this ever-increasing
knowledge without automated planning and scheduling tools.

Any astronomer can submit a proposal to the HST observing committee. Proposals are
classified as high priority (which are almost always executed and take up about 70% of the avail-
able observing time), low priority (which are scheduled as time allows), or rejected. Proposals
are received at the rate of about one per day, which means there are more proposals than can be
executed. Each proposal includes a machine-readable specification of which instrument should {
be pointed at which celestial object, and what kind of exposure should be made. Some observa-
tions can be done at any time, whereas others are dependent on factors such as the alignment of
planets and whether the HST is in the earth's shadow. There are some constraints that are unique
to this domain. For example, an astronomer may request periodic observations ofa quasar over a
period of months or years subject to the constraint that each observation be taken under the same
shadow conditions.

The HST planning system is split into two parts. A long-term scheduler, called SPIKE,
first schedules observations into one-week segments. The heuristic is to assign high-priority
proposals so that they can all be executed within the scheduled segment, and then to pack each
segment with extra low-priority proposals until they are about 20% above capacity. This is done
a year or more ahead of time. A multiyear schedule with 5000 observations or so can be created
in less than an hour, so replanning is easy. After each segment is scheduled, a short-term planner,
SPSS, does the detailed planning of each segment, filling in the time between high-priority tasks

 
