 

470 Chapter 13 1/O Systems

access style is also good for output devices such as printers or audio boards,
which naturally fit the concept of a linear stream of bytes.

13.3.2 Network Devices

Because the performance and addressing characteristics of network I/O differ
significantly from those of disk 1/O, most operating systems provide a network
1/O interface that is different from the read()-write()-seek() interface
used for disks. One interface available in many operating systems, including
UNIX and Windows NT, is the network socket interface.

Think of a wall socket for electricity: Any electrical appliance can be
plugged in. By analogy, the system calls in the socket interface enable an
application to create a socket, to connect a local socket to a remote address
(which plugs this application into a socket created by another application), to
listen for any remote application to plug into the local socket, and to send and
receive packets over the connection. To support the implementation of servers,
the socket interface also provides a function called select () that manages a set
of sockets. A call to select () returns information about which sockets have a
packet waiting to be received, and which sockets have room to accept a packet
to be sent. The use of select () eliminates the polling and busy waiting that
would otherwise be necessary for network I/O. These functions encapsulate the
essential behaviors of networks, greatly facilitating the creation of distributed
applications that can use any underlying network hardware and protocol stack.

Many other approaches to interprocess communication and network com-
munication have been implemented. For instance, Windows NT provides one
interface to the network interface card, and a second interface to the network
protocols (Section 21.6). In UNIX, which has a long history as a proving ground
for network technology, we find half-duplex pipes, full-duplex FIFOs, full-
duplex STREAMS, message queues, and sockets. Information on UNIX network-
ing is given in Section A.9.

13.3.3 Clocks and Timers
Most computers have hardware clocks and timers that provide three basic
functions:
e Give the current time
© Give the elapsed time
Set a timer to trigger operation X at time T
These functions are used heavily by the operating system, and also by time-

sensitive applications. Unfortunately, the system calls that implement these
functions are not standardized across operating systems.
