294 Chapter 9. Inference in First-Order Logic

Textbooks geared toward automated deduction include (in addition to those mentioned in
Chapter 7) the classic Symbolic Logic and Mechanical Theorem Proving (Chang and Lee, 1973)
and, more recently, Automated Reasoning: Introduction and Applications (Wos et al., 1992).
The two-volume anthology Automation of Reasoning (Siekmann and Wrightson, 1983) includes
many important papers on automated deduction from 1957 to 1970. The historical summaries
prefacing each volume provide a concise yet thorough overview of the history of the field. Further
important historical information is available from Loveland's "Automated Theorem Proving: A
Quarter-Century Review" (1984) and from the bibliography of (Wos et al., 1992).

The principal journal for the field of theorem proving is the Journal of Automated Reason-
ing; important results are also frequently reported in the proceedings of the annual Conferences
on Automated Deduction (CADE). Research in theorem proving is also strongly related to the use
of logic in analyzing programs and programming languages, for which the principal conference
is Logic in Computer Science.

 

EXERCISES

9.1 For each of the following pairs ofatomic sentences, give the most general unifier, ifit exists.
a. P(A, B,B), Pix.y.2).
b. Oly. G(A, B)), O(G(x,x),y).
c. Older(Father(y), y), Older(Father(x), John).
d. Knows(Father(y), y).Knows(x, x).

9.2. One might suppose that we can avoid the problem of variable conflict in unification by
standardizing apart all of the sentences in the knowledge base once and for all. Show that for
some sentences, this approach cannot work. (Hint: Consider a sentence, one part of which unifies
with another.)

9.3 Show that the final state of the knowledge base after a series of calls to FORWARD-CHAIN is
independent of the order of the calls. Does the number of inference steps required depend on the
order in which sentences are added? Suggest a useful heuristic for choosing an order.

9.4 Write down logical representations for the following sentences, suitable for use with Gen-
eralized Modus Ponens:

a. Horses, cows, and pigs are mammals.

b. An offspring ofa horse is a horse

c. Bluebeard is a horse.

d. Bluebeard is Charlie's parent.

e. Offspring and parent are inverse relations.
f. Every mammal has a parent
