304 — CHAPTER NM Pipeline and Vector Processing

task

space-time diagram

TABLE 9-1 Content of Registers in Pipeline Example

 

 

Clock Segment 1 Segment 2 Segment 3

Pulse OO
Number Rl R29 -R3— RS RS
1 A BS = -
2 A OB AB OG -

3 A, By AWB, Cz AItB +O

4 Ac Be ABs GG Ar* By + C2

5 As Bs AstBe Ca AS* B+ Cs

6 Ac Be AstBs Cs Aut Ba + Ca

7 Ay Br AstBe Cy AS* BS + Cs

8 AB, Cy AG BE + Ge

9 = = ARB Hy

 

R2. The second clock pulse transfers the product of R1 and R2 into R3 and C,
into R4. The same clock pulse transfers Ay and By into R1 and R2. The third
clock pulse operates on all three segments simultaneously. It places als and By
into Rl and R2, transfers the product of R1 and R2 into R3, transfers C, into
R4, and places the sum of R3 and R4 into RS. It takes three clock pulses to fill
up the pipe and retrieve the first output from R5. From there on, each clock
produces a new output and moves the data one step down the pipeline. This
happens as long as new input data flow into the system. When no more input
data are available, the clock must continue until the last output emerges out
of the pipeline.

General Considerations

Any operation that can be decomposed into a sequence of suboperations of
about the same complexity can be implemented by a pipeline processor. The
technique is efficient for those applications that need to repeat the same task
many times with different sets of data. The general structure of a four-segment
pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 9-3. The operands pass through all four segments
ina fixed sequence. Each segment consists of a combinational circuit 5; that
performsa suboperation over the data stream flowing through the pipe The
segments are separated by registers R; that hold the intermediate results
between the stages. Information flows between adjacent stages under the
control of a common clock applied to all the registers simultaneously. We
define a task as the total operation performed going through all the segments
in the pipeline.

The behavior of a pipeline can be illustrated with a space-time diagram.
This is a diagram that shows the segment utilization as a function of time. The
space-time diagram ofa four-segment pipeline is demonstrated in Fig. 9-4. The
horizontal axis displays the time in clock cycles and the vertical axis gives the
