430

CHAPTER ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

ferred in a serial fashion with the result that the transfer rate is much slower.
The task of the data communication processor is to transmit and collect digital
information to and from each terminal, determine if the information is data or
control and respond to all requests according to predetermined established
procedures. The processor, obviously, must also communicate with the CPU
and memory in the same manner as any UO processor.

The way that remote terminals are connected to a data communication
processor is via telephone lines or other public or private communication
facilities. Since telephone lines were originally designed for voice communica-
tion and computers communicate in terms of digital signals, some form of
conversion must be used. The converters are called data sets, acoustic couplers,
or modems (from “‘modulator-demodulator’). A modemconvertsdigitalsignals
into audio tones to be transmittedovertelephonelines and also converts audio
tones from the line to digital signals for machine use. Various modulation
schemes as wellas different grades of communication media and transmission
speeds are used. A communication line may be connected to a synchronous
or asynchronous interface, depending on the transmission method of the
remote terminal, An asynchronous interface receives serial data with start and
stop bits in each character as shown in Fig. 11-7. This type ofinterfaceis similar
to the asynchronous communication interface unit presented in Fig. 11-8.

‘Synchronous transmission does not use start-stop bits to frame characters
and therefore makes more efficient use of the communication link. High-speed
devices use synchronous transmission to realize this efficiency. The modems
used in synchronous transmission have internal clocks that are set to the
frequency that bits are being transmitted in the communication line. For proper
operation, it is required that the clocks in the transmitter and receiver modems
remainsynchronized at all times. The communication line, however, contains
only the data bits from which the clock information must be extracted. Fre-
quency synchronization is achieved by the receiving modem from the signal
transitions that occur in the received data. Any frequency shift that may occur
between the transmitter and receiver clocks is continuously adjusted by main-
taining the receiver clock at the frequency of the incoming bit stream. The
modem transfers the received data together with the clock to the interface unit.
The interface or terminal on the transmitterside also uses the clock information
fromits modem. In this way, the same bit rate is maintained in both transmitter
and receiver.

Contrary to asynchronous transmission, where each character canbe sent
separately with its own start and stop bits, synchronous transmission must
send a continuous message in order to maintain synchronism. The message
consists of a group of bits transmitted sequentially as a block of data. The entire
block is transmitted with special control characters at the beginning and end
of the block. The control characters at the beginning of the block supply the
information needed to separate the incoming bits into individual characters.

‘One of the functions of the data communication processor is to check for
transmission errors. An error can be detected by checking the parity in each
