286

CHAPTER EIGHT Central Processing Unit

a new window consisting of a set of registers from the register file for use by
the new procedure. Each procedure call activates a new register window by
incrementing a pointer, while the return statement decrements the pointer and
causes the activation of the previous window. Windows for adjacent proce-
dures have overlapping registers that are shared to provide the passing of
parameters and results.

‘The concept of overlapped register windows is illustrated in Fig, 8-9. The
system has a total of 74 registers. Registers RO through R9 are global registers
that hold parameters shared by all procedures. The other 64 registers are
divided into four windows to accommodate procedures A, B, C, and D. Each
register window consists of 10 local registers and two sets of six registers
common to adjacent windows. Local registers are used for local variables.
Common registers are used for exchange of parameters and results between
adjacent procedures. The common overlapped registers permit parameters to
be passed without the actual movement of data. Only one register window is
activated at any given time with a pointer indicating the active window. Each
procedure call activates a new register window by incrementing the pointer.
The high registers of the calling procedure overlap the low registers of the
called procedure, and therefore the parameters automatically transfer from
calling to called procedure.

‘Asan example, suppose that procedure A calls procedure B. Registers
R26 through R31 are common to both procedures, and therefore procedure A
stores the parameters for procedure B in these registers. Procedure B uses local
registers R32 through R41 for local variable storage. If procedure B calls pro-
cedure C, it will pass the parameters through registers R42 through R47. When
procedure Bis ready toreturnat the end of its computation, the program stores
results of the computation in registers R26 through R31 and transfers back to
the register window of procedure A. Note that registers R10 through R15 are
common to procedures A and D because the four windows have a circular
organization with A being adjacent to D.

‘As mentioned previously, the 10 global registers RO through R9 are
available to all procedures. Each procedure in Fig, 8-9 has available a total of
32registers whileit is active. Thisincludes 10 globalregisters, 10local registers,
six low overlapping registers, and six high overlapping registers. Other fixed-
size register window schemes are possible, and each may differ in the size of
the register window and the size of the total register file. In general, the
organization of register windows will have the following relationships:

number of global registers = G

number of local registers in each window = L
number of registers common to two windows = C
number of windows = W
