492 CHAPTER THIRTEEN Multiprocessors

shared memory

 

Memory unit

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

crul cruz cpus 1oP1 loP2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 13-1 Time-shared common bus organization.

operations are conducted by the processor that is in control of the bus at the
time Any other processor wishing to initiate a transfer must first determine
the availability status of the bus, and only after the bus becomes available can
the processor address the destination unit toinitiate the transfer. A command
is issued to inform the destination unit what operation isto be performed. The
receiving unit recognizes its address in the bus and responds to the control
signals from the sender, after which the transfer is initiated. The system may
exhibit transfer conflicts since one common bus is shared by all processors.
These conflicts must be resolved by incorporating a bus controller that estab-
lishes priorities among the requesting units.

Asingle common-bus system is restricted to one transfer at a time. This
means that when one processor is communicating with the memory, all other
processors are either busy with internal operations or must be idle waiting for
the bus. As a consequence, the total overall transfer rate within the system is
limited by the speed of the single path. The processors in the system can be
kept busy more often through the implementation of two or more independent
buses to permit multiple simultaneous bus transfers. However, this increases
the system cost and complexity.

"A more economical implementation of a dual bus structure is depicted in
Fig, 13-2. Here we have a number of local buses each connected tots own local
memory and to one or more processors, Each local bus may be connected to
a CPU, an IOP, or any combination of processors. A system bus controller links
each local bus to a common system bus. The /O devices connected to the local
IOP, as well as the local memory, are available to the local processor. The
memory connected to the common system bus is shared by all processors. If
an IOP is connected directly to the system bus, the /O devices attached to it
may be made available to all processors. Only one processor can communicate
with the shared memory and other common resources through the system bus
at any given time. The other processors are kept busy communicating with
theirlocal memory and V/O devices. Part of the local memory may be designed
