182

Chapter 7 Quicksort

if we can count the total number of times that line 4 is executed, we can bound the
total time spent in the for loop during the entire execution of QUICKSORT.

Lemma 7.1

Let X be the number of comparisons performed in line 4 of PARTITION over the
entire execution of QUICKSORT on an n-element array. Then the running time of
QUICKSORT is O(n + X).

Proof By the discussion above, the algorithm makes at most n calls to PARTI-
TION, each of which does a constant amount of work and then executes the for

loop some number of times. Each iteration of the for loop executes line 4. .

Our goal, therefore, is to compute X’, the total number of comparisons performed
in all calls to PARTITION. We will not attempt to analyze how many comparisons
are made in each call to PARTITION. Rather, we will derive an overall bound on the
total number of comparisons. To do so, we must understand when the algorithm
compares two elements of the array and when it does not. For ease of analysis, we
rename the elements of the array A as Z,,Z2.....Z,, With z; being the ith smallest
element. We also define the set Z;; = {Z;, Zj11,---.Z;} to be the set of elements
between z; and Z;, inclusive.

When does the algorithm compare z; and z;? To answer this question, we first
observe that each pair of elements is compared at most once. Why? Elements
are compared only to the pivot element and, after a particular call of PARTITION
finishes, the pivot element used in that call is never again compared to any other
elements.

Our analysis uses indicator random variables (see Section 5.2). We define

 

Xi; =1{z; is compared to z;} ,

where we are considering whether the comparison takes place at any time during
the execution of the algorithm, not just during one iteration or one call of PARTI-
TION. Since each pair is compared at most once, we can easily characterize the
total number of comparisons performed by the algorithm:

n-l n
X=>o > xy.
i=l j=it+l

Taking expectations of both sides, and then using linearity of expectation and
Lemma 5.1, we obtain

nat = of 8]

i=1 j=itl
