data communication
Processor

SECTION 11-8 Serial Communication 429

that the IOP program must use in carrying out its task. The task block contains
the actual program to be executed in the IOP.

The CPU and IOP work together through the control and parameter
blocks. The CPU obtains use of the shared memory after checking the busy flag
to ensure that the IOP isavailable. The CPU then fills in the information in the
parameter block and writes a “start operation” command in the CCW. After
the communication blocks have been set up, the CPU enables the channel
attention signal to inform the IOP to start its /O operation. The CPU then
continues with another program. The IOP responds to the channel attention
signal by placing the address of the control block into its program counter. The
IOP refers to the control block and sets the busy flag. It then checks the
operation in the CCW. The PB (parameter block) address and TB (task block)
addressare then transferred into internal IOP registers. The IOP starts execut-
ing the program in the task block using the information in the parameter block.
The entries in the parameter block depend on the /O device. The parameters
listed in Fig. 11-24 are suitable for data transfer to or from a magnetic disk. The
memory address specifies the beginning address of amemory buffer. The byte
count gives the number of bytes to be transferred. The device address specifies
the particular /O device to be used. The track and sector numbers locate the
data on the disk. When the I/O operation is completed, the IOP storesits status
bits in the status word location of the parameter block and interrupts the CPU.
The CPU can refer to the status word to check if the transfer has been com-
pleted satisfactorily. -

11-8 Serial Communication

‘A data communication processor is an VO processor that distributes and
collects data from many remote terminals connected through telephone and
other communication lines. It is a specialized /O processor designed to com-
municate directly with data communication networks. A communication
network may consist of any of a wide variety of devices, such as printers,
interactive display devices, digital sensors, or a remote computing facility.
With the use of a data communication processor, the computer can service
fragments of each network demand in an interspersed manner and thus have
the apparent behavior of serving many usersat once. In this way the computer
is able to operate efficiently in a time-sharing environment

The most striking difference between an /O processor and a data comunu-
nication processor is in the way the processor communicates with the /O
devices. An V/O processor communicates with the peripherals through a com-
mon U/O bus that is comprised of many data and control lines. All peripherals
share the common bus and use it to transfer information to and from the /O
processor. A data communication processor communicates with each terminal
through a single pair of wires Both data and control information are trans-

 
