14.3 Disk Management 499

(or physical formatting). Low-level formatting fills the disk with a special data
structure for each sector. The data structure for a sector typically consists of a
header, a data area (usually 512 bytes in size), and a trailer. The header and
trailer contain information used by the disk controller, such as a sector number
and an error-correcting code (ECC). When the controller writes a sector of data
during normal I/O, the ECC is updated with a value calculated from all the
bytes in the data area. When the sector is read, the ECC is recalculated and
is compared with the stored value. If the stored and calculated numbers are
different, this mismatch indicates that the data area of the sector has become
corrupted and that the disk sector may be bad (Section 14.3.3). The ECC is an
error-correcting code because it contains enough information that, if only a few
bits of data have been corrupted, the controller can identify which bits have
changed and can calculate what their correct values should be. The controller
automatically does the ECC processing whenever a sector is read or written.

Most hard disks are low-level formatted at the factory as a part of the
manufacturing process. This formatting enables the manufacturer to test the
disk and to initialize the mapping from logical block numbers to defect-free
sectors on the disk. For many hard disks, when the disk controller is instructed
to low-level format the disk, it can also be told how many bytes of data space
to leave between the header and trailer of all sectors. It is usually possible
to choose among a few sizes, such as 256, 512, and 1,024 bytes. Formatting a
disk with a larger sector size means that fewer sectors can fit on each track, but
that also means fewer headers and trailers are written on each track, and thus
increases the space available for user data. Some operating systems can handle
only a sector size of 512 bytes.

To use a disk to hold files, the operating system still needs to record its own
data structures on the disk. It does so in two steps. The first step is to partition
the disk into one or more groups of cylinders. The operating system can treat
each partition as though it were a separate disk. For instance, one partition can
hold a copy of the operating system’s executable code, while another holds user
files. After partitioning, the second step is logical formatting (or creation of a
file system). In this step, the operating system stores the initial file-system data
structures onto the disk. These data structures may include maps of free and
allocated space (a FAT or inodes) and an initial empty directory.

Some operating systems give special programs the ability to use a disk
partition as a large sequential array of logical blocks, without any file-system
data structures. This array is sometimes called the raw disk, and I/O to this
array is termed raw I/O. For example, some database systems prefer raw I/O
because it enables them to control the exact disk location where each database
record is stored. Raw I/O bypasses all the file-system services, such as the buffer
cache, file locking, prefetching, space allocation, file names, and directories.
We can make certain applications more efficient by implementing their own
special-purpose storage services on a raw partition, but most applications
perform better when they use the regular file-system services.

 
