Problems for Chapter 15 409

a restricted language. Each path in the graph starting from a distinguished ver-
tex Vo € V corresponds to a possible sequence of sounds produced by the model.
We define the label of a directed path to be the concatenation of the labels of the
edges on that path.

a. Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an edge-labeled graph G with dis-
tinguished vertex Vp and a sequence s = (6), 03..... ox) of sounds from &,
returns a path in G that begins at vp and has s as its label, if any such path exists.
Otherwise, the algorithm should return NO-SUCH-PATH. Analyze the running
time of your algorithm. (Hint: You may find concepts from Chapter 22 useful.)

Now, suppose that every edge (u,v) € E has an associated nonnegative proba-
bility p(u, v) of traversing the edge (u,v) from vertex u and thus producing the
corresponding sound. The sum of the probabilities of the edges leaving any vertex
equals 1. The probability of a path is defined to be the product of the probabil-
ities of its edges. We can view the probability of a path beginning at vo as the
probability that a “random walk” beginning at v9 will follow the specified path,
where we randomly choose which edge to take leaving a vertex u according to the
probabilities of the available edges leaving u.

b. Extend your answer to part (a) so that if a path is returned, it is a most prob-
able path starting at Vp and having label s. Analyze the running time of your
algorithm.

15-8 Image compression by seam carving

We are given a color picture consisting of anm xn array A[1..m,1..n] of pixels,
where each pixel specifies a triple of red, green, and blue (RGB) intensities. Sup-
pose that we wish to compress this picture slightly. Specifically, we wish to remove
one pixel from each of the m rows, so that the whole picture becomes one pixel
narrower. To avoid disturbing visual effects, however, we require that the pixels
removed in two adjacent rows be in the same or adjacent columns; the pixels re-
moved form a “seam” from the top row to the bottom row where successive pixels
in the seam are adjacent vertically or diagonally.

a. Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least exponentially in m,
assuming that n > 1.

b. Suppose now that along with each pixel A[i, j], we have calculated a real-
valued disruption measure d[i, j], indicating how disruptive it would be to
remove pixel A[i, j]. Intuitively, the lower a pixel’s disruption measure, the
more similar the pixel is to its neighbors. Suppose further that we define the
disruption measure of a seam to be the sum of the disruption measures of its
pixels.
