Section 1.2.

The Foundations of Artificial Intelligence B

 

BEHAVIORISM

COGNITIVE
PSYCHOLOGY

is even now described as "the single most important treatise on the physics and physiology of
human vision to this day" (Nalwa, 1993, p.15). In 1879, the same year that Frege launched first-
order logic, Wundt opened the first laboratory of experimental psychology at the University of
Leipzig. Wundt insisted on carefully controlled experiments in which his workers would perform
a perceptual or associative task while introspecting on their thought processes. The careful
controls went a long way to make psychology a science, but as the methodology spread, a curious
phenomenon arose: each laboratory would report introspective data that just happened to match
the theories that were popular in that laboratory. The behaviorism movement of John Watson
(1878-1958) adEdward Lee Thorndike( 1874-1949) rebelled against this subjectivism, rejecting
any theory invelving mental processes on the grounds that introspection could not provide reliable
evidence. Behaviorists insisted on studying only objective measures of the percepts (or stimulus)
given to an animal and its resulting actions (or response). Mental constructs such as knowledge,
beliefs, goals, nd reasoning steps were dismissed as unscientific “folk psychology.” Behaviorism
discovered a le about rats and pigeons, but had less success understandinghumans. Nevertheless,
it had a stronghold on psychology (especially in the United States) from about 1920 to 1960.

The view that the brain possesses and processes information, which is the principal char-
acteristic of cognitive psychology, can be traced back at least to the works of William James?
(1842-1910). Helmholtz also insisted that perception involved a form of unconscious logical in-
ference. The cognitive viewpoint was largely eclipsed by behaviorism until 1943, when Kenneth
Craik published The Nature of Explanation. Craik put back the missing mental step between
stimulus and response. He claimed that beliefs, goals, and reasoning steps could be useful valid
components oja theory of human behavior, and are just as scientific as, say, using pressure and
temperature tctalk about gases, despite their being made of molecules that have neither. Craik
specified the three key steps of a knowledge-based agent: (1) the stimulus must be translated into
an internal representation, (2) the representation is manipulated by cognitive processes to derive
new internal representations, and (3) these are in turn retranslated back into action. He clearly
explained why this was a good design for an agent:

If the organism carries a "small-scale model" of external reality and ofits own possible actions
within it:head, it is able to try out various alternatives, conclude which is the best of them,
react to fiture situations before they arise, utilize the knowledge of past events in dealing with
the present and future, and in every way to react in a much fuller, safer, and more competent
manner to the emergencies which face it. (Craik, 1943)

An agent designed this way can, for example, plan a long trip by considering various possi-
ble routes, comparing them, and choosing the best one, all before starting the journey. Since
the 1960s, the information-processing view has dominated psychology. It it now almost taken
for granted among many psychologists that "a cognitive theory should be like a computer pro-
gram" (Anderwn, 1980). By this it is meant that the theory should describe cognition as consisting
of well-defined transformation processes operating at the level of the information carried by the
input signals

For most of the early history of AI and cognitive science, no significant distinction was
drawn between the two fields, and it was common to see AI programs described as psychological

© William Jameswas the brother of novelist Henry James. It is said that Henry wrote fiction as if it were psychology
and William wrot psychology as if it were fiction,
