326 © cuarrernane Pipeline and Vector Processing

sustained from the time the first answer is produced and does not include the
initial setup time of the pipeline.

‘The first supercomputer developed in 1976 is the Cray-1 supercomputer.
It uses vector processing with 12 distinct functional units in parallel. Each
functional unit is segmented to process the incoming data through a pipeline.
All the functional units can operate concurrently with operands stored in the
largenumber of registers (over 150) in the CPU. A floating-point operation can
be performed on two sets of 64-bit operands during one clock cycle of 12.5 ns.
This gives a rate of 80 megaflops during the time that the data are processed
through the pipeline. It has a memory capacity of 4 million 64-bit words. The
memary is divided into 16 banks, with each bank having a 50-ns access time.
This means that when all 16 banks are accessed simultaneously, the memory
transfer rate is 320 million words per second. Cray research extended its
supercomputer to a multiprocessor configuration called Cray X-MP and Cray
Y-MP. The new Cray-2 supercomputer is 12 times more powerful than the
Cray-1 in vector processing mode.

‘Another early model supercomputer is the Fujitsu VP-200, It has a scalar
processor and a vector processor that can operate concurrently. Like the Cray
supercomputers, a large number of registersand multiple functional units are
used to enable register-to-register vector operations. There are four execution
pipelines in the vector processor, and when operating simultaneously, they
can achieve up to 300 megaflops. The main memory has 32 million words
connected to the vectorregisters through load and store pipelines. The VP-200
hhas 83 vector instructionsand 195 scalar instructions. The newer VP-2600 uses
a clock cycle of 32 ns and claimsa peak performance of 5 gigaflops.

9-7_Array Processors

Anarray processor is a processor that performscomputations on large arrays
of data. The term is used to refer to two different types of processors. An
attached array processor is an auxiliary processor attached to a general-purpose
computer. It is intended to improve the performance of the hast computer in
specific numerical computation tasks. An SIMD array processor is a processor
that has a single-instruction multiple-data organization. It manipulates vector
instructions by means of multiple functional units responding to a common
instruction, Although both types of array processors manipulate vectors, their
internal organization is different.

Attached Array Processor

An attached array processor is designed asa peripheral fora conventional host
computer, and its purpose is to enhance the performance of the computer by
providing. vector processing for complex scientific applications. It achieves
