start bit

stop bit

SECTION 11-3 Asynchronous Data Tranger 397

at the I-state when no characters are transmitted. The first bit, called the start
bit, is always a 0 and is used to indicate the beginning of a character. The last
bit called the stop bit is always a 1. An example of this format is shown in
Fig. 11-7.

A transmitted character can be detected by the receiver from knowledge
of the transmission rules:

1. When a character is not being sent, the line is kept in the I-state.

2. The initiation of a character transmission is detected from the start bit,
which is always 0.

3. The character bits always follow the start bit.

4. After the last bit of the character is transmitted, a stop bit is detected
when the line returns to the I-state for at least one bit time.

Using these rules, the receiver can detect the start bit when the line goes from
1to 0. A clock in the receiver examines the line at proper bit times. The receiver
knows the transfer rate of the bits and the number of character bits to accept.
After the character bits are transmitted, one or two stop bits are sent. The stop
bits are always in the I-state and frame the end of the character to signify the
idle or wait state.

At the end of the character the line is held at the 1-state for a period of
at least one or two bit times so that both the transmitter and receiver can
resynchronize. The length of time that the line stays in this state depends on
the amount of time required for the equipment to resynchronize. Some older
electromechanical terminals use two stop bits, but newer terminals use one
stop bit. The line remains in the 1-state until another character is transmitted.
The stop time ensures that a new character will not follow for one or two bit
times.

‘As an illustration, consider the serial transmission of a terminal whose
transfer rate is 10 characters per second. Each transmitted character consists

Figure 11-7 Asynchronous serial transmission.

LE

Start Stop_,|
tit oo Character bs +} Stop

 
