FS

508 Chapter 14 Mass-Storage Structure

data is stored, and the extra disks are used to store redundant information for
failure recovery.

© RAID Level 0: RAID level 0 refers to disk arrays with striping at the level
of blocks, but without any redundancy (such as mirroring or parity bits).
Figure 14.9a shows an array of size 4.

.

RAID Level 1: RAID level 1 refers to disk mirroring. Figure 14.9b shows a
mirrored organization that holds four disks’ worth of data.

¢ RAID Level 2: RAID level 2 is also known as memory-style error-correcting-
code (ECC) organization. Memory systems have long implemented error
detection using parity bits. Each byte in a memory system may have a
parity bit associated with it that records whether the numbers of bits in the
byte set to 1 is even (parity=0) or odd (parity=1). If one of the bits in the
byte gets damaged (either a 1 becomes a 0, or a 0 becomes a 1), the parity of
the byte changes and thus will not match the stored parity. Similarly, if the
stored parity bit gets damaged, it will not match the computed parity. Thus,
all single-bit errors are detected by the memory system. Error-correcting
schemes store two or more extra bits, and can reconstruct the data if a single
bit gets damaged. The idea of ECC can be used directly in disk arrays via
striping of bytes across disks. For example, the first bit of each byte could
be stored in disk 1, the second bit in disk 2, and so on until the eighth bit
is stored in disk 8, and the error-correction bits are stored in further disks.
This scheme is shown pictorially in Figure 14.9, where the disks labeled P
store the error-correction bits. If one of the disks fails, the remaining bits
of the byte and the associated error-correction bits can be read from other
disks and be used to reconstruct the damaged data. Figure 14.9¢ shows an
array of size 4; note RAID level 2 requires only three disks’ overhead for four
disks of data, unlike RAID level 1, which required four disks’ overhead.

¢ RAID level 3: RAID level 3, or bit-interleaved parity organization,
improves on level 2 by noting that, unlike memory systems, disk
controllers can detect whether a sector has been read correctly, so a single
parity bit can be used for error correction, as well as for detection. The idea
is as follows. If one of the sectors gets damaged, we know exactly which
sector it is, and, for each bit in the sector, we can figure out whether it is
a 1 ora 0 by computing the parity of the corresponding bits from sectors
in the other disks. If the parity of the remaining bits is equal to the stored
parity, the missing bit is 0; otherwise, it is 1. RAID level 3 is as good as
level 2 but is less expensive in the number of extra disks (it has only a
one-disk overhead), so level 2 is not used in practice. This scheme is shown
pictorially in Figure 14.9d.
RAID level 3 has two benefits over level 1. Only one parity disk is
needed for several regular disks, unlike one mirror disk for every disk in
