section 12.1

Practical Planners 369

 

‘OPTIMUM-AIV is based on the open planning architecture O-PLAN (Currie and Tate, 1991).
O-PLAN is similar to the POP planner of Chapter | 1, except that it is augmented to accept a more
expressive language that can represent time, resources, and hierarchical plans. It also accepts
heuristics for guiding the search and records its reasons for each choice, which makes it easier
to replan when necessary. O-PLAN has been applied to a variety of problems, including software
procurement planning at Price Waterhouse, back axle assembly process planning at Jaguar Cars,
and complete factory production planning at Hitachi.

Job shop scheduling

The problem that a factory solves is to take in raw materials and components, and assemble them
into finished products. The problem can be divided into a planning task (deciding what assembly
steps are going to be performed) and a scheduling task (deciding when and where each step will
be performed). In many modem factories, the planning is done by hand and the scheduling is
done with an automated tool.

O-PLAN is being used by Hitachi forjob shop planning and scheduling in a system called
TOSCA. A typical problem involves a product line of 350 different products, 35 assembly
machines, and over 2000 different operations. The planner comes up with a 30-day schedule for
three 8-hour shifts a day. In general, TOSCA follows the partial-order, least-commitment planning
approach. It also allows for "low-commitment" decisions: choices that impose constraints on
the plan or on a particular step. For example, the system might choose to schedule an action to
be carried out on a class of machine without specifying any particular one.

Factories with less diversity of products often follow a fixed plan, but still have a need for
automated scheduling. The Isis system (Fox and Smith, 1984) was developed specifically for
scheduling. It was first tested at the Westinghouse turbine component plant in Winston-Salem,
NC. The plant makes thousands of different turbine blades, and for each one, there are one or
more plans, called process routings. When an order comes in, one of the plans is chosen and a
time for it is scheduled. The time depends on the criticality ofthe order: whether it is an urgent
replacement for a failed blade in service, a scheduled maintenance part that has plenty of lead
time but must arrive on time, orjust a stock order to build up the reserves.

Traditional scheduling methods such as PERT are capable of finding a feasible ordering of
steps subject to time constraints, but it turns out that human schedulers using PERT spend 80% to
90% of their time communicating with other workers to discover what the real constraints are.
A successful automated scheduler needs to be able to represent and reason with these additional
constraints. Factors that are important include the cost of raw materials on hand, the value
of finished but unshipped goods, accurate forecasts of future needs, and minimal disruption of
existing procedures. ISIS uses a hierarchical, least-commitment search to find high-quality plans
that satisfy all of these requirements.

Scheduling for space missions

Planning and scheduling systems have been used extensively in planning space missions as well
as in constructing spacecraft. There are two main reasons for this. First, spacecraft are very

 
