458  Chapter13 I/O Systems

this communication can occur is through the use of special 1/O instructions
that specify the transfer of a byte or word to an I/O port address. The I/O
instruction triggers bus lines to select the proper device and to move bits into
or out of a device register. Alternatively, the device controller can support
memory-mapped I/O. In this case, the device-control registers are mapped
into the address space of the processor. The CPU executes I/O requests using
the standard data-transfer instructions to read and write the device-control
registers.

Some systems use both techniques. For instance, PCs use 1/O instructions
to control some devices and memory-mapped I/O to control others. Figure 13.2
shows the usual PC 1/O port addresses. The graphics controller has I/O ports
for basic control operations, but the controller has a large memory-mapped
region to hold screen contents. The process sends output to the screen by
writing data into the memory-mapped region. The controller generates the
screen image based on the contents of this memory. This technique is simple
to use. Moreover, writing millions of bytes to the graphics memory is faster
than issuing millions of I/O instructions. But the ease of writing to a memory-
mapped 1/O controller is offset by a disadvantage. Because a common type
of software fault is a write through an incorrect pointer to an unintended
region of memory, a memory-mapped device register is vulnerable to accidental
modification. Of course, protected memory helps to reduce this risk.

An I/O port typically consists of four registers, called the status, control,
data-in, and data-out registers.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VO address range (hexadecimal) device
000-00F DMA controller
020-021 interrupt controller
040-043, timer
200-20F game controller
2F8-2FF serial port (secondary)
320-32F hard-disk controller
378-37F parallel port
3D0-3DF graphics controller
3F0-3F7 diskette-drive controller
3F8-3FF serial port (primary)

 

 

 

 

Figure 13.2 Device I/O port locations on PCs (partial).
