16.4 Matroids and greedy methods 439

Theorem 16.6
All maximal independent subsets in a matroid have the same size.

Proof Suppose to the contrary that A is a maximal independent subset of M
and there exists another larger maximal independent subset B of M. Then, the
exchange property implies that for some x € B — A, we can extend A to a larger
independent set A U {x}, contradicting the assumption that A is maximal. .

As an illustration of this theorem, consider a graphic matroid Mg for a con-
nected, undirected graph G. Every maximal independent subset of Mg must be a
free tree with exactly |V | — 1 edges that connects all the vertices of G. Such a tree
is called a spanning tree of G.

We say that a matroid M = (S, L) is weighted if it is associated with a weight
function w that assigns a strictly positive weight w(x) to each element x € S. The
weight function w extends to subsets of S by summation:

w(A) = >» w(x)

xeA
for any A C S. For example, if we let w(e) denote the weight of an edge e ina
graphic matroid Mg, then w(A) is the total weight of the edges in edge set A.

Greedy algorithms on a weighted matroid

Many problems for which a greedy approach provides optimal solutions can be for-
mulated in terms of finding a maximum-weight independent subset in a weighted
matroid. That is, we are given a weighted matroid M = (S, I), and we wish to
find an independent set A € I such that w(A) is maximized. We call such a sub-
set that is independent and has maximum possible weight an optimal subset of the
matroid. Because the weight w(x) of any element x € S is positive, an optimal
subset is always a maximal independent subset — it always helps to make A as large
as possible.

For example, in the minimum-spanning-tree problem, we are given a connected
undirected graph G = (V, £) and a length function w such that w(e) is the (posi-
tive) length of edge e. (We use the term “length” here to refer to the original edge
weights for the graph, reserving the term “weight” to refer to the weights in the
associated matroid.) We wish to find a subset of the edges that connects all of
the vertices together and has minimum total length. To view this as a problem of
finding an optimal subset of a matroid, consider the weighted matroid Mg with
weight function w’, where w’(e) = wo — w(e) and wo is larger than the maximum
length of any edge. In this weighted matroid, all weights are positive and an opti-
mal subset is a spanning tree of minimum total length in the original graph. More
specifically, each maximal independent subset A corresponds to a spanning tree
