14.3

14.4

14.5

 

Exercises 529

d. LOOK
e. C-SCAN

f, C-LOOK

Elementary physics states that when an object is subjected to a constant
acceleration a, the relationship between distance d and time t is given
by d = jaf’. Suppose that, during a seek, the disk in Exercise 14.2
accelerates the disk arm at a constant rate for the first half of the seek,
then decelerates the disk arm at the same rate for the second half of the
seek. Assume that the disk can perform a seek to an adjacent cylinder
in 1 millisecond, and a full-stroke seek over all 5,000 cylinders in 18
milliseconds.

a. The distance of a seek is the number of cylinders that the head
moves. Explain why the seek time is proportional to the square
root of the seek distance.

b. Write an equation for the seek time as a function of the seek dis-
tance. This equation should be of the form ¢ = x + yVL, where ¢ is
the time in milliseconds and L is the seek distance in cylinders.

c. Calculate the total seek time for each of the schedules in Exercise
14.2. Determine which schedule is the fastest (has the smallest total
seek time).

d. The percentage speedup is the time saved divided by the original time.
What is the percentage speedup of the fastest schedule over FCFS?

Suppose that the disk in Exercise 14.3 rotates at 7,200 RPM.

a. What is the average rotational latency of this disk drive?

b. What seek distance can be covered in the time that you found for
part a?

The accelerating seek described in Exercise 14.3 is typical of hard-disk
drives. By contrast, floppy disks (and many hard disks manufactured
before the mid-1980s) typically seek at a fixed rate. Suppose that the
disk in Exercise 14.3 has a constant-rate seek, rather than a constant-
acceleration seek, so the seek time is of the form t = x + yL, where f is
the time in milliseconds and L is the seek distance. Suppose that the
time to seek to an adjacent cylinder is 1 millisecond, as before, and is 0.5
milliseconds for each additional cylinder.

a. Write an equation for this seek time as a function of the seek dis-
tance.
