Section 10.9.

Summary 331

 

Prolog interpreters and compilers in Common Lisp. Several textbooks on automated reasoning
were mentioned in Chapter 9. Aside from these, a unique text by Bundy (1983) provides
reasonably broad coverage of the basics while also providing treatments of more advanced topics
such as meta-level inference (using PRESS as one case study) and the use of higher-order logic.
The Journal of Logic Programming and the Journal of Automated Reasoning are the principal
journals for logic programming and theorem proving respectively. The major conferences in these
fields are the annual Intemational Conference on Automated Deduction (CADE) and Intemational
Conference on Logic Programming.

Aside from classical examples like the semantic networks used in Shastric Sanskrit grammar
described in Chapter 8, or Peirce's existential graphs as described by Roberts (1973), modem
work on semantic networks in AI began in the 1960s with the work of Quillian (1961; 1968)
Charniak’s (1972) thesis served to underscore the full extent to which heterogeneous knowledge
on a wide variety of topics is essential for the interpretation of natural language discourse.

Minsky's (1975) so-called "frames paper" served to place knowledge representation on the
map as a central problem for AI. The specific formalism suggested by Minsky, however, that
of so-called "frames," was widely criticized as, at best, a trivial extension of the techniques of
object-oriented programming, such as inheritance and the use of default values (Dahl er al., 1970;
Birtwistle et al., 1973), which predated Minsky's frames paper. It is not clear to what extent
the latter papers on object-oriented programming were influenced in turn by early AI work on
semantic networks.

The question of semantics arose quite acutely with respect to Quillian's semantic networks
(and those of others who followed his approach), with their ubiquitous and very vague "ISA links,"
as well as other early knowledge representation formalisms such as that of MERLIN (Moore and
Newell, 1973) with its mysterious "flat" and "cover" operations. Woods' (1975) famous article
“What's In a Link?" drew the attention of AI researchers to the need for precise semantics in
knowledge representation formalisms. Brachman (1979) elaborated on this point and proposed
solutions. Patrick Hayes's (1979) "The Logic of Frames" cut even deeper by claiming that most
of whatever content such knowledge representations did have was merely sugar-coated logic:
"Most of ‘frames’ isjust a new syntax for parts of first-order logic." Drew McDermott’s (1978b)
“Tarskian Semantics, or, No Notation Without Denotation!” argued that the kind of semantical
analysis used in the formal study of first-order logic, based on Tarski's definition of truth, should
be the standard for ail knowledge representation formalisms. Measuring all formalisms by
the "logic standard" has many advocates but remains a controversial idea; notably, McDermott
himself has reversed his position in "A Critique of Pure Reason" (McDermott, 1987). NETL.
(Fahlman, 1979) was a sophisticated semantic network system whose ISA links (called "virtual
copy" or VC links) were based more on the notion of "inheritance" characteristic of frame
systems or of object-oriented programming languages than on the subset relation, and were
much more precisely defined than Quillian's links from the pre-Woods era. NETL is particularly
intriguing because it was intended to be implemented in parallel hardware to overcome the
difficulty of retrieving information from large semantic networks. David Touretzky (1986)
subjects inheritance to rigorous mathematical analysis. Selman and Levesque (1993) discuss the
complexity ofinheritance with exceptions, showing that in most formulations it is NP-complete.

The development of description logics is merely the most recent stage in a long line of
research aimed at finding useful subsets of first-order logic for which inference is computationally
