448  Chapter12_ File-System Implementation

session semantics of Andrew. In spite of these drawbacks, the utility and high
performance of the mechanism makes it the most widely used multivendor
distributed system in operation.

12.10 =» Summary

The file system resides permanently on secondary storage, which is designed to
hold a large amount of data permanently. The most common secondary-storage
medium is the disk.

Physical disks may be segmented into partitions to control media use and
to allow multiple, possibly varying, file systems per spindle. These file systems
are mounted onto a logical file system architecture to make them available for
use. File systems are often implemented in a layered or modular structure. The
lower levels deal with the physical properties of storage devices. Upper levels
deal with symbolic file names and logical properties of files. Intermediate levels
map the logical file concepts into physical device properties.

Every file-system type can have different structures and algorithms. A VFS
layer allows the upper layers to deal with each file-system type uniformly. Even
remote file systems can be integrated into the system’s directory structure and
acted on by standard system calls via the VFS interface.

The various files can be allocated space on the disk in three ways: through
contiguous, linked, or indexed allocation. Contiguous allocation can suffer
from external fragmentation. Direct access is very inefficient with linked allo-
cation. Indexed allocation may require substantial overhead for its index block.
These algorithms can be optimized in many ways. Contiguous space may be
enlarged through extents to increase flexibility and to decrease external frag-
mentation. Indexed allocation can be done in clusters of multiple blocks to
increase throughput and to reduce the number of index entries needed. Index-
ing in large clusters is similar to contiguous allocation with extents.

Free-space allocation methods also influence the efficiency of use of disk
space, the performance of the file system, and the reliability of secondary
storage. The methods used include bit vectors and linked lists. Optimizations
include grouping, counting, and the FAT, which places the linked list in one
contiguous area.

The directory-management routines must consider efficiency, performance,
and reliability. A hash table is the most frequently used method; it is fast
and efficient. Unfortunately, damage to the table or a system crash could
result in the directory information not corresponding to the disk’s contents. A
consistency checker—a systems program such as fsck in UNIX, or chkdsk in
MS-DOS—can be used to repair the damage. Operating-system backup tools
allow disk data to be copied to tape, to recover from data or even disk loss due
to hardware failure, operating system bug, or user error.
