22

Chapter 2. Getting Started

a pointer to the array is passed, rather than the entire array, and changes to
individual array elements are visible to the calling procedure.

+ A return statement immediately transfers control back to the point of call in
the calling procedure. Most return statements also take a value to pass back to
the caller. Our pseudocode differs from many programming languages in that
we allow multiple values to be returned in a single return statement.

* The boolean operators “and” and “or” are short circuiting. That is, when we
evaluate the expression “x and y” we first evaluate x. If x evaluates to FALSE,
then the entire expression cannot evaluate to TRUE, and so we do not evaluate y.
If, on the other hand, x evaluates to TRUE, we must evaluate y to determine the
value of the entire expression. Similarly, in the expression “x or y” we eval-
uate the expression y only if x evaluates to FALSE. Short-circuiting operators
allow us to write boolean expressions such as “x # NIL and x.f = y” without
worrying about what happens when we try to evaluate x.f when x is NIL.

* The keyword error indicates that an error occurred because conditions were
wrong for the procedure to have been called. The calling procedure is respon-
sible for handling the error, and so we do not specify what action to take.

Exercises

2.1-1
Using Figure 2.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of INSERTION-SORT on the
array A = (31, 41,59, 26, 41,58).

2.1-2
Rewrite the INSERTION-SORT procedure to sort into nonincreasing instead of non-
decreasing order.

2.1-3

Consider the searching problem:

Input: A sequence of n numbers A = (4), d2.....dy) and a value v.

Output: An index i such that v = A[i] or the special value NIL if v does not
appear in A.

Write pseudocode for linear search, which scans through the sequence, looking
for v. Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct. Make sure that
your loop invariant fulfills the three necessary properties.

2.1-4
Consider the problem of adding two n-bit binary integers, stored in two n-element
arrays A and B. The sum of the two integers should be stored in binary form in
