SECTION 11-8 Serial Communication 433

received. If they do not match the bits of the SYN character, the receiver accepts
the next bit, rejects the previous high-order bit, and again checks the last eight
bits received for a SYN character. This is repeated after each clock pulse and
bit received until a SYN character is recognized. Once a SYN character is
detected, the receiver has framed acharacter. From here on the receiver counts
every eight bits and accepts them as a single character. Usually, the receiver
checks two consecutive SYN characters to remove any doubt that the first did
not occur as a result of a noise signal on the line. Moreover, when the trans-
mitter is idle and does not have any message characters to send, it sends a
continuous string of SYN characters. The receiver recognizes these characters
asa condition for synchronizing the line and goes into a synchronous idlestate.
Inthisstate, the twounits maintain bit and character synchronism even though
no meaningful information is communicated.

Messages are transmitted through the data link with an established
format consisting of a header field, a text field, and an error-checking field. A
typical message format fora character-oriented protocol is shown in Fig. 11-25.
The two SYN characters assure proper synchronization at the start of the
message. Following the SYN characters is the header, which starts with an
SOH (tart of heading) character. The header consists of address and control
information The STX character terminates the header and signifies the begin-
ning of the text transmission. The text portion of the message is variable in
length and may contain any ASCII characters except the communication con-
trol characters. The text field is terminated with the ETX character. The last field
is a block check character (BCC) used for error checking. It is usually either a
longitudinal redundancy check (LRC) or a cyclic redundancy check (CRO).

The receiver accepts the message and calculates its own BCC. If the BCC
transmitted does not agree withthe BCC calculated by the receiver, the receiver
responds with a negative acknowledge (NAK) character. The message is then
retransmitted and checked again. Retransmission will be typically attempted
several times before it is assumed that the line is faulty. When the transmitted
BCC matches the one calculated by the receiver, the response is a positive
acknowledgment using the ACK character.

‘Transmission Example

In order to appreciate the function of a data communication processor, let us
illustrate by a specific example the method by which a terminal and the
processor communicate. The communication withthe memory unit and CPU
is similar to any /O processor.

Figure 11-25 Typical message format for characteroriented protocol

 

syn | SYN | SOH | Header | STX Text ETx | Bcc

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
