382. CHAPTER ELEVEN Input-Output Organization

peripheral

‘monitor and
keyboard

printer

large amount of programs and data must be prepared in advance and transmit-
ted into a storage medium such as magnetic tapes or disks. The information
in the disk is then transferred into computer memory ata rapid rate. Results
of programs are also transferred into a high-speed storage, such as disks, from
which they can be transferred later into a printer to provide a printed output
of results.

Devices that are under the direct control of the computer are said to be
connected on-line. These devices are designed to read information into or out
of the memory unit upon command from the CPU and are considered to be
part of the total computer system. Input or output devices attached to the
computer are also called peripherals. Among the most common peripherals are
keyboards, display units, and printers. Peripherals that provide auxiliary stor-
age for the system are magnetic disks and tapes. Peripherals are elecirome-
chanical and electromagnetic devices of some complexity. Only a very brief
discussion of their function will be given here without going into detail of their
internal construction.

‘Video monitors are the most commonly used peripherals, They consist
ofa keyboard as the input device and adisplay unit as the output device. There
are different types of video monitors, but the most popular use a cathode ray
tube (CRT). The CRT contains an electronic gun that sends an electronic beam
toa phosphorescent screen in front of the tube. The beam can be deflected
horizontally and vertically. To produce a pattern on the screen, a grid inside
the CRT receives a variable voltage that causes the beam to hit the screen and
makeit glow at selected spots. Horizontal and vertical signals deflect the beam
and makeit sweep across the tube, causing the visual pattern to appear on the
screen. A characteristic feature of display devices is a cursor that marks the
position in the screen where the next character will be inserted. The cursor can
be moved to any position in the screen, to a single character, the beginning of
a word, or toany line. Edit keys add or delete information based on the cursor
position. The display terminal can operate in a single-character mode where
all characters entered on the screen through the keyboard are transmitted to
the computer simultaneously. In the block mode, the edited text is first stored
ina local memory inside the terminal. The text is transferred to the computer
as a block of data.

Printers provide a permanent record on paper of computer output data
or text. There are three basic types of character printers: daisywheel, dot
matrix, and laser printers. The daisywheel printer contains a wheel with the
characters placed along the circumference. To print a character, the wheel
rotates to the proper position and an energized magnet then presses the letter
against the ribbon. The dot matrix printer contains a set of dots along the
printing mechanism. For example, a 5 x 7 dot matrix printer that prints 80
characters per line has seven horizontal lines, each consisting of 5 x 80 = 400
dots. Each dot can be printed or not, depending on the specific characters that
are printed on the line. The laser printer uses a rotating photographic drum
