ata selector

SECTION 2-3 Multiplexers 49

When the selection inputs are equal to 00, output Y is equal to input Ig. When
the selection inputs are equal to 01, input J, has a path to output Y, andsimilarly
for the other two combinations. The multiplexer is also called a data selector,
since it selects one of many data inputs and steers the binary information to
the output.

TABLE 2-3 Function Table for 4-10-1-Line Multiplexer

 

Select Output

 

 

Si So Y
o 0 Io
oot h
1 0 b
11 b

The AND gates and inverters in the multiplexer resemble a decoder
circuit, and indeed they decode the input selection lines. In general, a 2’-to-1-
line multiplexeris constructed from an n-to-2" decoder by adding to it 2" input
lines, one from each data input. The size of the multiplexer is specified by the
number 2 ofits data inputs and the single output. It is then implied that it also
contains n input selection lines. The multiplexer is often abbreviated as MUX.

‘As in decoders, multiplexers may have an enable input to control the
operation of the unit. When the enable input isin the inactivestate, the outputs
are disabled, and whenitisin theactive state, the circuit functions as anormal
multiplexer. The enable input is useful for expanding two or more multiplexers
to a multiplexer with a larger number of inputs.

In some cases two of more multiplexers are enclosed within a single
integrated circuit package. The selection and the enable inputs in multiple-unit
construction are usually common to all multiplexers. As an illustration, the
block diagram of a quadruple 2-to-I-line multiplexer is shown in Fig. 2-5. The
Gircuit has four multiplexers, each capable of selecting one of two input lines.
Output ¥ecan be selected to come from either input Ap or Bo. Similarly, output
¥% may have the value of A, or By, andso on. One input selection line $ selects
one of the lines in each of the four multiplexers. The enable input E must be
active for normal operation. Although the circuit contains four multiplexers,
we can also think of it as a circuit that selects one of two 4-bit data lines. As
shown in the function table, the unit is enabled when E = 1. Then, if S = 0,
the four A inputs have a path to the four outputs. On the other hand, if $ = 1,
the four B inputs are applied to the outputs. The outputs have all 0's when
E = 0, regardless of the values of S.

 
