 

 

GAME PLAYING

 

5.1

In which we examine the problems that arise when we try to plan ahead in a world
that includes a hostile agent.

INTRODUCTION: GAMES AS SEARCH PROBLEMS

 

Games have engaged the intellectual faculties ofhumans—sometimes to an alarming degree—for
as long as civilization has existed. Board games such as chess and Go are interesting in part
because they offer pure, abstract competition, without the fuss and bother of mustering up two
amies and going to war. It is this abstraction that makes game playing an appealing target of AI
research. The state of a game is easy to represent, and agents are usually restricted to a fairly
small number of well-defined actions. That makes game playing an idealization of worlds in
which hostile agents act so as to diminish one’s well-being. Less abstract games, such as croquet

or football, have not attracted much interest in the AI community.

Game playing is also one of the oldest areas of endeavor in artificial intelligence. In 1950,
almost as soon as computers became programmable, the first chess programs were written by
Claude Shannon (the inventor of information theory) and by Alan Turing. Since then, there has
been steady progress in the standard of play, to the point where current systems can challenge

the human world champion without fear of gross embarrassment.

Early researchers chose chess for several reasons. A chess-playing computer would be an
existence proof ofa machine doing something thought to require intelligence. Furthermore, the
simplicity of the rules, and the fact that the world state is fully accessible to the program! means
that it is easy to represent the game as a search through a space of possible game positions. The
computer representation of the game actually can be correct in every relevant detail—unlike the

representation of the problem of fighting a war, for example.

"Recall from Chapter 2 that accessible means that the agent can perceive everything there is to know about the

environment. In game theory, chess is called a game of perfect information.

122

 
