  

Section 11.5. A Partial-Order Planning Example 353

 

achieves the At(Home) precondition.) On the other hand, if the agent goes to the supermarket
first, then it cannot go from home to the hardware store

At this point, we have reached a dead end in the search for a solution, and must back up
and try another choice. The interesting part is seeing how a planner could notice that this partial

I: plan is a dead end without wasting a lot of time on it. The key is that the the causal links in
PROTECTED LINKS © a partial plan are protected links. A causal link is protected by ensuring that threats—that is,
THREATS steps that might delete (or clobber) the protected condition—are ordered to come before or after

the protected link. Figure 11.10(a) shows a threat: The causal link S\ “ > is threatened by

the new step 53 because one effect of 53 is to delete c. The way to resolve the threat is to add

ordering constraints to make sure that $3 does not intervene between S, and $2. If $3 is placed
DEMOTION before 5, this is called demotion (see Figure 11.10(b)), and if it is placed after S, it is called
PROMOTION promotion (see Figure 11.10(c)).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

s, \ $1
Toot |
c ne e c
| Sz / Sz So
N/ Ny
a¢
@ ) ©

 

 

Figure 11.10 Protecting causal links. In (a), the step 5s threatens a condition c that is established
by 5; and protected by the causal link from S; to 52. In (b), Sshas been demoted to come before
S), and in (c) it has been promoted to come after $2.

 

 

 

In Figure 11.9, there is no way to resolve the threat that each Go step poses to the other.
Whichever Go step comes first will delete the 4t(Home) condition on the other step. Whenever
the planner is unable to resolve a threat by promotion or demotion, it gives up on the partial plan
and backs up to a try a different choice at some earlier point in the planning process.

Suppose the next choice is to try a different way to achieve the Ar(x) precondition of the
Go(SM) step, this time by adding a causal link from Go(HWS) to Go(SM). In other words, the
plan is to go from home to the hardware store and then to the supermarket. This introduces
another threat. Unless the plan is further refined, it will allow the agent to go from the hardware
store to the supermarket without first buying the drill (which was why it went to the hardware
store in the first place). However much this might resemble human behavior, we would prefer our
planning agent to avoid such forgetfulness. Technically, the Go(SM) step threatens the Ar(/HWS)
precondition of the Buy {Drill)step, which is protected by a causal link. The threat is resolved by
constraining Go(SM)to come after Buy(Drill). Figure 11.11 shows this.
