29.3 The simplex algorithm 871

In Section 29.5, we shall show how to determine whether a problem is feasible,
and if so, how to find a slack form in which the initial basic solution is feasible.
Therefore, let us assume that we have a procedure INITIALIZE-SIMPLEX (A, b,c)
that takes as input a linear program in standard form, that is, an m x n matrix
A= (aj), an m-vector b = (b;), and an n-vector c = (c;). If the problem is
infeasible, the procedure returns a message that the program is infeasible and then
terminates. Otherwise, the procedure returns a slack form for which the initial
basic solution is feasible.

The procedure SIMPLEX takes as input a linear program in standard form, as just
described. It returns an n-vector ¥ = (X;) that is an optimal solution to the linear
program described in (29.19)}-(29.21).

SIMPLEX(A, b,c)
1 (N, B,A,b,c,v) = INITIALIZE-SIMPLEX (A, b,c)
2 let A be a new vector of length n
3 while some index j ¢ N has cj > 0

4 choose an index e € N for which ce > 0
5 for each index i € B

6 if daje > 0

7 Ai = bildie

8 else A; = 00

9

choose an index / € B that minimizes A;

10 if A; == 00

11 return “unbounded”

12 else (N, B, A,b,c,v) = Prvot(N, B, A,b,c,v,1,e)
13. fori = lton

14 ifie B

15 X; = bj

16 else x; = 0

17. return (X),%2,..., Xn)

The SIMPLEX procedure works as follows. In line 1, it calls the procedure
INITIALIZE-SIMPLEX (A, b,c), described above, which either determines that the
linear program is infeasible or returns a slack form for which the basic solution is
feasible. The while loop of lines 3-12 forms the main part of the algorithm. If all
coefficients in the objective function are negative, then the while loop terminates.
Otherwise, line 4 selects a variable x,, whose coefficient in the objective function
is positive, as the entering variable. Although we may choose any such variable as
the entering variable, we assume that we use some prespecified deterministic rule.
Next, lines 5—9 check each constraint and pick the one that most severely limits
the amount by which we can increase x, without violating any of the nonnegativ-
