4100 cuarrer HevEN Input-Output Organization

priority logic

Interrupt
request
from device

vaD

|

Vector address

Priority in

 

 
  
 
 

7 Enable

 

 

 

Priority out

   

 

 

 

 

Open-collector
inverter

 

Interrupt request to CPU

Figure 11-13 One stage of the daisy-chain priority arrangement.

lower-priority interrupts while a higher-priority device is being serviced. It can
also provide a facility that allows a high-priority device to interrupt the CPU
while a lower-priority device is being serviced.

The priority logic for a system of four interrupt sources is shown in
Fig. 11-14. It consists of an interrupt register whose individual bits are set by
external conditions and cleared by program instructions. The magnetic disk,
being a high-speed device, is given the highest priority. The printer has the
next priority, followed by a character reader and a keyboard. The mask register
has the same number of bits as the interrupt register. By means of program
instructions, it is possible to set or reset any bit in the mask register. Each
interrupt bit and its corresponding mask bit are applied to an AND gate to
produce the four inputs to a priority encoder. In this way an interrupt is
recognized only if its corresponding mask bit is set to 1 by the program. The
priority encoder generatestwo bits of the vector address, which is transferred
to the CPU.

Another output from the encoder sets an interrupt status flip-flop IST
when an interrupt that is not masked occurs. The interrupt enable flip-flop IEN
can be set or cleared by the program to provide an overall control over the
interrupt system. The outputs of IST ANDed with IEN provide a common
interrupt signal for the CPU. The interrupt acknowledge INTACK signal from
the CPU enables the bus buffers in the output register and a vector address
VAD is placed into the data bus. We will now explain the priority encoder
circuit and then discuss the interaction between the priority interrupt con-
troller and the CPU.
