360 cuarrer TEN Computer Arithmetic

the content of BR into AC and also complement its sign if the numbers are to
be subtracted. If neither number is equal to zero, we proceed to align the
mantissas.

‘The magnitudecomparatorattached to exponents. and b provides three
outputs that indicate their relative magnitude. If the two exponents are equal,
‘we go to perform the arithmetic operation. If the exponents are not equal, the
mantissa having the smaller exponent is shifted to the right and its exponent
incremented. This process is repeated until the two exponents are equal.

The addition and subtraction of the two mantissas is identical to the
fixed-point addition and subtraction algorithm presented in Fig. 10-2. The
magnitude part is added or subtracted depending on the operation and the
signs of the two mantissas. If an overflow occurs when the magnitudes are
added, itis transferred into flip-flop E. If E is equal to 1, the bit is transferred
into A, and all other bits of A are shifted right. The exponent must be incre-
mented to maintain the correct number. No underflow may occur in this case
because the original mantissa that was not shifted during the alignment was
already in a normalized position.

If the magnitudes were subtracted, the result may be zero or may have
an underflow. If the mantissa is zero, the entire floating-point number in the
AC is made zero. Otherwise, the mantissa must have at least one bit that is
equal to 1 Themantissa has an underflow ifthe most significant bit in position
‘Ay isO. In that case, the mantissa is shifted left and the exponent decremented.
The bit in Ay is checked again and the process is repeated until it is equal to
1. When A; = 1, the mantissa is normalized and the operation is completed.

Multiplication

The multiplication of two floating-point numbers requires that we multiply the
mantissas and add the exponents. No comparison of exponents or alignment
of mantissas is necessary. The multiplication of the mantissas is performed in
the same way as in fixed-point to provide a double-precision product. The
double-precision answer is used in fixed-point numbers to increase the accu-
racy of the product In floating-point, the range of a single-precision mantissa
combined with the exponent is usually accurate enough so that only single-
precision numbers are maintained. Thus the half most significant bits of the
mantissa product and the exponent will be taken together to form a single-
precision floating-point product.

The multiplication algorithm can be subdivided into four parts:

1. Check for zeros.
2. Add the exponents.

3. Multiply the mantissas.
4. Normalize the product.
