8-1.

8.12

8-13.

au.

15,

8-16.

8.17.

8-18.

SECTION 6 Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) 293

A computer has 32-bit instructions and 12-bit addresses. If there are
250 two-address instructions, how many one-address instructions can be
formulated?

Write a program to evaluate the arithmetic statement:

ye AS Bt Cook
* G+HeK

a. Using a general register computer with three address instructions

b. Using a general register computer with two address instructions.

¢. Using an accumulator type computer with one address instructions.

4. Using a stack organized computer with zero-address operation instruc-
tions

The memory unit of a computer has 256K words of 32 bits each. The

computer has an instruction format with four fields: an operation code field,

1a mode field to specify one of seven addressing modes, a register address

field to specify one of 60 processor registers, and a memory address. Specify

the instruction format and the number ofbitsin each field ifthe in instruction

is in one memory word.

‘A two-word instruction is stored in memory atan address designated by the

symbol W. The address field of the instruction (stored at W + 1) is desig-

nated by the symbol Y. The operand used during the execution of the

instruction is stored at an address symbolized by Z. An index register

contains the value X. State how Z is calculated from the other addresses if

the addressing mode of the instruction is

a direct

b. indirect

. relative

d. indexed

Arelative mode branch typeof instruction is stored in memory at an address

equivalent to decimal 750. The branch is made to an address equivalent to

decimal 500.

a. What should be the value of the relative address field of the instruction
(in decimal)?

b. Determine therelativeaddress value in binary using 12 bits. (Why must
the number be in 2's complement?)

¢. Determine the binary value in PC after the fetch phase and calculate the
binary value of 500. Then show that the binary value in PC plus the
relative address calculated in part (b) is equal to the binary value of 500.

How many times does the control unit refer to memory when it fetches and

executes an indirect addressing mode instruction if the instruction is (a) a

computational type requiring an operand from memory; (b) a branch type.

‘What must the address field of an indexed addressing mode instruction be

to make it the same as a register indirect mode instruction?

‘An instruction is stored at location 300 with its address field at location 301.

The address field has the value 400. A. processor register R1 contains the

number 200. Evaluate the effective address if the addressing mode of the
