500 CHAPTER THIRTEEN Multiprocessors

system bus

representative of the hypercube architecture is the Intel PSC computer
complex. Itconsists of128 (n = 7) microcomputers connected throughcommu-
nication channels. Each node consists of a CPU, a floating-point processor,
local memory, and serial communication interface units. The individual nodes
operate independently on data stored in local memory according to resident
programs. Thedata and programs to each node come througha message-pass-
ing system from other nodes or from a cube manager. Application programs
are developed and compiled on the cube manager and then downloaded to the
individual nodes. Computations are distributed through the system and exe-
cuted concurrently.

 

13-3__Interprocessor Arbitration

Computer systems contain a number of buses at various levels to facilitate the
transfer of information between components. The CPU contains a number of
internal buses for transferring information between processor registers and
ALU, A memory bus consists of lines for transferring data, address, and
read/write information. An VO bus is used to transfer information to and from
input and output devices. A bus that connects major components in a multi-
processor system, such as CPUs, IOPs, and memory, is called asystem bus. The
physical circuits of a system bus are contained in a number of identical printed
Gircuit boards. Each board in the system belongs to a particular module. The
board consists of circuits connected in parallel through connectors. Each pin
of each circuit connector is connected by a wire to the corresponding pin of all
other connectors in other boards. Thus any board can be plugged into a slot
in the backplane that forms the system bus.

The processors in a shared memory multiprocessor system request access
tocommon memory or other common resources through the system bus. If no
other processor is currently utilizing the bus, the requesting processor may be
granted access immediately. However, the requesting processor must wait if
another processor is currently utilizing the system bus. Furthermore, other
processors may request the system bus at the same time. Arbitration must then
be performed to resolve this multiple contention for the shared resources. The
arbitration logic would be part of the system bus controller placed between the
local bus and the system bus as shown in Fig. 13-2

System Bus

A typical system bus consists of approximately 100 signal lines. These lines are
divided into three functional groups: data, address, and control. In addition,
there are power distribution lines that supply power to the components. For
example, the IEEE standard 796 multibus system has 16 data lines, 24 address
lines, 26 control lines, and 20 power lines, for a total of 86 lines.
