SECTION 10:3 Multiplication Algorithms 3.4].

‘The sign of the product is determined from the signs of the multiplicand
and multiplier. If they are alike, the sign of the product is positive. If they are
unlike, the sign of the product is negative.

Hardware Implementation for Signed-Magnitude Data

When multiplication is implemented in a digital computer, it is convenient to
change the process slightly. First, instead of providing registers to store and
add simultaneously as many binary numbers as thereare bits in the multiplier,
it is convenient to provide an adder for the summation of only two binary
numbers and successively accumulate the partial products in a register. Sec-
ond, instead of shifting the multiplicand to the left, the partial product is
shifted to the right, which results in leaving the partial product and the
multiplicand in the required relative positions. Third, when the corresponding
bit of the multiplier is 0, there is no need to add all zeros to the partial product
since it will not alter its value.

‘The hardware for multiplication consists of the equipment shown in Fig.
10-1 plus two more registers. These registers together with registers A and B
are shown in Fig. 10-5. The multiplier is stored in the Q register and its sign
in Q,. The sequence counter SC isinitially set to anumber equal to the number
of bits in the multiplier. The counter is decremented by 1 after forming each
partial product. When the content of the counter reaches zero, the product is,
formed and the process stops.

Initially, the multiplicand is in register Band the multiplier in Q. The sum
of Aand B formsa partial product whichis transferred to the EA register. Both
partial product and multiplier are shifted to the right. This shift will be denoted
by the statement shr EAQ to designate the right shift depicted in Fig. 10-5. The

 

Figure 10-5 Hardware for multiply operation.

 

3,

 

 

 

Bier Seqenescoumer 60) ]

I

‘Complementer and
parallel adder

 

 

 

 

A

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ofe}_ ava +f oreter i

 

 

 
