multiprogramming

SECTION 12-1 Memory Hierarchy 447

By making programsand dataavailableat a rapid rate, itis possible to increase
the performance rate of the computer.

While the UO processor manages data transfers between auxiliary mem-
ory and main memory, the cache organization is concerned with the transfer
of information between main memory and CPU. Thus each is involved with
adifferent level in the memory hierarchy system. The reason for having two
or three levels of memory hierarchy is economics. As the storage capacity of
thememoryincreases, the cost per bit forstoring binary information decreases
and the access time of the memory becomes longer. The auxiliary memory has
a large storage capacity, is relatively inexpensive, but has low access speed
compared to main memory. The cache memory is very small, relatively expen-
sive, and has very high access speed. Thus as the memory access speed
increases, s0 does itsrelative cost. The overall goal ofusing amemory hierarchy
is to obtain the highest-possible average access speed while minimizing the
total cost of the entire memory system.

Auxiliary and cache memories are used fordifferent purposes. The cache
holds those parts of the program and data that are most heavily used, while
the auxiliary memory holds those parts that are not presently used by the CPU.
Moreover, the CPU has direct access to both cache and main memory but not
to auxiliary memory. The transfer from auxiliary to main memory is usually
done by means of direct memory access of large blocks of data. The typical
access time ratio between cache and main memory is about 1 to 7. Forexample,
atypical cache memory may have an access time of 100ns, while main memory
access time may be 700 ns. Auxiliary memory average access time is usually
1000 times that of main memory. Block size in auxiliary memory typically
ranges from 256 to 2048 words, while cache block size is typically from 1 to 16
words.

Many operating systems are designed to enable the CPU to process a
number of independent programs concurrently. This concept, called multipro-
‘gramming, refers to the existence of two or more programs in different parts
of the memory hierarchy at the same time. In this way it is possible to keep
all parts of the computer busy by working with several programs in sequence.
For example, suppose that a programis being executed in the CPU and an/O
transfer is required. The CPU initiates the UO processor to start executing the
transfer. This leaves the CPU free to execute another program. In a multipro-
gramming system, when one program is waiting for input or output transfer,
there is another program ready to utilize the CPU.

With multiprogram ming the need arises for running partial programs, for
varying the amount of main memory in use by a given program, and for
moving programs around the memory hierarchy. Computer programs are
sometimes to long to be accommodated in the total space available in main
memory. Moreover, a computer system uses many programs and all the
programs cannot reside in main memory at all times. A program with its data
normally resides in auxiliary memory. When the program or a segment of the
