Section 12.2.

Hierarchical Decomposition 371

 

with as many low-priority ones as possible. The system also calculates the commands for the
platform attitude controls so that the observation plan can be executed. It can check the feasibility
of proposals and detailed schedules much faster than human experts.

Buildings, aircraft carriers, and beer factories

Sire (System for Interactive Planning and Execution monitoring) was the first planner to deal
with the problem of replanning, and the first to take some important steps toward expressive
operators. It is similar to O-PLAN in the range of its features and in its applicability. It is not
in everyday practical use, but it has been used in demonstration projects in several domains,
including planning operations on the flight deck of an aircraft carrier and job-shop scheduling
for an Australian beer factory. Another study used Sipe to plan the construction of multistory
buildings, one of the most complex domains ever tackled by a planner.

SIPE allows deductive rules to operate over states, so that the user does not have to specify
all relevant literals as effects ofeach operator. It allows for an inheritance hierarchy among object
classes and for an expressive set of constraints. This means it is applicable to a wide variety of
domains, but its generality comes at a cost. For example, in the building construction domain, it
was found that SIPE needed time O(n? >) for an n-story building. This suggests a high degree of
interaction between stories, when in fact the degree of interaction should be much lower: if you
remember to build from the ground up and make sure that the elevator shafts line up, it should be
possible to get performance much closer to O(n).

The examples in this and the preceding sections give an idea of the state of the art of
planning systems. They are good enough to model complex domains, but have not yet gained
practical acceptance beyond a few pilot projects. Clearly, to achieve the degree of flexibility and
efficiency needed to exceed the capabilities of human planners armed with traditional scheduling
tools, we need to go far beyond the limited STRIPS language.

12.2__ HIERARCHICAL DECOMPOSITION

The grocery shopping example of Chapter 11 produced solutions at a rather high level ofabstrac-
tion. A plan such as

[Go(Supermarket), Buy(Milk), Buy(Bananas), Go(Home)|

is a good high-level description of what to do, but it is a long way from the type of instructions
that can be fed directly to the agent's effectors. Thus, it is insufficient for an agent that wants to
actually do anything. On the other hand, a low-level plan such as

[Forward(\cm), Tum(\ deg), Forward(1cm),...]

would have to be many thousands of steps long to solve the shopping problem. The space ofplans
of that length is so huge that the techniques of Chapter 11 would probably not find a solution in
a reasonable amount of time.
