—

532 Chapter14 Mass-Storage Structure

d. Calculate the random-access I/Os per second and transfer rate for
I/O sizes of 4 KB, 8 KB, and 64 KB.

e. Ifmultiple requests are in the queue, a scheduling algorithm such as
SCAN should be able to reduce the average seek distance. Suppose
that a random-access workload is reading 8 KB pages, the average
queue length is 10, and the scheduling algorithm reduces the aver-
age seek time to 3 milliseconds. Calculate the I/Os per second and
the effective transfer rate of the drive.

14.18 More than one disk drive can be attached to a SCSI bus. In particular,
a fast wide SCSI-II bus (Exercise 14.17) can be connected to at most
15 disk drives. Recall that this bus has a bandwidth of 20 MB per
second. At any time, only one packet can be transferred on the bus
between some disk’s internal cache and the host. However, a disk can
be moving its disk arm while some other disk is transferring a packet
on the bus. Also, a disk can be transferring data between its magnetic
platters and its internal cache while some other disk is transferring a
packet on the bus. Considering the transfer rates that you calculated for
the various workloads in Exercise 14.17, discuss how many disks can be
used effectively by one fast wide SCSI-II bus.

14.19 Remapping of bad blocks by sector sparing or sector slipping could
influence performance. Suppose that the drive in Exercise 14.17 has a
total of 100 bad sectors at random locations, and that each bad sector
is mapped to a spare that is located on a different track, but within the
same cylinder. Estimate the number of I/Os per second and the effective
transfer rate for a random-access workload consisting of 8 KB reads, with
a queue length of 1 (that is, the choice of scheduling algorithm is not a
factor). What is the effect of a bad sector on performance?

14.20 Discuss the relative advantages and disadvantages of sector sparing and
sector slipping.

14.21 The operating system generally treats removable disks as shared file
systems, but assigns a tape drive to only one application at a time. Give
three reasons that could explain this difference in treatment of disks and
tapes. Describe the additional features that an operating system would
need to support shared file-system access to a tape jukebox. Would the
applications sharing the tape jukebox need any special properties, or
could they use the files as though the files were disk-resident? Explain
your answer.

14.22 Ina disk jukebox, what would be the effect if the number of open files
was greater than the number of drives in the jukebox?
