436 © CHAPTER LEVEN Input-Output Organization

DLE character

services each one in turn The speed of most remote terminalsis extremely slow
compared to the processor speed. This property allows multiplexing of many
users to achieve greater efficiency ina time-sharing system. This also allows
many users to operate simultaneously while each is being sampled at speeds
comparable to normal human response.

Data Transparency

Thecharacter-oriented protocol was originally developed to communicate with
keyboard, printer, and display devices that use alphanumeric characters exclu-
sively. As the data communication field expanded, it became necessary to
transmit binary information which is not ASCII text. This happens, for exam-
ple, when two remote computers send programs and data to each other over
a communication channel. An arbitrary bit pattern in the text message becomes
a problem in the character-oriented protocol. This is because any 8-bit pattern
belonging to a communication control character will be interpreted erro-
neously by the receiver. For example, if the binary data in the text portion of
the message has the 8-bit pattern 10000011, the receiver will interpret this as
an ETX character and assume that it reached the end of the text field. When
the text portion of the message is variable in length and contains bits that are
to be treated without reference to any particular code, it is said to contain
transparent data. This feature requires that the character recognition logic of
the receiver be turned off so that data patterns in the text field are not acciden-
tally interpreted as communication control information.

Data transparency is achieved in character-oriented protocols by insert-
ing a DLE (data link escape) character before each communication control
character. Thus, thestart of heading is detected fromthe double character DLE
SOH, and the text field is terminated with the double character DLE ETX. If
the DLE bit pattern 00010000 occurs in the text portion of the message, the
transmitter inserts another DLE bit pattern following it. The receiver removes
all DLE characters and then checks the next &-bit pattern. [fit is another DLE
bit pattern, the receiver considers it as part of the text and continues to receive
text. Otherwise, the receiver takes the following 8-bit pattern to be a commu-
nication control character.

The achievement of data transparency by means of the DLE character is.
inefficient and somewhat complicated to implement. Therefore, other proto-
cols have been developed tomake the transmission of transparent data more
efficient. One protocol used by Digital Equipment Corporation employs a byte
count field that gives the number of bytes in the message that follows. The
receiver must then count the number of bytes received to reach the end of the
text field. The protocol that has been mostly used to solve the transparency
problem (and other problems associated with the character-oriented protocol)
is the bit-oriented protocol.
