SECTION $5 Instruction Cyde 141

signal T,, At the same time, PC is incremented by one to prepare it for the
address of the next instruction in the program. At time T;, the operation code
in IR is decoded, the indirect bit is transferred to flip-flop I, and the address
part of the instruction is transferred to AR. Note that SC is incremented after
each clock pulse to produce the sequence To, T, and T>

Figure5-8 shows how the first two register transfer statements are imple-
mented in the bus system. To provide the data path for the transfer of PC to
AR we must apply timing signal Ty to achieve the following connection:

1. Place the content of PC onto the bus by making the bus selection inputs

$5150 equal to 010.
2. Transfer the content of the bus to AR by enabling the LD input of AR.

The next clock transition initiates the transfer from PC to AR since Ty = 1. In
carder iy dmpbamenn ihe second statement

Ts IR@MIAR], PC<PC +1

it is necessary to use timing signal T; to provide the following connections in
the bus system.

1. Enable the read input of memory.

2. Place the content of memory onto the bus by making $,5,5) = 111.
3. Transfer the content of the bus to IR by enabling the LD input of IR.
4, Increment PC by enabling the INR input of PC.

 

The next clock transition initiates the read and increment operations since
T=1

Figure 5-8 duplicates a portion of the bus system and shows how Ty and
T; are connected to the control inputs of the registers, the memory, and the
bus selection inputs. Multiple input OR gates are included in the diagram
because there are other control functions that will initiate similar operations.

Determine the Type of Instruction
The timing signal that is active after the decoding is Ts During time Ts, the
control unit determines the type of instruction that wasjustread frommemory.
The flowchart of Fig. 5-9 presents an initial configuration for the instruction
cycle and shows how the control determines the instruction type after the
decoding. The three possible instruction types available in the basic computer
are specified in Fig. 5-5.

Decoder output D; is equal to 1 if the operation code is equal to binary
111. From Fig. 5-5 we determine that if D, = 1, the instruction must be a
