| 14.8 Tertiary-Storage Structure 517

Another category of removable disk is the optical disk. These disks do
not use magnetism at all. They use special materials that can be altered by
laser light to have relatively dark or bright spots. One example of optical-disk
technology is the phase-change disk.

The phase-change disk is coated with a material that can freeze into either
a crystalline or an amorphous state. The crystalline state is more transparent,
and hence a laser beam is brighter when it passes through the phase-change
material and bounces off the reflective layer. The phase-change drive uses laser
light at three different powers: low power to read data, medium power to erase
the disk by melting and refreezing the recording medium into the crystalline
state, and a high power to melt the medium into the amorphous state to write
to the disk. The most common examples of this technology are the re-recordable
CD-RW and DVD-RW.

The kinds of disks described here can be used over and over. They are
called read—write disks. In contrast, write-once, read-many-times (WORM)
disks form another category. An old way to make a WORM disk is to manufac-
ture a thin aluminum film sandwiched between two glass or plastic platters.
To write a bit, the drive uses a laser light to burn a small hole through the
aluminum. Because this burning cannot be reversed, any sector on the disk can
be written only once. Although it is possible to destroy the information on a
WORM disk by burning holes everywhere, it is virtually impossible to alter data
on the disk, because holes can only be added, and the ECC code associated with
each sector is likely to detect such additions. WORM disks are considered to
be durable and reliable because the metal layer is safely encapsulated between
the protective glass or plastic platters, and magnetic fields cannot damage the
recording. A newer write-once technology records on an organic polymer dye
instead of an aluminum layer: the dye absorbs laser light to form marks. This
technology is used in the recordable CD-R and DVD-R.

Read-only disks, such as CD-ROM and DVD, come from the factory with
the data pre-recorded. They use technology similar to that of WORM disks
(although the pits are pressed, not burnt), and they are very durable.

Most removable disks are slower than their non-removable counterparts.
The writing process is slower, as are rotation and sometimes seek time.

14.8.1.2 Tapes

Magnetic tape is another type of removable medium. As a general rule, a tape
holds more data than an optical or magnetic disk cartridge. Tape drives and
disk drives have similar transfer rates. But random access to tape is much
slower than a disk seek, because it requires a fast-forward or rewind operation
that takes tens of seconds, or even minutes.

Although a typical tape drive is more expensive than a typical disk drive,
the price of a tape cartridge is lower than the price of the equivalent capacity
of magnetic disks. So tape is an economical medium for purposes that do not
