4

gates

CHAPTER ONE Digital Logic Circuits

tion set, and techniques for addressing memory. The architectural design of
a computer system is concerned with the specifications of the various func-
tional modules, such as processors and memories, and structuring them to-
gether into a computer system.

The book deals with all three subjects associated with computer hard-
ware. InChapters 1 through 4 we present the various digital components used
in the organization and design of computer systems. Chapters 5 through 7
cover the steps that a designer must go through to design and program an
elementary digital computer. Chapters 8 and 9 deal with the architecture of the
central processing unit. In Chapters 1] and 12 we present the organization and
architecture of the input-output processor and the memory unit.

1-2__Logic Gates

Binary information is represented in digital computers by physical quantities
called signals. Electrical signals such as voltages exist throughout the computer
in either one of two recognizable states. The two states represent a binary
variable that can be equal fo 1 or 0. For example, a particular digital computer
may employ a signal of 3 volts to represent binary 1 and 0.5 volt to represent
binary 0. The input terminals of digital circuits accept binary signals of 3 and
0.5 volts and the circuits respond at the output terminals with signals of 3 and
0.5 volts to represent binary input and output corresponding to 1 and 0,
respectively.

Binary logic deals with binary variables and with operations that assume
a logical meaning. It is used to describe, in algebraic or tabular form, the
manipulation and processing of binary information. The manipulation of bi-
nary information is done by logic circuits called gates. Gates are blocks of
hardware that produce signals of binary 1 or 0 when input logic requirements
are satisfied. A variety of logic gates are commonly used in digital computer
systems. Each gate has a distinct graphic symbol and its operation can be
described by means of an algebraic expression. The input-output relationship
of the binary variables for each gate can be represented in tabular form by a
truth table.

The names, graphic symbols, algebraic functions, and truth tables of
eight logic gates are listed in Fig. 1-2. Each gate has one or two binary input
variables designated by A and B and one binary output variable designated by
x. The AND gate produces the AND logic function: that is, the output is 1 if
input A and input B are both equal to 1; otherwise, the output is 0. These
conditions are also specified in the truth table for the AND gate. The table
shows that output zis 1 only when both inputA and input Bare I. The algebraic
operation symbol of the AND functionis the same as the multiplication symbol
of ordinary arithmetic. We can either use a dot between the variables or

 
