Chapter 11. Planning

 

ACTION
DESCRIPTION.
PRECONDITION

EFFECT

OPERATOR SCHEMA,

APPLICABLE

Representations for actions
Our STRIPS operators consist of three components:

* The action description is what an agent actually returns to the environment in order to do
something. Within the planner it serves only as a name for a possible action.

* The precondition is a conjunction of atoms (positive literals) that says what must be true
before the operator can be applied.

* The effect of an operator is a conjunction of literals (positive or negative) that describes
how the situation changes when the operator is applied.>

Here is an example of the syntax we will use for forming a STRIPS operator for going from one
place to another:

Op(ACTION:Go(there), PRECOND:At(here)A Path(here, there),
EFFECT: At(there) A 7At(here))

(We will also use a graphical notation to describe operators, as shown in Figure 11.3.) Notice
that there are no explicit situation variables. Everything in the precondition implicitly refers to
the situation immediately before the action, and everything in the effect implicitly refers to the
situation that is the result of the action.

 

At(here), Path(here, there)

 

Go(there)

 

 

 

At(there), —At(here)

 

 

 

 

Figure 11.3 Diagrammatic notation for the operator Go(there). The preconditions appear
above the action, and the effects below.

 

 

 

An operator with variables is known as an operator schema, because it does not correspond
toa single executable action but rather to a family of actions, one foreach different instantiation of
the variables. Usually, only fully instantiated operators can be executed; our planning algorithms
will ensure that each variable has a value by the time the planner is done. As with state
descriptions, the language ofpreconditions and effects is quite restricted. The precondition must
be a conjunction of positive literals, and the effect must be a conjunction of positive and/or
negative literals. All variables are assumed universally quantified, and there can be no additional
quantifiers. In Chapter 12, we will relax these restrictions.

We say that an operator ¢ is applicable in a state s if there is some way to instantiate the
variables in o so that every one of the preconditions of o is true in s, that is, if Precond(o) C s.
In the resulting state, all the positive literals in Effect(ohold, as do all the literals that held in s,

3. The original version of STRIPS divided the effects into an add list and a delete list.

 
