446 ourrea rwuve Memory Organtation

cache memory

other information is stored in auxiliary memory and transferred to main mem-
ory when needed.

The total memory capacity of a computer can be visualized as being a
hierarchy of eemponents. The memoty hierarchy system consists of all storage
devices employed in a computer system from the slow but highcapacity
auxiliary memory to a relatively faster main memory, to an even smaller and
faster cache memory accessible to the high-speed processing logic. Figure 12-1
illustrates the components ina typical memory hierarchy. At the bottom of the
hierarchy are the relatively siow magnetic tapes used to store removable Biles.
Next are the magnetic disks used as backup storage. The main memory occu-
piesa central position by being able tocommunicate directly with the CPU and
with awriliary memory devices through an UO processor. When programs not
residing in main memory are needed by the CPU, they are brought in from
auxiliary memory. Programs not currently needed in main memony are trans-
ferredinto auxiliary memory to provide space for currently used programsand
data

A special very-high-speed memory called a cashe is sometimes used to
increase the speed of processing by making current programs and data avail-
able to the CPU at a rapid rate. The cache memoty is employed in computer
systems to compensate for the speed differential between main memory acress
time and processor logic. CPU logic isusually faster than main memory access
time, with the result that processing speed is limited primarily by the speed
of main memouy. A technique used to compensate for the mismatch in oper-
ating speeds is to employ an extremely fast, small cache between the CPU and
main memory whose aecess time is close to processor logic dack cycle time.
‘The cache is used for storing segments of programs currently being executed
in the CPU and temporary data frequently needed in the present calculations.

Figuee (2-1. Memory hierarchy in 0 compurey syners.

Auriliary memory

=
=

 

Wo pra

 

 

 
