464

Chapter 17 Amortized Anat

 

the unused space in the table is never more than a constant fraction of the total
amount of space.

We start by analyzing a dynamic table in which we only insert items. We then
consider the more general case in which we both insert and delete items.

17.4.1 Table expansion

Let us assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots. A table fills
up when all slots have been used or, equivalently, when its load factor is 1.' In some
software environments, upon attempting to insert an item into a full table, the only
alternative is to abort with an error. We shall assume, however, that our software
environment, like many modern ones, provides a memory-management system that
can allocate and free blocks of storage on request. Thus, upon inserting an item
into a full table, we can expand the table by allocating a new table with more slots
than the old table had. Because we always need the table to reside in contiguous
memory, we must allocate a new array for the larger table and then copy items from
the old table into the new table.

A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as the old
one. If the only table operations are insertions, then the load factor of the table is
always at least 1/2, and thus the amount of wasted space never exceeds half the
total space in the table.

In the following pseudocode, we assume that T is an object representing the
table. The attribute T. table contains a pointer to the block of storage representing
the table, 7. num contains the number of items in the table, and T. size gives the total
number of slots in the table. Initially, the table is empty: T. num = T. size = 0.

TABLE-INSERT(T, x)

if T.size == 0
allocate T. table with 1 slot
T.size = 1

if T.num == T. size
allocate new-table with 2 - T. size slots
insert all items in T. table into new-table
free T. table
T.table = new-table
T.size = 2-T.size

insert x into T. table

T.num = T.num +1

FSeCHmrAwWswne

 

‘In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, we may wish to consider a table to be full if
its load factor equals some constant strictly less than 1. (See Exercise 17.4-1.)
