5.1 The hiring problem Ws

HIRE-ASSISTANT (1)

1 best = 0 // candidate 0 is a least-qualified dummy candidate
2 fori = lton
3 interview candidate i
if candidate 7 is better than candidate best
best =i
hire candidate i

Ans

The cost model for this problem differs from the model described in Chapter 2.
We focus not on the running time of HIRE-ASSISTANT, but instead on the costs
incurred by interviewing and hiring. On the surface, analyzing the cost of this algo-
rithm may seem very different from analyzing the running time of, say, merge sort.
The analytical techniques used, however, are identical whether we are analyzing
cost or running time. In either case, we are counting the number of times certain
basic operations are executed.

Interviewing has a low cost, say c;, whereas hiring is expensive, costing cy. Let-
ting m be the number of people hired, the total cost associated with this algorithm
is O(cjn + cpm). No matter how many people we hire, we always interview n
candidates and thus always incur the cost cjn associated with interviewing. We
therefore concentrate on analyzing c,m, the hiring cost. This quantity varies with
each run of the algorithm.

This scenario serves as a model for a common computational paradigm. We of-
ten need to find the maximum or minimum value in a sequence by examining each
element of the sequence and maintaining a current “winner.” The hiring problem
models how often we update our notion of which element is currently winning.

Worst-case analysis

In the worst case, we actually hire every candidate that we interview. This situation
occurs if the candidates come in strictly increasing order of quality, in which case
we hire n times, for a total hiring cost of O(can).

Of course, the candidates do not always come in increasing order of quality. In
fact, we have no idea about the order in which they arrive, nor do we have any
control over this order. Therefore, it is natural to ask what we expect to happen in
a typical or average case.

Probabilistic analysis

Probabilistic analysis is the use of probability in the analysis of problems. Most
commonly, we use probabilistic analysis to analyze the running time of an algo-
rithm. Sometimes we use it to analyze other quantities, such as the hiring cost
