5.4 Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables 139

this number is small (much less than 1), then we expect few streaks of length k to
occur and the probability that one occurs is low. If k = clgn, for some positive
constant c, we obtain
n—clgn+1

Qelen
n—clgn+l1

ne

1 (clgn—1)/n
no net

= O(I/n).

E[X]

 

If c is large, the expected number of streaks of length c Ign is small, and we con-
clude that they are unlikely to occur. On the other hand, if c = 1/2, then we obtain
E[X] = @(1/n/2-!) = @(n'/”), and we expect that there are a large number
of streaks of length (1/2) lg. Therefore, one streak of such a length is likely to
occur. From these rough estimates alone, we can conclude that the expected length
of the longest streak is O(1gn).

5.4.4 The on-line hiring problem

Asa final example, we consider a variant of the hiring problem. Suppose now that
we do not wish to interview all the candidates in order to find the best one. We
also do not wish to hire and fire as we find better and better applicants. Instead, we
are willing to settle for a candidate who is close to the best, in exchange for hiring
exactly once. We must obey one company requirement: after each interview we
must either immediately offer the position to the applicant or immediately reject the
applicant. What is the trade-off between minimizing the amount of interviewing
and maximizing the quality of the candidate hired?

We can model this problem in the following way. After meeting an applicant,
we are able to give each one a score; let score(i) denote the score we give to the ith
applicant, and assume that no two applicants receive the same score. After we have
seen j applicants, we know which of the j has the highest score, but we do not
know whether any of the remaining n—j applicants will receive a higher score. We
decide to adopt the strategy of selecting a positive integer k <n, interviewing and
then rejecting the first k applicants, and hiring the first applicant thereafter who has
a higher score than all preceding applicants. If it turns out that the best-qualified
applicant was among the first k interviewed, then we hire the nth applicant. We
formalize this strategy in the procedure ON-LINE-MAXIMUM(k, 7), which returns
the index of the candidate we wish to hire.
