write-through

‘write-back

valid bit

SECTION 126 Virtual Memory 469

The simplest and most commonly used procedure is to update main
memory with every memory write operation, with cache memory being up-
dated in parallel if it contains the word at the specified address. This is called
the write-through method. This method has the advantage that main memory
always contains the same data as the cache. This characteristic is important in
systems with direct memory access transfers. It ensures that the data residing
in main memory are valid at all times so that an /O device communicating
through DMA would receive the most recent updated data.

The second procedureis called the write-back method. In this method only
the cache location is updated during a write operation. The location is then
marked by a flag so that later when the word is removed from the cache it is
copied into main memory. The reason for the write-back method is that during
the timea word resides in the cache, it may be updated several times; however,
as long as the word remains in the cache, it does not matter whether the copy
in main memory is out of date, since requests from the word are filled from
the cache. Itis only when the word is displaced from the cache that an accurate
copy need be rewritten into main memory. Analytical results indicate that the
number of memory writes in a typical program ranges between 10 and 30
percent of the total references to memory.

Cache Initialization
‘One more aspect of cache organization that must be taken into consideration
is the problem of initialization. The cache is initialized when power is applied
to the computer or when the main memory is loaded with a complete set of
programs from auxiliary memory. After initialization the cache is considered
to be empty, but in effect it contains some nonvalid data. It is customary to
include with each word in cache a valid bit to indicate whether or not the word
contains valid data.

The cache is initialized by clearing all the valid bits to 0. The valid bit of
a particular cache word is set to 1 the first time this word is loaded from main
memory and stays set unless the cache has to be initialized again. The intro-
duction of the valid bit means that a word in cache is not replaced by another
word unless the valid bit is set to 1 and a mismatch of tags occurs If the valid
bit happens to be 0, thenew word automatically replaces the invalid data. Thus
the initialization condition has the effect of forcing misses from the cache until
it fills with valid data.

 

12-6 Virtual Memory

Inamemory hierarchy system, programs and data are first stored in auxiliary
memory. Portions ofa program or data are brought into main memory as they
are needed by the CPU, Virtual memory is a concept used in some large
computer systems that permit the user to construct programs as though alarge
