350

Chapter 11. Planning

 

The goal state is defined by a Finish step describing the objects to be acquired and the final
destination to be reached:
Op(ACTION: Finish,
PRECOND:Have(Drill)A Have(Milk)A Have(Banana) A At(Home))
The actions themselves are defined as follows:
Op(ACTION:Go(there), PRECOND:At(here),
EFFECT:At(there) A —At(here))
Op(ACTION:Buy(x), PRECOND:Ar(store)A  Sells(store, x),
ErFEct: Have(x))

Figure 11.6 shows a diagram of the initial plan for this problem. We will develop a solution to
the problem step by step, showing at each point a figure illustrating the partial plan at that point
in the development. As we go along, we will note some of the properties we require for the
planning algorithm. After we finish the example, we will present the algorithm in detail.

 

 

At(Home) Sells(SM,Banana) | Sells(SM, Milk) Sells(HWS, Drill)

Have Drill) Have Milk) | Have(Banana) At(Home)

Figure 11.6 The initial plan for the shopping problem.

 

 

 

 

 

The first thing to notice about Figure 11.6 is that there are many possible ways in which
the initial plan can be elaborated. Some choices will work, and some will not. As we work out
the solution to the problem, we will show some correct choices and some incorrect choices. For
simplicity, we will start with some correct choices. In Figure 11.7 (top), we have selected three
Buy actions to achieve three of the preconditions of the Finish action. In each case there is only
one possible choice because the operator library offers no other way to achieve these conditions.

The bold arrows in the figure are causal links. For example, the leftmost causal link in the
figure means that the step Buy(Drill)was added in order to achieve the Finish step's Have(Drill)
precondition. The planner will make sure that this condition is maintained by protecting it: ifa
step might delete the Have(Drill)condition, then it will not be inserted between the Buy(Drill)
step and the Finish step. Light arrows in the figure show ordering constraints. By definition, all
actions are constrained to come after the Start action. Also, all causes are constrained to come
before their effects, so you can think of each bold arrow as having a light arrow underneath it.

The second stage in Figure 11.7 shows the situation after the planner has chosen to achieve }
the Sells preconditions by linking them to the initial state. Again, the planner has no choice here
because there is no other operator that achieves Sells.

 
