Section 168. Summary 495

planning (Feldman and Sproull, 1977). After the resurgence of interest in probabilistic methods :

in AI in the 1980s, decision-theoretic expert systems gained widespread acceptance (Horvitz et

al., 1988)—in fact, from 1991 onward, the cover design of the journal Artificial Intelligence has |
depicted a decision network, although some artistic license appears to have been taken with the
direction of the arrows.

 

EXERCISES

16.1

(Adapted from David Heckerman.) This exercise concerns the Almanac Game, which is

used by decision analysts to calibrate numeric estimations. For each of the questions below, give
your best guess of the answer, that is, a number that you think is as likely to be too high as it is
to be too low. Also give your guess at a 25th percentile estimate, that is, a number that you think
has a 25% chance of being too high, and a 75% chance of being too low. Do the same for the
75th percentile. (Thus, you should give three estimates in all—low, median, and high—foreach
question.)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

i

i.

Number of passengers who flew between New York and Los Angeles in 1989.
Population of Warsaw in 1992.

. Year in which Coronado discovered the Mississippi River.
. Number of votes received by Jimmy Carter in the 1976 presidential election.

Number of newspapers in the U.S. in 1990.

Height of Hoover Dam in feet.

Number of eggs produced in Oregon in 1985.
Number of Buddhists in the world in 1992.

Number of deaths due to AIDS in the U.S. in 1981.
Number of U.S. patents granted in 1901.

The correct answers appear after the last exercise for this chapter. From the point of view of
decision analysis, the interesting thing is not how close your median guesses came to the real
answers, but rather how often the real answer came within your 25% and 75% bounds. If it was
about half the time, then your bounds are accurate. But if you're like most people, you will be

more

sure of yourself than you should be, and fewer than half the answers will fall within the

bounds. With practice, you can calibrate yourself to give realistic bounds, and thus be more
useful in supplying information for decision making. Try this second set of questions and see if
there is any improvement:

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

. Year of birth of Zsa Zsa Gabor.

Maximum distance from Mars to the sun in miles.

Value in dollars of exports of wheat from the U.S. in 1992,
Tons handled by the port of Honolulu in 1991.

Annual salary in dollars of the governor of California in 1993.
