  

Section 26.2.

Foundations of Reasoning and Perception 821

 

  
  
   
   
   

CORRESPONDENCE
THEORY

GROUNDING

‘CAUSAL SEMANTICS

WIDE CONTENT

NARROW CONTENT

BRAIN INA VAT

QUALIA

precisely because it clashed with the intuitions afforded by the folk cosmology of the time. We
may find out that our current folk psychology is so far off base that it is giving us similar kinds
of faulty intuitions.

The correspondence theory of belief goes somewhat further toward a realistic account.
According to this theory, an internal structure in an agent is a reasonable candidate for a repre-
sentation of a proposition if the following conditions hold:

1. The structure is formed when sensory evidence for the truth of the proposition is obtained.

2. The structure ceases to exist when sensory evidence for the proposition's falsehood is
obtained.

3. The structure plays the appropriate causal role in the selection of actions.

Thus, the internal structure acts as a "flag" that correlates with the external proposition.

The correspondence theory contains the crucial element of grounding—the agent's beliefs
are grounded in its sensory experience of the world. Grounding is often viewed as essential to
the possession of intentional states. For example, before an agent can be said to be dying for a
hamburger, it must have some direct experience ofhamburgers, or at least ofrelated comestibles. It
is not enough that its knowledge base contain the sentence DyingFor(Me,Hamburger). However,
if the sentence gets there "in the right way"—that is, through experience of hamburgers and so
on —then we say it has the appropriate causal semantics. It has meaning relating to hamburgers
because ofits connection to actual hamburger experiences.

There are two views on the sense in which an internal representation has actual meaning.
The first view, called wide content, has it that the internal representation intrinsically refers
to some aspect of the outside world; that is, there is some connection between the internal
representation and the external world that exists by the nature ofthe representation. For example,
the intemal state corresponding to the beliefthat "This hamburger is delicious" intrinsically refers
to the particular hamburger that itis "about." The second view, called narrow content, says that
no such connection exists. The “hamburgery” aspect of the beliefis an intrinsic aspect of the
belief as experienced by the agent.

We can distinguish between the two views by considering one of the favorite devices of
philosophers: the brain in a vat. Imagine, if you will, that your brain was removed from your
body at birth and placed in a marvellously engineered vat. The vat sustains your brain, allowing
it to grow and develop. At the same time, electronic signals are fed to your brain from a computer
simulation of an entirely fictitious world, and motor signals from your brain are intercepted and
used to modify the simulation as appropriate. The brain in a vat has been wheeled out many times
to resolve questions in philosophy. Its role here is to show that wide content is not consistent
with physicalism. The brain in the vat can be in an identical state to the brain of someone
eating a hamburger; yet in one case, the hamburger exists; in the other, it does not. Even in
the former case, then, the belief only refers to the actual hamburger in the eyes of a third party
who has independent access to the internals of the brain and to the external world containing the
hamburger. The brain by itself does not refer to the hamburger.

The nairow-content view goes beyond the simple correspondence theory. The belief that
a hamburger is delicious has a certain intrinsic nature—there is something that it is like to have
this belief. Now we get into the realm of qualia, or intrinsic experiences (from the Latin word
meaning, roughly, "such things"). The correspondence theory can account for the verbal or

 
