Section 26.3

On the Possibility of Achieving Intelligent Behavior 825

 

that keep the brain from being a formal system, then we can build a computer that incorporates
analog devices to achieve the same nondeterminism (for example, using a Geiger counter to seed
arandom number generator).

In practical terms, the limitations of formal systems are not going to be of much help to the
interrogator in the Turing Test anyway. First of all, descriptions of the halting problems for either
humans or sufficiently intelligent computers are going to be far too large to talk about. Even if
they were small enough, the interrogator does not know the details of the computer it is talking
to, and thus has no way of posing the right halting problem. And even if the interrogator made
a lucky guess, the computer could just wait a few minutes (or weeks) and then reply "It looks
like it doesn't halt, but I'm not sure—it’s pretty complicated." Presumably that would be a good
imitation ofa typical human reply.

Another way of stating the refutation argument, in a form appropriate to Lucas's version, is
that a human being cannot show the consistency ofa formal system that describes the operation of
his orher brain or ofa large computer, and cannot therefore establish the truth of the corresponding
Godel sentence. Therefore, humans have the same limitations that formal systems have.

Ina more recent revival of the mathematical objection, the mathematician Roger Penrose
has written a reasonably controversial book on AI, provocatively entitled The Emperor's New
Mind,’ which purports to overcome these objections to Lucas. Penrose argues that, at least
when we consider the mental faculties that mathematicians use to generate new mathematical
propositions and their proofs, the claim that F is complex cannot hold up. This is because
when a new result is found, it is usually a simple matter for one mathematician to communicate
it to another, and to provide convincing evidence by means of a series of simple steps. He
begins by assuming that this universal facility for mathematics is algorithmic, and tries to show
a contradiction:

Now this putative "universal" system, or algorithm, cannot ever be known as the one that we
mathematicians use to decide truth. For if it were, we would construct its Godel proposition
and know that fo be a mathematical truth also. Thus, we are driven to the conclusion that the
algorithm that mathematicians use to decide mathematical truth is so complicated or obscure
that its very validity can never be known to us. (Penrose, 1990, p. 654).

And because mathematical truths are in fact simple to see, at least step by step, mathematical
"insight" cannot be algorithmic. We can paraphrase the argument as follows:

. Mathematics is simple, and includes the “Gédelisation” process, which is also simple.
. Hence the "validity of mathematics" is easily seen.

wne

. Thus, if mathematics were a formal system, its Godel sentence would easily be seen to be
true by mathematicians.

4. Hence mathematical insight cannot be algorithmic
In an entertaining series of replies appearing in the journal Behavioral and Brain Sciences, a
number of mathematicians including George Boolos (1990) and Martin Davis (1990) point out

an obvious flaw in the first two steps. Mathematics has a long history of inconsistencies, the most
famous of which is Frege's Basic Laws ofArithmetic, shown inconsistent by Russell's paradox

7 Penrose (1990) strenuously denies that the obvious analogy to the tale of the Emperor's New Clothes was intended in
any way to suggest that AI is not all it claims to be.

 
