526

Chapter 18. Learning from Observations

 

crITiC

PROBLEM
(GENERATOR

 

Performance standard

 

 

 

 

| Learning “P| Performance

 

 

element = element
goals | ~
Problem

generator

Agent —

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 18.1 A general model of learning agents.

 

 

 

The critic is designed to tell the learning element how well the agent is doing. The critic
employs a fixed standard of performance. This is necessary because the percepts themselves
provide no indication ofthe agent's success. For example, a chess program may receive a percept
indicating that it has checkmated its opponent, but it needs a performance standard to know that
this is a good thing; the percept itself does not say so. It is important that the performance
standard is a fixed measure that is conceptually outside the agent; otherwise the agent could
adjust its performance standards to meet its behavior. In humans, this form of irrationality is
called "sour grapes" and is characterized by comments such as "Oh well, never mind, I didn't
want that stupid Nobel prize anyway.”

The last component of the learning agent is the problem generator. It is responsible for
suggesting actions that will lead to new and informative experiences. The point is that if the
performance element had its way, it would keep doing the actions that are best, given what it
knows. But ifthe agent is willing to explore a little, and do some perhaps suboptimal actions in the
short run, it might discover much better actions for the long run. The problem generator's job is
to suggest these exploratory actions. This is what scientists do when they carry out experiments.
Galileo did not think that dropping rocks from the top of a tower in Pisa was valuable in itself;
he was not trying to break the rocks, nor to render pedestrians unconscious. His aim was to
demonstrate a better theory of the motion of objects.

To make the overall design more concrete, let us return to the automated taxi example. The
performance element consists of whatever collection of knowledge and procedures the taxi has
for selecting its driving actions (turning, accelerating, braking, honking, and so on). The taxi goes
out on the road and drives, using this performance element. The learning element formulates
goals, for example, to learn better rules describing the effects of braking and accelerating, to
learn the geography of the area, to leam how the taxi behaves on wet roads, and to lear what

 
