Section 19.2. Neural Networks 567

 

19.2__NeuRAL NETWORKS

UNS A neural network is composed of a number of nodes, or units, connected by links. Each link
LINKS has a numeric weight associated with it. Weights are the primary means of long-term storage
wacut in neural networks, and learning usually takes place by updating the weights. Some of the units

are connected to the external environment, and can be designated as input or output units. The
weights are modified so as to try to bring the network's input/output behavior more into line with
that of the environment providing the inputs
Each unit has a set of input links from other units, a set of output links to other units, a
‘ACTIVATION LEVEL current activation level, and a means of computing the activation level at the next step in time,
given its inputs and weights. The idea is that each unit does a local computation based on inputs
from its neighbors, but without the need for any global control over the set of units as a whole
In practice, most neural network implementations are in software and use synchronous control
to update all the units in a fixed sequence.
To build a neural network to perform some task, one must first decide how many units are
to be used, what kind of units are appropriate, and how the units are to be connected to form a
network. One then initializes the weights of the network, and trains the weights using a leaming
algorithm applied to a set of training examples for the task.) The use of examples also implies
that one must decide how to encode the examples in terms of inputs and outputs of the network.

Notation

Neural networks have lots of pieces, and to refer to them we will need to introduce a variety of
mathematical notations. For convenience, these are summarized in Figure 19.3.

Simple computing elements

Figure 19.4 shows a typical unit. Each unit performs a simple computation: it receives signals
from its input links and computes a new activation level that it sends along each of its output
links. The computation of the activation level is based on the values of each input signal received
from a neighboring node, and the weights on each input link. The computation is split into

INPUT FUNCTION two components. First is a /inear component, called the input function, in;, that computes the
weighted sum of the unit's input values. Second is a nonlinear component called the activation
Aout function, g, that transforms the weighted sum into the final value that serves as the unit's activation

value, a;. Usually, all units in a network use the same activation function. Exercise 19.3 explains
why it is important to have a nonlinear component.
The total weighted input is the sum of the input activations times their respective weights:

in; = yi Wjiaj = Wi a
7

3 In this chapter, we will assume that all examples are labelled with the correct outputs. In Chapter 20, we will see how
to relax this assumption.
