 

518

Chapter 17. | Making Complex Decisions

 

 

 

Dt D.t+1 D.t+2

SN

State.t ( State.t+1 State.t+2 ~(_ State.t+3

Figure 17.16 The generic structure of a dynamic decision network, showing a sequential
decision problem with three steps. Evidence variables are shaded.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
    
  
  
  
   
 

Just as we used a limited horizon in game playing and with value iteration and policy
iteration, we can limit the extent of forward projection in the DDN in order to reduce complexity. |
This, combined with a heuristic estimate for the utility of the remaining steps, can provide .
a reasonable approximation to rational action. There are many other possible approximation |
techniques, such as using less detailed state variables for states in the distant future; using a |
greedy heuristic search through the space of decision sequences; assuming "most likely" values
for future percept sequences rather than considering all possible values; and so on. There remain
many possible techniques for DDN evaluation that are as yet unexplored.

Discussion

All in all, the DDN promises potential solutions to many of the problems that arise as AI systems {|
are moved from static, accessible, and above all simple environments to dynamic, inaccessible,
complex environments that are closer to the real world.

* They can handle uncertainty coirectly, and sometimes efficiently.
They deal with continuous streams of sensor input.
They can handle unexpected events because they have no fixed “plan.”
They can handle noisy sensors and sensor failure.
They can act in order to obtain relevant information.
They can handle relatively large state spaces because they decompose the state into a set
of state variables with sparse connections. 4
They exhibit "graceful degradation" under time pressure and in complex environments,
using various approximation techniques
What is missing? The first, and probably the most important, defect of DDNs is that they retain
the property of forward search through concrete states that is typical of the search algorithms’

studied in Part I In Part IV, we explained how the ability to consider partially ordered,
abstract plans using goal-directed search provided a massive increase in problem-solving poweh|
