Section 3.2.

CONTINGENCY
PROBLEM

INTERLEAVING

7)
ase

PLOF

BL

Formulating Problems 59

 

ATION

Although it might seem different, the case of ignorance about the effects of actions can be
treated similarly. Suppose, for example, that the environment appears to be nondeterministic in
that it obeys Murphy's Law: the so-called Suck action sometimes deposits dirt on the carpet but
only if there is no dirt there already. For example, if the agent knows it is in state 4, then it
knows that if it sucks, it will reach one of the states {2,4}. For any known initial state, however,
there is an action sequence that is guaranteed to reach a goal state (see Exercise 3.2).

Sometimes ignorance prevents the agent from finding a guaranteed solution sequence.
Suppose, for example, that the agent is in the Murphy's Law world, and that it has a position
sensor and a local dirt sensor, but no sensor capable of detecting dirt in other squares. Suppose
further that the sensors tell it that it is in one of the states {1,3}. The agent might formulate the
action sequence [Suck,Right,Suck]. Sucking would change the state to one of {5.7}, and moving
right would then change the state to one of {6,8}. If itis in fact state 6, then the action sequence
will succeed, but if it is state 8, the plan will fail. If the agent had chosen the simpler action
sequence /Suck], it would also succeed some of the time, but not always. It turns out there is no
fixed action sequence that guarantees a solution to this problem.

Obviously, the agent does have a way to solve the problem starting from one of {1,3}: first
suck, then move right, then suck only ifthere is dirt there. Thus, solving this problem requires
sensing during the execution phase. Notice that the agent must now calculate a whole tree of
actions, rather than a single action sequence. In general, each branch of the tree deals with a
possible contingency that might arise. For this reason, we call this a contingency problem.
Many problems in the real. physical world are contingency problems, because exact prediction is
impossible. For this reason, many people keep their eyes open while walking around or driving

Single-state and multiple-state problems can be handled by similar search techniques,
which are covered in this chapter and the next. Contingency problems, on the other hand,
require more complex algorithms, which we cover in Chapter 13. They also lend themselves to a
somewhat different agent design, in which the agent can act before it has found a guaranteed plan.
This is useful because rather than considering in advance every possible contingency that might
arise during execution, it is often better to actually start executing and see which contingencies
do arise. The agent can then continue to solve the problem given the additional information. This
type of interleaving of search and execution is also covered in Chapter 13, and for the limited
case of two-player games, in Chapter 5. For the remainder of this chapter, we will only consider
cases where guaranteed solutions consist of a single sequence of actions.

Finally, consider the plight of an agent that has no information about the effects of its
actions. This is somewhat equivalent to being lost in a strange country with no map at all, and is
the hardest task faced by an intelligent agent.* The agent must experiment, gradually discovering
what its actions do and what sorts of states exist. This is a kind of search, but a search in the
real world rather than in a model thereof. Taking a step in the real world, rather than in a model,
may involve significant danger for an ignorant agent. Ifit survives, the agent learns a "map" of
the environment, which it can then use to solve subsequent problems. We discuss this kind of
exploration problem in Chapter 20.

3° We assume that most readers face similar problems, and can imagine themselves as frustrated as our agent. We
apologize to owners of modern, efficient home appliances who cannot take advantage of this pedagogical device

4 It is also the task faced by newborn babies.
