820

Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

 

INTENTIONAL STATES

INTENTIONAL
STANCE

of Modus Ponens at a higher level. Clearly, however, logical systems do manage to work without
infinite regress. This is because at some point, the rule application process is fixed; for example,
in Prolog, the process of left-to-right, depth-first chaining applies to all inferences. Although this
process could be implemented by a meta-Prolog interpreter, there is no need because it is not
subject to alteration. This means that it can be implemented directly by a physical process, based
on the actual operation of the laws of physics, rather than the application of rules representing
those laws. The physical implementation of the reasoning system serves as the base case that
tenminates the regress before it becomes infinite. There is therefore no in-principle philosophical
difficulty in seeing how a machine can operate as a reasoning system to achieve intelligent
behavior. There is a practical difficulty: the system designer must show both that the rules
will lead to the right inferences, and that the reasoning system (the fixed, physical instantiation)
correctly implements the metalevel reasoning rules.

So much for intelligent behavior, at least for now. What about mental states? How do
we explain their possession by humans, and do machines have them? We will first consider
propositional attitudes, which are also known as intentional states. These are states, such as
believing, knowing, desiring, fearing, and so on, that refer to some aspect of the external world.
For example, the belief that Vienna is the capital of Austria is a belief about a particular city and
its status (or ifyou prefer, a belief about a proposition which is in turn about a city). The question
is, when can one say that a given entity has such a belief?

One approach is to adopt what Daniel Dennett (1971) has called the intentional stance
toward the entity. On this view, ascribing beliefs or desires to entities is no more than a calcula-
tional device that allows one to predict the entity's behavior. For example, a thermostat can be
said to desire that room temperature be maintained in a certain range, and to believe that the room
is currently too cold and that switching on the heat increases the room temperature (McCarthy
and Hayes, 1969). It is then reasonable to ascribe intentional states when that provides the most
succinct explanatory model for the entity's behavior. As mentioned in Chapter 1, this is similar
to ascribing pressure to a volume of gas. However, the thermostat's "belief" that the room is too
cold is not identical to the corresponding belief held by a person. The thermostat's sensors only
allow it to distinguish three states in the world, which we might call Hot, OK, and Cold. It can
have no conception of a room, nor of heat for that matter. "The room is too cold" is simply a way
of naming the proposition in which the thermostat is said to believe

The "intentional stance" view has the advantage of being based solely on the entity's
behavior and not on any supposed internal structures that might constitute "beliefs." This is also
a disadvantage, because any given behavior can be implemented in many different ways. The
intentional stance cannot distinguish among the implementations. For some implementations,
there are no structures that might even be candidates for representations of the ascribed beliefs
or desires. For example, ifa chess program is implemented as an enormous lookup table, then it
does not seem reasonable to suppose that the program actually believes that it is going to capture
the opponent's queen; whereas a human with identical chess behavior might well have such a
belief. The question of actual intentional states is still a real one.

The intentional stance allows us to avoid paradoxes and clashes of intuition (such as being
forced to say that thermostats have beliefs). This makes us all feel more comfortable, but it is not
necessarily the right scientific approach. Intuitions can change, and paradoxes can be resolved.
The hypothesis that the earth revolves around the sun was once called "the Copernican paradox"

 
