726

Chapter 24. Perception

 

PERSPECTIVE
PROJECTION

VANISHING POINT

‘SCALED
ORTHOGRAPHIC
PROJECTION

 

 

‘image y,
plane 4

 

 

 

 

pinhole

 

 

 

 

 

———

f

 

 

Figure 24.1 Geometry of image formation in the pinhole camera.

 

 

 

(x, y.2). If fis the distance from the pinhole O to the image plane, then by similar triangles, we

can derive the following equations:

x Y
f Zs 2

Note that the image is inverted, both left-right and up-down, compared to the scene as indicated

in the equations by the negative signs. These equations define an image formation process known

as perspective projection.

Equivalently, we can model the perspective projection process with the projection plane
being at a distunce f infront of the pinhole. This device ofimagining a projection surface in front
was first recommended to painters in the Italian Renaissance by Alberti in 1435 as a technique for
constructing geometrically accurate depictions of a three-dimensional scene. For our purposes,
the main advantage of this model is that it avoids lateral inversion and thereby eliminates the
negative signs in the perspective projection equations

Under perspective projection, parallel lines appear to converge to a point on the horizon —
think of railway tracks. Let us see why this must be so. We know from vector calculus that an
arbitrary point P| on the line passing through (X,Y), Zo) in the direction (U,V, W) is given by
(Xy t+ AU, Yo + XV, Zy + AW), with A varying between +00 and —oo. The projection of P, on the
image plane is given by

(tee j VEAV

Zot AW'™ Zot AW

As A — x or A — -x, this becomes p., = (fU/W.fV/Wf W#0. We callp.. the vanishing

point associated with the family of straight lines with direction (U, V, W). It does not depend on

the point (X,, Yo, Zp) through which the straight line in the scene passes, only on the direction.
If the object is relatively shallow compared to its distance from the camera, we can ap-

proximate perspective projection by scaled orthographic projection. The idea is the following.

If the depth Z of points on the object varies in some range Zo + AZ, with AZ < Zo, then the

 

  

+ oat

 

 

 
