Section 16.2. The Basis of Utility Theory 473

 

16.2 THE BASIS OF UTILITY THEoRY

Intuitively, the principle of Maximum Expected Utility (MEU) seems like a reasonable way to
make decisions, but it is by no means obvious that it is the on/y rational way. After all, why
should maximizing the average utility be so special—why not try to maximize the sum of the
cubes of the possible utilities, or try to minimize the worst possible loss? Also, couldn't an agent
act rationally just by expressing preferences between states without giving them numeric values?
Finally, why should a utility function with the required properties exist at all? Perhaps a rational
agent can have a preference structure that is too complex to be captured by something as simple
as a single real number for each state.

Constraints on rational preferences

These questions can be answered by writing down some constraints on the preferences that a
rational agent should have, and then showing that the MEU principle can be derived from the
constraints. Writing down these constraints is a way of defining the semantics of preferences.
The idea is that, given some preferences on individual atomic states, the theory should allow one
to derive results about preferences for complex decision-making scenarios. This is analogous
to the way that the truth value of a complex logical sentence is derived from the truth value of
its component propositions, and the way the probability of a complex event is derived from the
probability of atomic events.

LOTTERIES In the language of utility theory, the complex scenarios are called lotteries to emphasize
the idea that the different attainable outcomes are like different prizes, and that the outcome is
determined by chance. The lottery Z, in which there are two possible outcomes—state A with
probability p and state B with the remaining probability—is written

L=([p,A; 1—p,B]

In general, a lottery can have any number of outcomes. Each outcome can be either an atomic
state or another lottery. A lottery with only one outcome can be written either as A or [1,A]. It
is the decision-maker's job to choose among lotteries. Preferences between prizes are used to
determine preferences between lotteries. The following notation is used to express preferences
or the lack ofa preference between lotteries or states:

A>B A is preferred toB
A~B the agent is indifferent between 4 and B
AWB the agent prefers A to B oris indifferent between them

Now we impose reasonable constraints on the preference relation, much as we imposed rationality
constraints on degrees of belief in order to obtain the axioms of probability in Chapter 14. One
reasonable constraint is that preference should be transitive, that is, if4 > B and B > C, then
we would expect A > C. We argue for transitivity by showing that an agent whose preferences
do not respect transitivity would behave irrationally. Suppose, for example, that an agent has
the nontransitive preferences 4 > B >» C > A, where A, B, and C are goods that can be freely
