Section 15.7.

Summary 467

 

The three approaches to quantitative reasoning about uncertainty just surveyed—fuzzy
logic, certainty factors, and Dempster-Shafer theory—were the three main alternatives to which
AI researchers resorted after early probabilistic systems fell out of favor in the early 1970s, as de-
scribed in Chapter 14. The later development of nonmonotonic logics inthe early 1980s was also,
in part, a response to the need for an effective method for handling uncertainty. The resurgence
of probability depended mainly on the discovery of beliefnetworks as a method for representing
and using conditional independence information. This resurgence did not come without a fight—
probabilistic methods were attacked both by logicists, who believed that numerical approaches
to AI were both unnecessary and introspectively implausible, and by supporters of the other
quantitative approaches to uncertainty. Peter Cheeseman's (1985) pugnacious "In Defense of
Probability," and his later article "An Inquiry into Computer Understanding" (Cheeseman, 1988,
with commentaries) give something of the flavor of the debate

It is fair to say that certainty factors are now of historical interest only (for reasons noted
above), and although fuzzy logic is a healthy, ongoing enterprise, it is increasingly perceived
as a way of handling continuous-valued variables rather than uncertainty. Nonmonotonic logics
continue to be ofinterest as a purely qualitative mechanism, although there is a good deal of work
aimed at showing how nonmonotonic inference is best viewed as a special case of probabilistic
reasoning with probabilities close to 0 or 1 (Goldszmidt ef al., 1990). Dempster-Shafer theory
is still perceived by its supporters as a viable alternative to Bayesian systems. Nonprobabilists
continue to be irritated by the dogmatic “Bayesianity” of the probabilists.

Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference (Pearl,
1988) is a comprehensive textbook and reference on beliefnetworks, by one of the major contrib-
utors to the field. Probabilistic Reasoning in Expert Systems: Theory and Algorithms (Neapolitan,
1990) gives a relatively readable introduction to belief networks from the standpoint of their use
in expert systems. Readings in Uncertain Reasoning (Shafer and Pearl, 1990) is a voluminous
collection of important papers about probability, belief networks, and other formalisms for rea-
soning about uncertainty, and their applications in AI. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (Kanal
and Lemmer, 1986) is an anthology containing a number of important early papers about belief
networks and other matters having to do with reasoning under uncertainty. Although this volume
is not numbered, a series of numbered anthologies with the same title have also been published.
New research on probabilistic reasoning appears both in mainstream AI journals such as Artificial
Intelligence and in more specialized journals such as the International Journal of Approximate
Reasoning. The proceedings ofthe Conferences on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (known
as UAI) are an excellent source for current research.

Sa eneeeeennemeeeneneeeee ee EEE

EXERCISES

15.1 Consider the problem ofdealing with a car that will not start, as diagrammed in Figure 15.5.

a. Extend the network with the Boolean variables JcyWeather and StarterMotorWorking.
b. Give reasonable conditional probability tables for all the nodes.
