68

Chapter 3. Solving Problems by Searching

 

 

Imagine the scene in real life: three members of the Arawaskan tribe, Alice, Bob, and Charles,
stand at the edge of the crocodile-infested Amazon river with their new-found friends, Xavier,
Yolanda, and Zelda. All around them birds cry, a rain storm beats down, Tarzan yodels, and so
on. The missionaries Xavier, Yolanda, and Zelda are a little worried about what might happen if
one of them were caught alone with two or three of the others, and Alice, Bob, and Charles are
concemed that they might be in for a long sermon that they might find equally unpleasant. Both
parties are not quite sure if the small boat they find tied up by the side of the river is up to making
the crossing with two aboard.

To formalize the problem, the first step is to forget about the rain, the crocodiles, and all the
other details that have no bearing in the solution. The next step is to decide what the right operator
set is. We know that the operators will involve taking one or two people across the river in the
boat, but we have to decide if we need a state to represent the time when they are in the boat, or
just when they get to the other side. Because the boat holds only two people, no "outnumbering"
can occur in it; hence, only the endpoints of the crossing are important. Next, we need to abstract
over the individuals. Surely, each of the six is a unique human being, but for the purposes of the
solution, when it comes time for a cannibal to get into the boat, it does not matter if it is Alice,
Bob, or Charles. Any permutation of the three missionaries or the three cannibals leads to the
same outcome. These considerations lead to the following formal definition of the problem:

0 States: a state consists of an ordered sequence of three numbers representing the number
of missionaries, cannibals, and boats on the bank of the river from which they started.
Thus, the start state is (3,3,1).

0 Operators: from each state the possible operators are to take either one missionary, one
cannibal, two missionaries, two cannibals, or one of each across in the boat. Thus, there
are at most five operators, although most states have fewer because it is necessary to avoid
illegal states. Note that if we had chosen to distinguish between individual people then
there would be 27 operators instead ofjust 5.

0 Goal test: reached state (0,0,0).

Path cost: number of crossings.

This state space is small enough to make it a trivial problem for a computer to solve. People.
have a hard time, however, because some of the necessary moves appear retrograde. Presumably,
humans use some notion of "progress" to guide their search. We will see how such notions are
used in the next chapter.

Real-world problems

Route finding

We have already seen how route finding is defined in terms of specified locations and transitions
along links between them. Route-finding algorithms are used in a variety of applications, such
as routing in computer networks, automated travel advisory systems, and airline travel planning
systems. The last application is somewhat more complicated, because airline travel has a very
complex path cost, in terms of money, seat quality, time of day, type of airplane, frequent-flyer
