612 Chapter 22. Elementary Graph Algorithms

223-9
Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graph G contains a path
from u to v, then any depth-first search must result in v.d <u.f.

22.3-10

Modify the pseudocode for depth-first search so that it prints out every edge in the
directed graph G, together with its type. Show what modifications, if any, you need
to make if G is undirected.

22.3-11
Explain how a vertex u of a directed graph can end up in a depth-first tree contain-
ing only u, even though u has both incoming and outgoing edges in G.

22.3-12

Show that we can use a depth-first search of an undirected graph G to identify the
connected components of G, and that the depth-first forest contains as many trees
as G has connected components. More precisely, show how to modify depth-first
search so that it assigns to each vertex v an integer label v.cc between | and k,
where k is the number of connected components of G, such that u.cc = v.cc if
and only if u and v are in the same connected component.

22.3-13, x

A directed graph G = (V, E) is singly connected if u ~> v implies that G contains
at most one simple path from u to v for all vertices u,v € V. Give an efficient
algorithm to determine whether or not a directed graph is singly connected.

 

22.4 Topological sort

This section shows how we can use depth-first search to perform a topological sort
of a directed acyclic graph, or a “dag” as it is sometimes called. A topological sort
of adag G = (V, E£) is a linear ordering of all its vertices such that if G contains an
edge (u,v), then u appears before v in the ordering. (If the graph contains a cycle,
then no linear ordering is possible.) We can view a topological sort of a graph as
an ordering of its vertices along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from
left to right. Topological sorting is thus different from the usual kind of “sorting”
studied in Part II.

Many applications use directed acyclic graphs to indicate precedences among
events. Figure 22.7 gives an example that arises when Professor Bumstead gets
dressed in the morning. The professor must don certain garments before others
(e.g., socks before shoes). Other items may be put on in any order (e.g., socks and
