838 Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

they fail to prove its impossibility, it is equally difficult to prove its correctness. Fortunately, few
mainstream AI researchers, ifany, believe that anything significant hinges on the outcome of the
debate given the field's present stage of development. Even Searle himself recommends that his
arguments not stand in the way of continued research on AI as traditionally conceived.

Like genetic engineering and nuclear power, artificial intelligence has its fair share of critics
concerned about its possible misuses. We will discuss these concerns in the next chapter. But
unlike other fields, artificial intelligence has generated a thriving industry devoted to proving its
impossibility. This second batch of critics has raised some important issues concerning the basic i
aims, claims, and assumptions of the field. Every AI scientist and practitioner should be aware of t
these issues, because they directly affect the social milieu in which AI research is carried out and 2
in which AI techniques are applied. Although general societal awareness should be part of the
education ofevery scientist, it is especially important for AI because the nature of the field seems
to arouse scepticism and even hostility in a significant portion of the population. There persists
an incredible degree of misunderstanding of the basic claims and content of the field, and, like it
or not, these misunderstandings have a significant effect on the field itself.

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

The nature of the mind has been a standard topic of philosophical theorizing from ancient times
to the present. In the Phaedo, Plato specifically considered and rejected the idea that the mind
could be an “attunement” or pattern of organization of the parts of the body, a viewpoint that
approximates the functionalist viewpoint in modern philosophy of mind. He decided instead
that the mind had to be an immortal, immaterial soul, separable from the body and different in
substance—the viewpoint of dualism. Aristotle distinguished a variety of souls (Greek vy“)
in living things, some of which, at least, he described in a functionalist manner. (See Nuss-
baum (1978) for more on Aristotle's functionalism.) Aristotle also conceived of deliberation
about what action to take in a way reminiscent of the modern situated agent approach (the last
part of this extract also appears on the cover of the book):

But how does it happen that thinking is sometimes accompanied by action and sometimes not,
sometimes by motion, and sometimes not? It looks as if almost the same thing happens as in
the case of reasoning and making inferences about unchanging objects. But in that case the
end is a speculative proposition ... whereas here the the conclusion which results from the
two premises is an action. .. .T need covering; a cloak is a covering. I need a cloak. What I
need, Ihave to make; I need a cloak. Ihave to make a cloak. And the conclusion, the "I have
to make a cloak," is an action. (Nussbaum, 1978, p. 40)

Descartes is notorious for his dualistic view ofthe human mind, but ironically his historical influ-
ence was toward mechanism and physicalism. He explicitly conceived of animals as automata,
and his spirited defense of this viewpoint actually had the effect of making it easier to conceive of
humans as automata as well, even though he himself did not take this step. The book L’Homme
Machine or Man a Machine (La Mettrie, 1748) did explicitly argue that humans are automata

 
