652

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

Of course, there are other attributes that are uniquely human: no other species wears
clothes, creates representational art, or watches four hours of television a day. But when Turing
proposed his test (see Section 1.1), he based it on language because language is intimately tied to
thinking in a way that, say, clothing is not. In this chapter, we will explain how a communicating
agent works and present a simplified version of English that is sufficient to illustrate the workings
of the agent's major components.

22.1 COMMUNICATION AS ACTION

‘SPEECH ACT

INDIRECT SPEECH
ACT

One of the actions that is available to an agent is to produce language. This is called a speech
act. "Speech" is used in the same sense as in "free speech," not "talking," so typing, skywriting,
and using sign language all count as speech acts. English has no neutral word for an agent that
produces language, either by speaking or writing or anything else. We will use speaker, hearer,
and utterance as generic terms referring to any mode of communication. We will also use the
term words to refer to any kind of conventional communicative sign.

Why would an agent bother to perform a speech act when it could be doing a "regular"
action? Imagine a group of agents are exploring the wumpus world together. The group gains an
advantage (collectively and individually) by being able to do the following:

Inform each other about the part of the world each has explored, so that each agent has
less exploring to do. This is done by making statements: There's a breeze here in 3 4.

Query other agents about particular aspects ofthe world. This is typically done by asking
questions: Have you smelled the wumpus anywhere?

Answer questions. This is a kind of informing. Yes, I smelled the wumpus in 2 5.

Request or command other agents to perform actions: Please help me carry the gold. It
can be seen as impolite to make a direct requests, so often an indirect speech act (a request
in the form of a statement or question) is used instead: / could use some help carrying this
or Couldyou help me cany this?

Promise to do things or offer deals: /'// shoot the wumpus ifvou let me share the gold.
Acknowledge requests and offers: OK.

Share feelings and experiences with each other: You know, old chap, when I get in a spot
like that, I usually go back to the start and head out in another direction, or Man, that
wumpus sure needs some deodorant!

These examples show that speech acts can be quite useful and versatile. Some kinds of speech
acts (informing, answering, acknowledging, sharing) have the intended effect of transferring
information to the hearer. Others (requesting, commanding, querying, leopard alarm) have the
intended effect of making the hearer take some action. A dual purpose of communication is to
establish trust and build social ties (just as primates groom each other both to remove fleas and
to build relationships). This helps to explain what is communicated in exchanges such as "Hello,
how are you? Fine, how are you? Not bad.”

 
