 

 

18 LEARNING FROM

OBSERVATIONS

 

 

 

In which we describe agents that can improve their behavior through diligent study
oftheir own experiences.

The idea behind learning is that percepts should be used not only for acting, but also for improving
the agent's ability to act in the future. Learning takes place as a result of the interaction between.
the agent and the world, and from observation by the agent ofits own decision-making processes.

Learning can range from trivial memorization of experience, as exhibited by the wumpus agent
in Chapter 7, to the creation of entire scientific theories, as exhibited by Albert Einstein. This
chapter starts with the design of general learning agents, and describes inductive learning—
constructing a description ofa function from a set of input/output examples. We then give several
algorithms for inductive learning in logical agents and a theoretical analysis that explains why
learning works.

18.1 A GENERAL MODEL OF LEARNING AGENTS

LEARNING ELEMENT

BEREO
ewe Ne

A learning agent can be divided into four conceptual components, as shown in Figure 18.1. The
most important distinction is between the learning element, which is responsible for making
improvements, and the performance element, which is responsible for selecting external actions.
The performance element is what we have previously considered to be the entire agent: it takes in
percepts and decides on actions. The learning element takes some knowledge about the learning
element and some feedback on how the agent is doing, and determines how the performance
element should be modified to (hopefully) do better in the future. The design of the leaming
element depends very much on the design of the performance element. When trying to design an
agent that leams a certain capability, the first question is not "How am I going to get it to learn
this?” but "What kind of performance element will my agent need to do this once it has learned
how?" For example, the learning algorithms for producing rules for logical systems are quite
different from the learning algorithms for producing belief networks. We will see, however, that
the principles behind the learning algorithms are much the same.

525
