Section 23.3.

Scaling Up the Lexicon 703

 

2

as)

TOKENIZATION

MORPHOLOGICAL
ANALYSIS:

INFLECTIONAL
MORPHOLOGY

DERIVATIONAL
MORPHOLOGY

‘COMPOUNDING

difference between 2" and 2n, but for large n, this representation offers considerable saving. The
representation is called a packed forest, because it is the equivalent to a set of trees (a forest),
but they are efficiently packed into one structure.

To implement the packed forest representation, we modify COMPLETER to keep track of
lists of possible children, and we modify ADD-EDGE so that when we go to add an edge that is
already in the chart. we merge its list of possible children with the list that is already there.

We end up with a parsing algorithm that is O(n?) in the worst case (where n is the number
of words in the input). This is the best that can be achieved for a context-free grammar. Note
that without the packed forest, the algorithm would be exponential in the worst case, because it
is possible for a sentence to have 0(2") different parse trees. In practice, one can expect a good
implementation of the algorithm to parse on the order of 100 words per second, with variation
depending on the complexity of the grammar and the input

3 SCALING UP THE LEXICON

In Chapter 22, the input was a sequence of words. In real text-understanding systems, the input
is a sequence of characters from which the words must be extracted. Most systems follow a
four-step process of tokenization, morphological analysis, dictionary lookup, and error recovery.

Tokenization is the process of dividing the input into distinct tokens—words and punctu-
ation marks. In Japanese, this is difficult because there are no spaces between words. Languages
like English are easier, but not trivial. A hyphen at the end ofthe line may be an inter- or intraword
dash. In some types of text, font changes, underlines, superscripts, and other control sequences
must be accounted for. Tokenization routines are designed to be fast, with the idea that as long as
they are consistent in breaking up the input text into tokens, any problems can always be handled
at some later stage of processing.

Morphological analysis is the process of describing a word in tems of the prefixes,
suffixes, and root forms that comprise it. There are three ways that words can be composed:

0 Inflectional morphology reflects the changes to a word that are needed in a particular
grammatical context. For example, most nouns take the suffix “s” when they are plural.

0 Derivational morphology derives a new word from another word that is usually of a
different category. For example, the noun "shortness" is derived from the adjective "short"
together with the suffix "ness."

© Compounding takes two words and puts them together. For example, "bookkeeper" is a
compound of "book" and "keeper." (The noun "keeper" is in turn derived from the verb
"keep" by derivational morphology.)

Even in a morphologically simple language like English, there can be morphological am-
biguities. "Walks" can be either a plural noun or a third-person singular verb. “Unionizable”
can be analyzed as “un-ion-izable” or “union-izable,” and “untieable” can be “‘un-(tie-able)” or
“(un-tie)-able.” Many languages make more use of morphology than English. In German, it
is not uncommon to see words like “Lebensversicherungsgesellschaftsangestellter” (life insur-
