Section 20.2.

Passive Learning in a Known Environment 601

 

REWARD-10-60

 

ADAPTIVE CONTROL
THEORY

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

sf \s
3 10
2 ce. 2
sf )s wl os
1 | starr Ono 2 1
FOS =
7 2 3 4
a) (b) (e)
Figure 20.1. (a) A simple stochastic environment. State (1,1) is the start state, (b) Each state

transitions to a neighboring state with equal probability among all neighboring states. State (4,2)
is terminal with reward —1, and state (4,3) is terminal with reward +1. (c) The exact utility values.

 

 

 

function is additive in the sense defined on page 502. We define the reward-to-go of a state as
the sum ofthe rewards from that state until a terminal state is reached. Given this definition, it is
easy to see that the expected utility ofa state is the expected reward-to-go of that state.

The generic agent design for passive reinforcement learning of utilities is shown in Fig-
ure 20.2. The agent keeps an estimate U of the utilities of the states, a table N of counts of
how many times each state was seen, and a table M of transition probabilities from state to state.
We assume that each percept e is enough to determine the STATE (i.e. the state is accessible),
the agent can determine the REWARD component ofa percept, and the agent can tell ifa percept
indicates a TERMINAL? state. In general, an agent can update its current estimated utilities after
each observed transition. The key to reinforcement learning lies in the algorithm for updating
the utility values given the training sequences. The following subsections discuss three possible
approaches to UPDATE.

Naive updating

A simple method for updating utility estimates was invented in the late 1950s in the area of
adaptive control theory by Widrow and Hoff (1960). We will call it the LMS (least mean
squares) approach. In essence, it assumes that for each state in a training sequence, the observed
reward-to-go on that sequence provides direct evidence of the actual expected reward-to-go. Thus,
at the end ofeach sequence, the algorithm calculates the observed reward-to-go for each state and
updates the estimated utility for that state accordingly. It can easily be shown (Exercise 20.1) that
the LMS approach generates utility estimates that minimize the mean square error with respect
to the observed data. When the utility function is represented by a table of values for each state,
the update is simply done by maintaining a running average, as shown in Figure 20.3.

Ifwe think of the utility function as a function, rather than just a table, then it is clear that
the LMS approach is simply leaming the utility function directly from examples. Each example
has the state as input and the observed reward-to-go as output. This means that we have reduced
reinforcement learning to a standard inductive learning problem, as discussed in Chapter 18. As
