Section 21.4,

Inductive Logic Programming 641

 

Figure 21.7 shows an example in which the new predicate P is generated in the process
of learning a definition for Ancestor. Once generated, P can be used in later inverse resolution
steps. For example, a later step might hypothesize that Morher(x,y) = P(x,y). Thus, the new
predicate P has its meaning constrained by the generation of hypotheses that involve it. Another
example might lead to the constraint Father(x,y) = P(x,y). In other words, the predicate P is
what we usually think of as the Parent relationship. As we mentioned earlier, the invention of
new predicates can significantly reduce the size of the definition of the goal predicate. Hence, by
including the ability to invent new predicates, inverse resolution systems can often solve learning
problems that are infeasible with other techniques

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Father(Georgey) > Ancestor(George,y)

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 21.7 An inverse resolution step that generates a new predicate P.

 

Some of the deepest revolutions in science come from the invention of new predicates
and functions—forexample, Galileo's invention of acceleration or Joule's invention of thermal
energy. Once these terms are available, the discovery ofnew laws becomes (relatively) easy. The
difficult part lies in realizing that some new entity, with a specific relationship to existing entities,
will allow an entire body of observations to be explained with a much simpler and more elegant
theory than previously existed.

As yet, ILP systems have not been applied to such difficult tasks. It does appear, however,
that the ability to use background knowledge provides significant advantages. In several appli-
cations, ILP techniques have outperformed knowledge-free methods. For example, in molecular
biology, it is useful to have background knowledge about typical molecular bonding pattems,
valences of atoms, bond strengths, and so on. Using such knowledge, Stephen Muggleton's
GOLEM system has been able to generate high-quality predictions of both protein structure from
sequence information (Muggleton et a/., 1992) and the therapeutic efficacy of various drugs
based on their molecular structures (King et al., 1992). These results, like Meta-DENDRAL's,
were considered sufficiently interesting in their own right to be published in leading scientific
journals. The differences between GOLEM'S and Meta-DENDRAL's performance are that (1) the
new domains are much more difficult, and (2) GOLEM is a completely general-purpose program
that is able to make use of background knowledge about any domain whatsoever.

Top-down learning methods

The second approach to ILP is essentially a generalization of the techniques of decision-tree
leaming to the first-order case. Rather than starting from the observations and working backwards,
we start with a very general rule and gradually specialize it so that it fits the data. This is
essentially what happens in decision-tree learning, where a decision tree is gradually grown until
