50 Chapter 2. Intelligent Agents

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

The analysis of rational agency as a mapping from percept sequences to actions probably stems
ultimately from the effort to identify rational behavior in the realm of economics and other forms
of reasoning under uncertainty (covered in later chapters) and from the efforts of psychological
behaviorists such as Skinner (1953) to reduce the psychology of organisms strictly to input/output
or stimulus/response mappings. The advance from behaviorism to functionalism in psychology,
which was at least partly driven by the application of the computer metaphor to agents (Putnam,
1960; Lewis, 1966), introduced the internal state of the agent into the picture. The philosopher
Daniel Dennett (1969; 1978b) helped to synthesize these viewpoints into a coherent "intentional
stance" toward agents. A high-level, abstract perspective on agency is also taken within the world
of AI in (McCarthy and Hayes, 1969). Jon Doyle (1983) proposed that rational agent design is
the core of AI, and would remain as its mission while other topics in AI would spin off to form
new disciplines. Horvitz et al. (1988) specifically suggest the use of rationality conceived as the
maximization of expected utility as a basis for AI

The AI researcher and Nobel-prize-winning economist Herb Simon drew a clear distinction
between rationality under resource limitations (procedural rationality) and rationality as making
the objectively rational choice (substantive rationality) (Simon, 1958). Cherniak (1986) explores
the minimal level ofrationality needed to qualify an entity as an agent. Russell and Wefald (1991)
deal explicitly with the possibility of using a variety of agent architectures. Dung Beetle Ecol-
ogy (Hanski and Cambefort, 1991)provides a wealth of interesting information on the behavior
of dung beetles

 

EXERCISES

2.1 What is the difference between a performance measure and a utility function?

22 For each of the environments in Figure 2.3, determine what type of agent architecture is
most appropriate (table lookup, simple reflex, goal-based or utility-based).
23 Choose a domain that you are familiar with, and write a PAGE description of an agent
for the environment. Characterize the environment as being accessible, deterministic, episodic,
static, and continuous or not. What agent architecture is best for this domain?
24 While driving, which is the best policy?

a. Always put your directional blinker on before turning,

b. Never use your blinker,

c. Look in your mirrors and use your blinker only if you observe a car that can observe you?
What kind of reasoning did you need to do to arrive at this policy (logical, goal-based, or utility-

based)? What kind of agent design is necessary to carry out the policy (reflex, goal-based, or
utility-based)?
