56

Chapter 3. Solving Problems by Searching

 

GOAL FORMULATION

PROBLEM
FORMULATION

SEARCH
SOLUTION

Imagine our agent in the city of Arad, Romania, toward the end of a touring holiday. The
agent has a ticket to fly out of Bucharest the following day. The ticket is nonrefundable, the
agent's visa is about to expire, and after tomozrow, there are no seats available for six weeks. Now
the agent's performance measure contains many other factors besides the cost of the ticket and
the.undesirability of being arrested aqd deported. For example, it wants to improve its suntan,
improve its Romanian, take in the sights, and so on. All these factors might suggest any ofa vast
array of possible actions. Given the seriousness of the situation, however, it should adopt the
goal of driving to Bucharest. Actions that result in a failure to reach Bucharest on time can be
rejected without further consideration. Goals such as this help organize behavior by limiting the
objectives that the agent is trying to achieve. Goal formulation, based on the current situation,
is the first step in problem solving. As well as formulating a goal, the agent may wish to decide
on some other factors that affect the desirability of different ways of achieving the goal.

For the purposes of this chapter, we will consider a goal to be a set of world states—just
those states in which the goal is satisfied. Actions can be viewed as causing transitions between
world states, so obviously the agent has to find out which actions will get it to a goal state. Before
it can do this, it needs to decide what sorts of actions and states to consider. Ifit were to try
to consider actions at the level of "move the left foot forward 18 inches" or "turn the steering
wheel six degrees left," it would never find its way out of the parking lot, let alone to Bucharest,
because constructing a solution at that level of detail would be an intractable problem. Problem
formulation is the process of deciding what actions and states to consider, and follows goal
formulation. We will discuss this process in more detail. For now, let us assume that the agent
will consider actions at the level of driving from one major town to another. The states it will
consider therefore correspond to being in a particular town.!

Our agent has now adopted the goal of driving to Bucharest, and is considering which town
to drive to from Arad. There are three roads out of Arad, one toward Sibiu, one to Timisoara,
and one to Zerind. None of these achieves the goal, so unless the agent is very familiar with the
geography of Romania, it will not know which road to follow.” In other words, the agent will not J
know which of its possible actions is best, because it does not know enough about the state that
results from taking each action. Ifthe agent has no additional knowledge, then it is stuck. The
best it can do is choose one of the actions at random.

But suppose the agent has a map of Romania, either on paper or in its memory. The point ]
of a map is to provide the agent with information about the states it might get itself into, and
the actions it can take. The agent can use this information to consider subsequent stages of a
hypothetical journey through each of the three towns, to try to find ajourney that eventually gets
to Bucharest. Once it has found a path on the map from Arad to Bucharest, it can achieve its goal
by carrying out the driving actions that correspond to the legs of the journey. In general, then, an
agent with several immediate options of unknown value can decide what to do by first examining
different possible sequences of actions that lead to states of known value, and then choosing the
best one. This process of looking for such a sequence is called search. A search algorithm takes
a problem as input and returns a solution in the form of an action sequence. Once a solution is

1 Notice that these states actually correspond to large sets of world states, because a world state specifies every aspect
ofreality. It is important to keep in ming the distinction between states in problem solving and world states

2 We are assuming that most readers are in the same position, and can easily imagine themselves as clueless as our
agent. We apologize to Romanian readers who are unable to take advantage of this pedagogical device

fw
