656 Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

 

GENERATIVE CAPACITY

Grammatical formalisms can be classified by their generative capacity: the set of
languages they can represent. Chomsky (1957) describes four classes of grammatical
formalisms that differ only in the form of the rewrite rules. The classes can be arranged
in a hierarchy, where each class can be used to describe all the languages that can be
described by a less powerful class, as well as some additional languages. Here we list
the hierarchy, most powerful class first:

Recursively enumerable grammars use unrestricted rules: both sides of the
rewrite rules can have any number of terminal and nonterminal symbols. These
grammars are equivalent to Turing machines in their expressive power.

Context-sensitive grammars are restricted only in that the right-hand hand side
must contain at least as many symbols as the left-hand side. The name context-
sensitive comes from the fact that a rule such as ASB — AXB says that an S can be
rewritten as an_X in the context ofa preceding 4 and a following B.

In context-free grammars (or CFGs), the left-hand side consists of a single
nonterminal symbol. Thus, each rule licenses rewriting the nonterminal as the right-
hand side in any context. CFGs are popular for natural language grammars, although
it is now widely accepted that at least some natural languages are not context-free
(ullum, 1991).

Regular grammars are the most restricted class. Every rule has a single nontermi-
nal on the left-hand side, and a terminal symbol optionally followed by a nonterminal
on the right-hand side. Regular grammars are equivalent in power to finite-state
machines. They are poorly suited for programming languages because, for example,
they cannot represent constructs such as balanced opening and closing parentheses.

To give you an idea of which languages can be handled by which classes, the
language a’b" (a sequence of n copies of a followed by the same number of b) can
be generated by a context-free grammar, but not a regular grammar. The language
a"h''c* requires a context-sensitive grammar, whereas the language a*b* (a sequence
of any number of a followed by any number of b) can be described by any of the four
classes. A summary of the four classes follows.

 

 

 

Class Sample Rule Sample Language
Recursively enumerable 4 B—C any
Context-sensitive ABBA a'b'c"
Context-free S—aSb ap"

Regular SaaS atb*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
