Section 18.3.

 

Learning Decision Trees 539

 

 

 

0 20 40 60 80 100
Training set size

 

 

Figure 18.9 A leaming curve for the decision tree algorithm on 100 randomly generated
examples in the restaurant domain. The graph summarizes 20 trials.

 

 

 

Designing oil platform equipment

In 1986, BP deployed an expert system called GASOIL for designing gas-oil separation systems
for offshore oil platforms. Gas-oil separation is done at the wellhead by a very large, complex,
and expensive separation system, whose design depends on a number of attributes including
the relative proportions of gas, oil, and water, and the flow rate, pressure, density, viscosity,
temperature, and susceptibility to waxing. At the time, GASOIL was the largest commercial
expert system in the world, containing approximately 2500 rules. Building such a system by
hand would have taken roughly 10 person-years. Using decision-tree leaming methods applied
to a database of existing designs, the system was developed in 100 person-days (Michie, 1986).
It is said to outperform human experts and to have saved BP many millions of dollars.

Learning to fly

There are two ways to design an automatic controller for a complex system. One can construct
a precise model of the dynamics of the system, and use one of a variety of formal methods
(including AI planning methods) to design a controller that has certain guaranteed properties.
Alternatively, one can simply leam the correct mapping from the state of the system to the
correct action. For very complex systems, such as aircraft and electorates, developing a detailed
model may be infeasible, which leaves the second alternative. Sammut et al. (1992) adopted this
alternative for the task of learning to fly a Cessna on a flight simulator. The data was generated
by watching three skilled human pilots performing an assigned flight plan 30 times each. Each
time the pilot took an action by setting one of the control variables such as thrust or flaps, a
training example was created. In all, 90,000 examples were obtained, each described by 20 state
variables and labelled by the action taken. From these examples, a decision tree was extracted
