840 Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

 

fag Eliminative materialism (Rorty, 1965; Churchland, 1979)differs from all other prominent
theories in the philosophy of mind, in that it does not attempt to give an account of why our
“folk psychology" or commonsense ideas about the mind are true, but instead rejects them as
false and attempts to replace them with a purely scientific theory of the mind. In principle,
this scientific theory could be given by classical Al, but in practice, eliminative materialists
tend to lean on neuroscience and neural network research instead (Churchland, 1986), on the
grounds that classical AI, especially "knowledge representation" research of the kind described
in Chapter 8, tends to rely on the truth of folk psychology. Although the "intentional stance"
viewpoint (Dennett, 1971) could be interpreted as functionalist, it should probably instead be
regarded as a form of eliminative materialism, in that taking the "intentional stance" is not
supposed to reflect any objective property of the agent toward whom the stance is taken. It should
also be noted that it is possible to be an eliminative materialist about some aspects of mentality
while analyzing others in some other way. For instance, Dennett (1978a) is much more strongly
eliminativist about qualia than about intentionality.

The Encyclopedia ofPhilosophy (1967) is an impressively authoritative source. General
collections of articles on philosophy of mind, including functionalism and other viewpoints
related to AI, are Materialism and the Mind-Body Problem (Rosenthal, 1971) and Readings
in the Philosophy of Psychology, volume 1 (Block, 1980). Biro and Shahan (1982) present
a collection devoted to the pros and cons of functionalism. Anthologies of articles dealing
more specifically with the relation between philosophy and AI include Minds and Machines
(Anderson, 1964), Philosophical Perspectives in Artificial Intelligence (Ringle, 1979), Mind
Design (Haugeland, 1981), and The Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence (Boden, 1990). There are
several general introductions to the philosophical "AI question" (Boden, 1977; Haugeland, 1985;
Copeland, 1993). Zhe Behavioral and Brain Sciences, abbreviated BBS, is a major journal
devoted to philosophical questions (and high-level, abstract scientific questions) about AI and
neuroscience. A BBS article includes occasionally amusing peer commentary from a large
number of critics and a rebuttal by the author of the main article

cae

 

EXERCISES

26.1 Go through Turing's list of alleged "disabilities" of machines, identifying which have
been shown to be achievable, which are achievable in principle by a program, and which are still
problematic because they require conscious mental states. at

26.2 Does a refutation of the Chinese Room argument necessarily prove that appropriately me
programmed computers are conscious?

26.3 Suppose we ask the Chinese Room to prove that John Searle is not a conscious being. After
awhile, it comes up with a leamed paper that looks remarkably like Searle’s paper, but switches
"computer" and "human" throughout, along with all the corresponding terms. The claim would
be that if Searle's argument is a refutation of the possibility of conscious machines, then the
Chinese Room's argument is a refutation of the possibility of conscious humans. Then, provided

 
