 

Section 1.2.

The Foundations of Artificial Intelligence 9

 

DUALISM

MATERIALISM

ENPRICIST

INDUCTION

and his student Aristotle laid the foundation for much of western thought and culture. The
philosopher Hubert Dreyfus (1979, p. 67) says that "The story ofartificial intelligence might well
begin around 450 B.C." when Plato reported a dialogue in which Socrates asks Euthyphro,> "I
want to know what is characteristic of piety which makes all actions pious ... that I may have it
to turn to, and to use as a standard whereby to judge your actions and those of other men.”* In
other words, Socrates was asking for an algorithm to distinguish piety from non-piety. Aristotle
went on to try to formulate more precisely the laws governing the rational part of the mind. He
developed an informal system of syllogisms for proper reasoning, which in principle allowed one
to mechanically generate conclusions, given initial premises. Aristotle did not believe all parts
of the mind were governed by logical processes; he also had a notion of intuitive reason.

Now that we have the idea of a set of rules that can describe the working of (at least part
of) the mind, the next step is to consider the mind as a physical system. We have to wait for
René Descartes (1596-1650) for a clear discussion of the distinction between mind and matter,
and the problems that arise. One problem with a purely physical conception of the mind is that
it seems to leave little room for free will: ifthe mind is governed entirely by physical laws, then
it has no more free will than a rock "deciding" to fall toward the center of the earth. Although a
strong advocate of the power of reasoning, Descartes was also a proponent of dualism. He held
that there is a part of the mind (or soul or spirit) that is outside of nature, exempt from physical
laws. On the other hand, he felt that animals did not possess this dualist quality; they could be
considered as ifthey were machines.

An alternative to dualism is materialism, which holds that all the world (including the
brain and mind) operate according to physical law.> Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716) was probably
the first to take the materialist position to its logical conclusion and build a mechanical device
intended to carry out mental operations. Unfortunately, his formulation of logic was so weak that
his mechanical concept generator could not produce interesting results.

It is also possible to adopt an intermediate position, in which one accepts that the mind
has a physical basis, but denies that it can be explained by a reduction to ordinary physical
processes. Mental processes and consciousness are therefore part of the physical world, but
inherently unknowable; they are beyond rational understanding. Some philosophers critical of
AI have adopted exactly this position, as we discuss in Chapter 26.

Barring these possible objections to the aims of AI, philosophy had thus established a
tradition in which the mind was conceived of as a physical device operating principally by
reasoning with the knowledge that it contained. The next problem is then to establish the
source of knowledge. The empiricist movement, starting with Francis Bacon's (1561-1626)
Novum Organum, is characterized by the dictum of John Locke (1632-1704): "Nothing is in
the understanding, which was not first in the senses." David Hume's (1711-1776) A Treatise
of Human Nature (Hume, 1978) proposed what is now known as the principle of induction:

 

3. The Eutlyphro describes the events just before the trial of Socrates in 399 B.C. Dreyfus has clearly erred in placing it
SL years earlier
4+ Note that other translations have "goodness/good” instead of "piety/pious.”

5 In this view, the perception of "free will" arises because the deterministic generation of behavior is constituted by the
operation of the mind selecting among what appear to be the possible courses of action. They remain "possible" because
the brain does not have access to its own future states

© An update of Aristotle's organon, or instrument of thought
