Section 18.5.

Learning General Logical Descriptions 545

 

EXTENSION

FALSE NEGATIVE

predicate. Using C; to denote the candidate definition, each hypothesis H; is a sentence of the
form Vx Q(x) < C(x). For example, the decision tree shown in Figure 18.8 expresses the
following logical definition (which we will call H, for future reference):

Vr WillWait(r) <=  Patrons(r, Some)
V_ Patrpns(r, Full) A ~Hungry(r)A Type(r French)
V_ Patrons(r, Full) A ~Hungry(r)A Type(r, Thai) A FrilSat(r)
Vs Patrons(r, Full) A sHungry(r)A Type(r Burger)

The hypothesis space is then the set ofall hypotheses that the learning algorithm is designed
to entertain. For example, the DECISION-TREE-LEARNING algorithm can entertain any decision
tree hypothesis defined in terms of the attributes provided; its hypothesis space therefore consists
of all these decision trees. We will generically use the letter H to denote the hypothesis space
{H),...,H,}. Presumably, the learning algorithm believes that one of the hypotheses is correct;
that is, it believes the sentence

Hy) VA2VH3V...VH, (18.1)
Each hypothesis predicts that a certain set ofexamples—namely, those that satisfy its candidate
definition—will be examples of the goal predicate. This set is called the extension of the
predicate. Two hypotheses with different extensions are therefore logically inconsistent with
each other, because they disagree on their predictions for at least one example. If they have the
same extension, they are logically equivalent.

Examples

Logically speaking, an example is an object to which the goal concept may or may not apply,
and that has some logical description. Let us generically call the ith example X;. Its description
will be the sentence Dj(X;), where D; can be any logical expression taking a single argument.
The classification will be given by a sentence Q(X,)if the example is positive, and ~Q(X))if
the example is negative. For instance, the first example from Figure 18.5 is described by the
sentences

Alternate(X)A 7Bar(X\) A >FrilSat(X))A Hungry(X))A ...
and the classification

WillWait(X;)
The complete training set is then just the conjunction of all these sentences. A hypothesis agrees
with all the examples if and only if it is logically consistent with the training set; ideally, we
would like to find such a hypothesis.

Let us examine this notion of consistency more carefully. Obviously, if hypothesis H; is

consistent with the entire training set, it has to be consistent with each example. What would it
mean for it to be inconsistent with an example? This can happen in one of two ways:

+ An example can be a false negative for the hypothesis, ifthe hypothesis says it should be
negative but in fact it is positive. For instance, the new example X)3 described by

Patrons(X13,Full)A Wait(X,3.0-10)\ —Hungry(Xi3)A ... A WillWait(X\3)
