Problems for Chapter 19 527

a. The professor’s claim that this procedure runs faster is based partly on the as-
sumption that line 7 can be performed in O(1) actual time. What is wrong with
this assumption?

b. Give a good upper bound on the actual time of PISANO-DELETE when x is
not H.min. Your bound should be in terms of x.degree and the number c of
calls to the CASCADING-CUT procedure.

c. Suppose that we call PISANO-DELETE (H, x), and let H’ be the Fibonacci heap
that results. Assuming that node x is not a root, bound the potential of H’ in
terms of x. degree, c, t(H), and m(H).

d. Conclude that the amortized time for PISANO-DELETE is asymptotically no
better than for FIB-HEAP-DELETE, even when x # H.min.

19-2 Binomial trees and binomial heaps

The binomial tree By is an ordered tree (see Section B.5.2) defined recursively.
As shown in Figure 19.6(a), the binomial tree Bo consists of a single node. The
binomial tree Bx, consists of two binomial trees B,_, that are linked together so
that the root of one is the leftmost child of the root of the other. Figure 19.6(b)
shows the binomial trees Bo through By.

a. Show that for the binomial tree Bx,

1. there are 2 nodes,

2. the height of the tree is k,

3. there are exactly (') nodes at depth i fori = 0,1,...,k, and

4. the root has degree k, which is greater than that of any other node; moreover,
as Figure 19.6(c) shows, if we number the children of the root from left to
right by k —1,k —2,..., 0, then child i is the root of a subtree B;.

A binomial heap H is a set of binomial trees that satisfies the following proper-
ties:

1. Each node has a key (like a Fibonacci heap).

2. Each binomial tree in H obeys the min-heap property.

3. For any nonnegative integer k, there is at most one binomial tree in H whose
root has degree k.

b. Suppose that a binomial heap H has a total of n nodes. Discuss the relationship
between the binomial trees that H contains and the binary representation of n.
Conclude that H consists of at most |[IgnJ + 1 binomial trees.
