Section 25.4.

Architectures 789

 

BEHAVIOR-BASED
ROBOTICS

 

State
register

     

Sensor
input

Actions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 259 The basic structure of Rosenschein’s situated automaton design. The shaded
region on the left represents a Boolean circuit for updating the current state registers. The shaded
region to the right represents a circuit for selecting actions based on the current state.

 

 

 

of "physics" are given to the compiler. Thus, the robot "knows" a set of propositions about the
environment, even though it has no explicit representation of the proposition.

Rosenschein's basic design is shown in Figure 25.9. It relies on a theorem to the effect
that any finite-state machine can be implemented as a state register together with a feedforward
circuit that updates the state based on the sensor inputs and the current state, and another circuit
that calculates the output given the state register. Because all the computation is carried out by
fixed-depth, feedforward circuits, the execution time for each decision cycle is vanishingly small.
Flakey, a robot based on situated automata theory, was able to navigate the halls of SRI, run
errands, and even ask questions, all without the benefit of explicit representations.

Rodney Brooks (1986) has advocated an approach to robot design that he calls behavior-
based robotics. The idea is that the overall agent design can be decomposed, not into functional
components such as perception, learning, and planning, but into behaviors such as obstacle
avoidance, wall-following, and exploration. Each behavioral module accesses the sensor inputs
independently to extract just the information it needs, and sends its own signals to the effectors.
Behaviors are arranged into a prioritized hierarchy in which higher level behaviors can access
the internal state of lower level behaviors and can modify or override their outputs. Figure 25.10
shows a hierarchy of behaviors proposed for a mobile robot by Brooks (1986).

The main aim of behavior-based robotics is to eliminate the reliance on a centralized,
complete representation of the world state, which seems to be the most expensive aspect of the
classical architecture. Internal state is needed only to keep track of those aspects of the world
state that are inaccessible to the sensors and are required for action selection in each behavior.
For tasks in which the appropriate action is largely determined by the sensor inputs, the slogan
"The world is its own model" is quite appropriate. In some cases, only a few bits ofinternal state
are needed even for quite complex tasks such as collecting empty soft drink cans. Similar results
have been found in Rosenschein's designs, in which the state register can be surprisingly small.

Behavior-based robotics has been quite successful in demonstrating that many basic com-
petences in the physical world can be achieved using simple, inexpensive mechanisms. At
