688

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

ambiguity is something to be resolved or to be cherished. Some of the earliest work on disam-
biguation was Wilks’ (1975) theory of preference semantics, which tried to find interpretations
that minimize the number of semantic anomalies. Hirst (1987) describes a system with similar
aims that is closer to the compositional semantics described in this chapter. Some problems with
multiple interpretations are addressed by Norvig (1988).

Probabilistic techniques for disambiguation have been predominant in recent years, partly
because of the availability of large corpora of text from which to gather statistics, and partly
because the field is evolving towards a more scientific methodology. Research involving large
corpora of text is described in the special issue of Computational Linguistics (Volume 19,
Numbers 1 and 2, 1993) and the book by Garside ef al. (1987). The statistical approach to
language is covered in a book by Charniak (1993). This subfield started when NLP researchers
noticed the success of probabilistic models in information retrieval (Salton, 1989) and speech
recognition (Rabiner, 1990). This lead to the development of probabilistic models for word
sense disambiguation (Yarowsky, 1992; Resnik, 1993) and eventually to the full parsing task,
as in the work by Church (1988) and by Chitrao and Grishman (1990). Some recent work
casts the disambiguation problem as belief network evaluation (Charniak and Goldman, 1992;
Goldman and Charniak, 1992; Wu, 1993).

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) holds regular conferences; much
current research on natural language processing is published in their proceedings, and in the
ACL's journal Computational Linguistics. Readings in Natural Language Processing (Grosz et
al., 1986) is an anthology containing many important papers in the field. The leading textbook
is Natural Language Understanding (Alien, 1995). Pereira and Sheiber (1987) and Covington
(1994) offer concise overviews based on implementations in Prolog. The Encyclopedia of AI
has many useful articles on the field; see especially "Computational Linguistics" and "Natural
Language Understanding."

EXERCISES

22.1 Outline the major differences between Pascal (or any other computer language with which
you are familiar) and English, and the "understanding" problem in each case. Think about such
things as grammar, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, compositionality, context-dependence, lexical
ambiguity, syntactic ambiguity, reference-finding (including pronouns), background knowledge,
and what it means to "understand" in the first place.

22.2. Which of the following are reasons for introducing a quasi-logical form?

a. To make it easier to write simple compositional grammar rules.
b. To extend the expressiveness of the semantic representation language.

c. To be able to represent quantifier scoping ambiguities (among others) in a succinct form.

a

To make it easier to do semantic disambiguation.
