618

Chapter 20. Reinforcement Learning

 

BANG-BANG
CONTROL

 

 

 

 

Figure 20.14 Setup for the problem ofbalancing a long pole on top of'a moving cart. The cart
can be jerked left or right by a controller that observes x, 6, x, and 6

 

 

 

learning, and over 200 papers have been published on it. The cart-pole problem differs from the
problems described earlier in that the state variables x, 9, x, and 0 are continuous. The actions
are usually discrete—jerk left orjerk right, the so-called bang-bang control regime.

The earliest work on learning for this problem was carried out by Michie and Cham-
bers (1968). Their BOXES algorithm was able to balance the pole for over an hour after only
about 30 trials. Moreover, unlike many subsequent systems, BOXES was implemented usinga |
real cart and pole, not a simulation. The algorithm first discretized the four-dimensional state
space into boxes, hence the name. It then ran trials until the pole fell over or the cart hit the end of
the track. Negative reinforcement was associated with the final action in the final box, and then
propagated back through the sequence. It was found that the discretization causes some problems
when the apparatus was initialized in a different position from those used in training, suggesting
that generalization was not perfect. Improved generalization and faster learning can be obtained
using an algorithm that adaptivelypattitions the state space according to the observed variation
in the reward.

More recently, neural networks have been used to provide a continuous mapping from
the state space to the actions, with slightly better results. The most impressive performance,
however, belongs to the control algorithm derived using classical control theory for the triple
inverted pendulum, in which three poles are balanced one on top of another with torque controls
at the joints (Furuta ef al., 1984). (One is disappointed, but not surprised, that this algorithm was
implemented only in simulation.)
