538

Chapter 18. Learning from Observations

 

test SET

LEARNING CURVE

Assessing the performance of the learning algorithm

A learning algorithm is good if it produces hypotheses that do a good job of predicting the
classifications of unseen examples. In Section 18.6, we will see how prediction quality can be
estimated in advance. For now, we will look at a methodology for assessing prediction quality
after the fact. .

Obviously, a prediction is good if it turns out to be true, so we can assess the quality ofa
hypothesis by checking its predictions against the correct classification once we know it. We do
this on a set of examples known as the test set. If we train on all our available examples, then
we will have to go out and get some more to test on, so often it is more convenient to adopt the
following methodology:

. Collect a large set of examples.

. Divide it into two disjoint sets: the training set and the test set.
Use the learning algorithm with the training set as examples to generate a hypothesis H.
Measure the percentage of examples in the test set that are correctly classified by H.

wR wNe

. Repeat steps 1 to 4 for different sizes of training sets and different randomly selected
training sets of each size.

The result of this is a set of data that can be processed to give the average prediction quality
as a function of the size of the training set. This can be plotted on a graph, giving what is
called the learning curve for the algorithm on the particular domain. The learning curve for
DECISION-TREE-LEARNING with the restaurant examples is shown in Figure 18.9. Notice that as
the training set grows, the prediction quality increases. (For this reason, such curves are also
called happy graphs.) This is a good sign that there is indeed some pattern in the data and the
learning algorithm is picking it up.

The key idea of the methodology is to keep the training and test data separate, for the same
reason that the results of an exam would not be a good measure of quality ifthe students saw the
test beforehand. The methodology of randomly dividing up the examples into training and test
sets is fair when each run is independent of the others—in that case, no run can "cheat" and tell
the other runs what the right answers are. But there is the problem that you, as the designer of
the learning algorithm, can cheat. If you run some examples, notice a pattern, and change either
the learning or the performance element, then the runs are no longer independent, and you have
effectively passed on information about the test set. In theory, every time you make a change to
the algorithm, you should get a new set ofexamples to work from. In practice, this is too difficult,
so people continue to run experiments on tainted sets of examples.

Practical uses of decision tree learning

Decision trees provide a simple representation for propositional knowledge that can be used for
decision making and classification of objects. Although decision tree learning cannot generate
interesting scientific theories because of its representational restrictions, it has been used in a
wide variety of applications. Here we describe just two

 
