528

Chapter 18. Learning from Observations

 

SUPERVISED

 

REINFORCEMENT

UNSUPERVISED
TEARNING

Representation of the components

Any of these components can be represented using any ofthe representation schemes in this book.
We have seen several examples: deterministic descriptions such as linear weighted polynomials
forutility functions in game-playing programs and propositional and first-order logical sentences
forall ofthe components in a logical agent; and probabilistic descriptions such as belief networks
for the inferential components of a decision-theoretic agent. Effective leaming algorithms have
been devised for all of these. The details of the learning algorithm will be different for each
representation, but the main idea remains the same.

Available feedback

For some components, such as the component for predicting the outcome of an action, the
available feedback generally tells the agent what the correct outcome is. That is, the agent
predicts that a certain action (braking) will have a certain outcome (stopping in 10 feet), and the
environment immediately provides a percept that describes the actual correct outcome (stopping
in 15 feet). Any situation in which both the inputs and outputs of a component can be perceived
is called supervised learning. (Often, the outputs are provided by a friendly teacher.)

On the other hand, in learning the condition-action component, the agent receives some
evaluation of its action (such as a hefty bill for rear-ending the car in front) but is not told the
correct action (to brake more gently and much earlier). This is called reinforcement learning;
the hefty bill is called a reinforcement.! The subject is covered in Chapter 20.7

Leaming when there is no hint at all about the comect outputs is called unsupervised
learning. An unsupervised learner can always learn relationships among its percepts using
supervised learning methods—that is, it can learn to predict its future percepts given its previous
percepts. It cannot learn what to do unless it already has a utility function.

Prior knowledge

The majority of leaming research in AI, computer science, and psychology has studied the case
in which the agent begins with no knowledge at all about what it is trying to learn. It only has
access to the examples presented by its experience. Although this is an important special case, it
is by no means the general case. Most human learning takes place in the context ofa good deal
of background knowledge. Some psychologists and linguists claim that even newbom babies
exhibit knowledge of the world. Whatever the truth of this claim, there is no doubt that prior
knowledge can help enormously in learning. A physicist examining a stack of bubble-chamber
photographs may be able to induce a theory positing the existence ofa new particle of a certain
mass and charge: but an art critic examining the same stack might learn nothing more than that
the "artist" must be some sort of abstract expressionist. In Chapter 21, we see several ways in
which leaming is helped by the use of existing knowledge.

1 The terms reward and punishment are also used as synonyms for reinforcement.
2 Drawing the line between supervised and reinforcement leaming is somewhat arbitrary; reinforcement leaming can
also be thought of as supervised learning with a less informative feedback signal

 
