768

Chapter 24. Perception

 

point P. He was well aware of the notion of motion parallax. The mathematical understanding
of perspective projection, this time in the context of projection onto planar surfaces, had its
next significant advance in the fifteenth century in Renaissance Italy. Brunelleschi (1413) is
usually credited with creating the first paintings based on geometrically correct projection of the
three-dimensional scene. In 1435, Alberti codified the rules and inspired generations of artists
whose artistic achievements amaze us to this day (Kemp, 1990). Particularly notable in their
development of the science ofperspective, as it was called in those days, were Leonardo Da Vinci
and Albrecht Diirer. Leonardo's late fifteenth century descriptions of the interplay of light and
shade (chiaroscuro), umbra and penumbra regions of shadows, and aerial perspective are still
worth reading in translation (Kemp, 1989).

Although perspective was known to the Greeks, they were curiously confused by the role
of the eyes in vision. Aristotle thought of the eyes as devices emitting rays, rather in the manner
ofmodern laser range finders. This mistaken view was laid to rest by the work of Arab scientists,
such as Alhazen in the tenth century. The development of various kinds of cameras followed.
These consisted of rooms (camera is Latin for chamber) where light would be let in through a
small hole in one wall to cast an image of the scene outside on the opposite wall. Ofcourse, in all
these cameras, the image was inverted, which caused no end of confusion. If the eye was to be
thought of as such an imaging device, how do we see right side up? This exercised the greatest
brains of the era (including Leonardo). It took the work of Kepler and Descartes to settle the
question. Descartes placed an eye from which the opaque cuticle had been removed in a hole in a
window shutter. This resulted in an inverted image being formed on a piece of paper laid out on
the retina. While the retinal image is indeed inverted, this need not cause a problem if the brain
interprets the image the right way. In modem jargon, one just has to access the data structure
appropriately.

The next major advances in the understanding of vision took place in the nineteenth
century. The work of Helmholtz and Wundt, described in Chapter |, established psychophysical
experimentation as a rigorous scientific discipline. Through the work of Young, Maxwell, and
Helmholtz, a trichromatic theory of color vision was established. That humans can see depth
if the images presented to the left and right eyes are slightly different was demonstrated by
Wheatstone's (1838) invention ofthe stereoscope. The device immediately became very popular
in parlors and salons throughout Europe. The essential concept of binocular stereopsis, that
two images of a scene taken from slightly different viewpoints carry information sufficient to
obtain a 3-D reconstruction of the scene, was exploited in the field of photogrammetry. Key
mathematical results were obtained—Kruppa(1913) proved that given two views of five distinct
points, one could reconstruct the rotation and translation between the two camera positions as
well as the depth of the scene (up to a scale factor). Although the geometry of stereopsis had
been understood for a long time, the correspondence problem in photogrammetry used to be
solved by humans trying to match up corresponding points. The amazing ability of humans
in solving the correspondence problem was illustrated by Julesz's invention of the random dot
stereogram (Julesz, 1971). Both in computer vision and in photogrammetry, much effort was
devoted to solving this problem in the 1970s and 1980s.

The second half of the nineteenth century was a major foundational period for the psy-
chophysical study of human vision. In the first half of the twentieth century the most signif-
icant research results in vision were obtained by the Gestalt school of psychology led by Max

 
