Section 24.6.

Object Representation and Recognition 753

 

feature pointsp ;,p2, ...,p, on the image plane. In general, n#m because some model points may
be occluded. The feature detector in the image also may miss true features and mark false ones
due to noise. We can express this as

pi = T(Ry; +t)

for 3-D model point ;:; and corresponding image point p;. Here T] denotes perspective projection
or one of its approximations such as scaled orthographic projection. We can summarize this by
the equation p; = Qy; where Q is the (unknown) transformation that brings the model points in
alignment with the image. Assuming the object is rigid, the transformation Q is the same for all
the model points.

One can solve for O given the 3-D coordinates of three model points and their 2-D
projections. The intuition is as follows: one can write down equations relating the coordinates of
Pi to those of j1;. In these equations, the unknown quantities correspond to the parameters of the
rotation matrix R and the translation vector t. If we have sufficiently many equations, we ought
to be able to solve for 9. We will not give any proof here, but merely state the following result
(Huttenlocher and Ullman, 1990):

Given three noncollinear points 1), j2, and j:; in the model, and their projections
on the image plane, p\, p2, and p; under scaled orthographic projection, there exist
exactly two transformations from the three-dimensional model coordinate frame to
a two-dimensional image coordinate frame.

These transformations are related by a reflection around the image plane and can be computed by
a simple closed-form solution. We will just assume that there exists a function FIND-TRANSFORM,
as shown in Figure 24.27.

If we could identify the corresponding model features for three features in the image,
we could compute Q, the pose of the object. The problem is that we do not know these
correspondences. The solution is to operate in a generate-and-test paradigm. We have to
guess an initial correspondence of an image triplet with a model triplet and use the function
FIND-TRANSFORM to hypothesize Q. Ifthe guessed correspondence was correct, then Q will be
correct, and when applied to the remaining model points will result in prediction of the image
points. Ifthe guessed correspondence was incorrect, then Q will be incorrect, and when applied
to the remaining model points would not predict the image points.

 

function FIND-TRANSFORM( pi, 72, 3, /l1, [2,43) returns a transform Q such that
Ani) = Pi

 

inputs: )1, P2, Ps, image feature points
11, £0, ts, model feature points

 

 

Figure 2427 The definition of the transformation-finding process. We omit the algorithm
(Huttenlocher and Ullman, 1990).

 

 

 

 
