834

Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

 

 

cannot lead to a conscious whole, an argument that we have tried to show is invalid. Having
failed to prove that the room is unconscious, Searle then appeals to intuition: just look at the
room; what's there to be conscious? While this approach gains some supporters, intuitions can
be misleading. It is by no means intuitive that a hunk of brain can support consciousness while
an equally large hunk of liver cannot. Furthermore, when Searle admits that materials other than
neurons could in principle support consciousness, he weakens his argument even further, for two
reasons: first, one has only Searle's intuitions (or one's own) to say that the Chinese room is not
conscious, and second, even if we decide the room is not conscious, that tells us nothing about
whether a program running on some other physical media might be conscious.

Searle describes his position as "biological naturalism." The physical nature of the system
is important, and not its computational description. He even goes so far as to allow the logical
possibility that the brain is actually implementing an AI program of the traditional sort. But even
ifthat program turned out to be an exact copy of some existing AI program, moving it to a different
machine would destroy consciousness. The distinction between the intrinsic properties (those
inherent in its specific physical makeup) and functional properties (the input/output specification)
ofa neuron is thus crucial.

One way to get at the distinction between intrinsic and functional properties is to look at
other artifacts. In 1848, artificial urea was synthesized for the first time, by Wohler. This was
important because it proved that organic and inorganic chemistry could be united, a question that
had been hotly debated. Once the synthesis was accomplished, chemists agreed that artificial
urea was urea, because it had all the right physical properties. Similarly, artificial sweeteners
are undeniably sweeteners, and artificial insemination (the other AI) is undeniably insemination.
On the other hand, artificial flowers are not flowers, and Daniel Dennett points out that artificial
Chateau Latour wine would not be Chateau Latour wine, even if it was chemically indistinguish-
able, simply because it was not made in the right place in the right way. Similarly, an artificial
Picasso painting is not a Picasso painting, no matter what it looks like.

Searle is interested in the notion of simulations as well as in artifacts. He claims that
AI programs can at best be simulations of intelligence, and such simulations imply no intrinsic
properties. The following quote is representative:

No one supposes that a computer simulation ofa storm will leave us all wet ... Why on earth
would anyone in his right mind suppose a computer simulation of mental processes actually
had mental processes? (Searle, 1980, pp. 37-38)

While it is easy to agree that computer simulations of storms do not make us wet, it is not
clear how to carry this analogy over to computer simulations of mental processes. After all, a
Hollywood simulation of a storm using sprinklers and wind machines does make the actors wet.
A computer simulation of multiplication does result in a product—in fact a computer simulation
of multiplication is multiplication. Searle achieves his rhetorical effect by choosing examples
carefully. It would not have been as convincing to say "Why on earth would anyone in his right
mind suppose that a computer simulation ofa video game actually is a game?,” but it would have
the same logical force as his original quote.

To help decide whether intelligence is more like Chateau Latour and Picasso or more like
urea and multiplication, we turn to another thought experiment

 

 

 
