Section 3.3 Example Problems 63

 

3.3__ EXAMPLE PROBLEMS.

The range of task environments that can be characterized by well-defined problems is vast. We

‘roy PROBLEMS can distinguish between so-called, toy problems, which are intended to illustrate or exercise

peakiigee various problem-solving methods, and so-called real-world problems, which tend to be more
difficult and whose solutions people actually care about. In this section, we will give examples of
both. By nature, toy problems can be given a concise, exact description. This means that they can
be easily used by different researchers to compare the performance of algorithms. Real-world
problems, on the other hand, tend not to have a single agreed-upon description, but we will
attempt to give the general flavor of their formulations.

Toy problems

The 8-puzzle

BPURZLE The 8-puzzle, an instance of which is shown in Figure 3.4, consists of a 3x3 board with eight
numbered tiles and a blank space. A tile adjacent to the blank space can slide into the space.
The object is to reach the configuration shown on the right of the figure. One important trick is
to notice that rather than use operators such as "move the 3 tile into the blank space," it is more
sensible to have operators such as "the blank space changes places with the tile to its left." This is
because there are fewer of the latter kind of operator. This leads us to the following formulation:

States: a state description specifies the location of each of the eight tiles in one of the nine
squares. For efficiency, it is useful to include the location of the blank.

} Operators: blank moves left, right, up, or down

0 Goal test: state matches the goal configuration shown in Figure 3.4.

0 Path cost: each step costs 1, so the path cost is just the length of the path.

S1pNIG-ALocK The 8-puzzle belongs to the family of sliding-block puzzles. This general class is known
to be NP-complete, so one does not expect to find methods significantly better than the search

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Start State Goal State

 

 

Figure34 A typical instance of the 8-puzzle.

 

 

 
