 

2 6 PHILOSOPHICAL

FOUNDATIONS

 

 

 

 

In which we consider what it means to think and to be conscious, and whether
artifacts could ever do such things.

 

 

 

 

26.1 THE BIG QUESTIONS

As we mentioned in Chapter 1, philosophers have been around for much longer than computers,
and have been trying to resolve many of the same questions that AI and cognitive science claim
to address: How can minds work, how do human minds work, and can nonhumans have minds?
For most of the book we have concentrated on getting AI to work at all, but in this chapter, we
address the big questions.

Sometimes the questions have led philosophers and AI researchers to square off in heated
debate. More often, the philosophers have debated each other. Some philosophers have sided
with the computational approach provided by artificial intelligence, partly because it has the tools
and the inclination to give detailed, causal explanations of intelligent behavior:!

It is rather as if philosophers were to proclaim themselves expert explainers of the methods
of a stage magician, and then, when we ask them to explain how the magician does the
sawing-the-lady-in-halftrick, they explain that it is really quite obvious: the magician doesn't
really saw her in half; he simply makes it appear that he does. "But how does he do shat?”
we ask. "Not our department," say the philosophers. (Dennett, 1984)

--. among philosophers of science one finds an assumption that machines can do everything
that people can do, followed by an attempt to interpret what this bodes for the philosophy
of mind; while among moralists and theologians one finds a last-ditch retrenchment to such
highly sophisticated behavior as moral choice, love and creative discovery, claimed to be
beyond the scope of any machine, (Dreyfus, 1972)

1 Ata recent meeting of the American Philosophical Association, it was put to us by one philosopher, who may prefer
to remain nameless, that "Philosophy has already capitulated to AI"

 

Q17
