466

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

POSSIBILITY THEORY

The literature on default and nonmonotonic reasoning is very large. Early work is col-
lected in Readings in Nonmonotonic Reasoning (Ginsberg, 1987). Shoham (1988) discusses
the nonmonotonic nature of reasoning about time and change, and proposes a semantics based
on general preferences between possible models of a default knowledge base. Geffner (1992)
provides an excellent introduction to default reasoning, including early philosophical work on
default conditionals. Some informative computational complexity results on default reasoning
have been derived by Kautz and Selman (1991). Bain and Muggleton (1991) provide methods for
learning default rules, suggesting a role for them as compact representations of data containing
regularities with exceptions. Autoepistemic logic (Moore, 1985b) attempts to explain nonmono-
tonicity as arising from the agent's reflection on its own states of knowledge. A comprehensive
retrospective and summary of work in this area is given by Moore (1993).

Applications of nonmonotonic reasoning have been largely limited to improving the the-
oretical underpinnings of logic programming. The use of negation as failure in Prolog can be ©
viewed as source of nonmonotonicity because adding new facts will rule out some potential
derivations (Clark, 1978). An important subclass of the so-called default theories in the default
logic of (Reiter, 1980) can be shown to be equivalent to logic programs in a language in which
both negation as failure and classical logical negation are available (Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1991).
The same is true of circumscriptive theories (Gelfond and Lifschitz, 1988). Autoepistemic logic
can, in tur, be closely imitated by circumscription (Lifschitz, 1989).

Certainty factors were invented for use in the medical expert system MYCIN (Shortliffe,
1976), which was intended both as an engineering solution and as a model of human judgment
under uncertainty. The collection Rule-Based Expert Systems (Buchanan and Shortliffe, 1984)
provides a complete overview of MYCIN and its descendants. David Heckerman (1986) showed
that a slightly modified version of certainty factors can be analyzed as a disguised form of reason-
ing with standard probability theory. The PROSPECTOR expert system (Duda ef a/., 1979) used a
rule-based approach in which the rules were justified by a global independence assumption. More
recently, Bryan Todd has shown that a rule-based system can perform correct Bayesian infer-
ence, provided that the structure of the rule set exactly reflects a set of conditional independence
statements that is equivalent to the topology ofa belief network (Todd ef al., 1993).

Dempster-Shafer theory originates with a paper by Arthur Dempster (1968) proposing a
generalization of probability to interval values, and a combination rule forusing them. Later work
by Glenn Shafer (1976) led to the Dempster-Shafer theory being viewed as a competing approach
to probability. Ruspini et al. (1992) analyze the relationship between the Dempster-Shafer theory
and standard probability theory from an AI standpoint. Shenoy (1989) has proposed a method
for decision making with Dempster-Shafer belief functions.

Fuzzy sets were developed by Lotfi Zadeh (1965) in response to the perceived difficulty
of providing exact inputs for intelligent systems. The text by Zimmermann (1991) provides a
thorough introduction to fuzzy set theory. As we mentioned in the text, fuzzy logic has often
been perceived incorrectly as a direct competitor to probability theory whereas in fact it addresses
a different set of issues. Possibility theory (Zadeh, 1978) was introduced to handle uncertainty
in fuzzy systems, and has much in common with probability. Dubois and Prade (1994) provide
a thorough survey of the connections between possibility theory and probability theory. An
interesting interview/debate with Lotfi Zadeh (the founder of fuzzy logic) and William Kahan
(the Turing award winner) appears in Woehr (1994).

 
