Section 16.7.

Decision-Theoretic Expert Systems 491

 

However, a perfectly rational information-gathering agent should consider all possible sequences
of information requests terminating in an external action. Because VPI is order-independent,
this is somewhist simplified by the fact that any permutations of a given sequence of information
requests has the same value. Thus, one need consider only subsets of the possible information
requests, without worrying about ordering.

 

16.7__DECISION-THEORETIC EXPERT SYSTEMS

oecision ANALYSIS

DECISION MAKER
DECISION ANALYST

 

 

 

The field of decision analysis, which evolved in the 1950s and 1960s, studies the application of
decision theory to actual decision problems. It is used to help make rational decisions in important
domains where the stakes are high, such as business, government, law, military strategy, medical
diagnosis and public health, engineering design, and resource management. The process involves
a careful study of the possible actions and outcomes as well as the preferences placed on each
outcome. It is traditional in decision analysis to talk about two roles: the decision maker states
preferences between outcomes, and the decision analyst enumerates the possible actions and
outcomes and elicits preferences from the decision maker to determine the best course of action.
Until the early 1980s, the use of computers in decision analysis was quite limited, and the main
purpose of analysis was seen as helping humans to make decisions that actually reflect their own
preferences.

As we discussed in Chapter 15, early expert system research concentrated on answering
questions, rather than making decisions. Those systems that did recommend actions rather
than providing opinions on matters of fact generally did so using condition-action rules, rather
than with explicit representations of outcomes and preferences. The eventual emergence of
belief networks made it possible to build large-scale systems that generated sound probabilistic
inferences from evidence. The addition of decision networks means that expert systems can be
developed that recommend optimal decisions, reflecting the preferences of the user as well as the
available evidence.

There are many advantages that accrue from the inclusion of explicit utility models and
calculations in the expert system framework. The expert benefits from the process of making
his or her (or the client's) preferences explicit, and the system can automate the action selection
process as well as the process of drawing conclusions from evidence. A system that incorporates
utilities can avoid one of the most common pitfalls associated with the consultation process:
confusing likelihood and importance. A common strategy in early medical expert systems,
for example, was to rank possible diagnoses in order of likelihood, and report the most likely.
Unfortunately, this can be disastrous, because it will miss cases of relatively rare, but treatable,
conditions that are easily confused with more common diseases. The confusion of Hodgkin's
disease (a form of cancer) with mononucleosis (a mild and very common viral infection) is a
classic case in point. (For the majority of patients in general practice, moreover, the most likely
diagnosis is “There’s nothing wrong with you.”) Obviously, a testing or treatment plan should
depend both on probabilities and utilities. Finally, the availability of utility information helps in
the knowledge engineering and consultation process, as we now explain.
