section 3.8

Summary 89

 

 

 

 

38 Given a pathless search algorithm such as the one called for in Exercise 3.7, explain how
you can modify the operators to keep track of the paths as part of the information in a state. Show
the operators needed to solve the route-finding and touring problems.

3.9 Describe a search space in which iterative deepening se
depth-first search. ,

 

rch performs much worse than

3.10 Figure 3.17 shows a schematic view of bidirectional search. Why do you think we chose
to show trees growing outward from the start and goal states, rather than two search trees growing
horizontally toward each other?

3.11 Write down the algorithm for bidirectional search, in pseudo-code or in a programming
language. Assume that each search will be a breadth-first search, and that the forward and
backward searches take turns expanding a node at a time. Be careful to avoid checking each node
in the forward search against each node in the backward search!

3.12 Give the time complexity of bidirectional search when the test for connecting the two
searches is done by comparing a newly generated state in the forward direction against all the
states generated in the backward direction, one at a time.

3.13 We said that at least one direction ofa bidirectional search must be a breadth-first search.
What would be a good choice for the other direction? Why?

3.14 Consider the following operator for the 8-queens problem: place a queen in the column
with the fewest unattacked squares, in such a way that it does not attack any other queens. How
many nodes does this expand before it finds a solution? (You may wish to have a program
calculate this for you.)

3.15 The chain problem (Figure 3.20) consists of various lengths of chain that must be recon-
figured into new arrangements. Operators can open one link and close one link. In the standard
form of the problem, the initial state contains four chains, each with three links. The goal state
consists of a single chain of 12 links in a circle. Set this up as a formal search problem and find
the shortest solution.

 

 

Start state Goal state

 

 

Figure 320 The chain problem. Operators can open, remove, reattach, and close a single link
at a time.

 

 

 
