Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

The knowledge engineering process required for building and using decision-theoretic
expert system is as follows:

* Determine the scope of the problem. Determine what are the possible actions, outcomes,
and evidence to consider. Normally, the analyst will have to interview one or more experts
in the domain to discover the important factors. Note that we recommended the same sort
of determination as the first step of knowledge engineering in Section 8.2.

Lay out the topology. Once all the relevant factors are determined, we need to know
which ones are influenced by which others. It is particularly important to understand
which aspects of the outcome state determine its utility.

Assign probabilities. In decision networks, the conditional probabilities reflect not only 4
causal influences between random variables, but also the effects of actions.

Assign utilities. A utility function is often assessed using the techniques described earlier.
Computer programs exist that automate the task of extracting preferences for various lotter-
ies and constructing a utility function. Identifying the preference structure of multiattribute
utility functions is also vital in reducing the dimensionality of the assessment problem. It
can reduce the number of questions exponentially.

Enter available evidence. For each specific case in which the system is used, there may
be some initial evidence available.

Evaluate the diagram. Calculate the optimal action according to the existing evidence

Obtain new evidence. Calculate the value of information, comparing it with the costs of
acquisition, and perform the appropriate observations, ifany. Notice that purely inferential *
expert systems, without utilities, cannot decide what new evidence to acquire.

Perform sensitivity analysis. This important step checks to see if the best decision is
sensitive to small changes in the assigned probabilities and utilities by systematically
varying these parameters and running the evaluation again. If small changes lead to
significantly different decisions, then it may be worthwhile to spend more resources to
collect better data. Ifall variations lead to the same decision, then the user will have more
confidence that it is the right decision.

   

Sensitivity analysis is particularly important, because one of the main criticisms of probabilistic
approaches to expert systems is that it is too difficult to assess the numerical probabilities
required. Sensitivity analysis often reveals that many of the numbers need only be specified very
approximately—within, say, 0.2 of the value that might be obtained from an exhaustive analysis. §
Some systems allow probabilities to be specified as ranges. This leads to ranges for the utilities of 4
actions. Ifthe range of one action dominates the ranges of all others, then no further probability
assessment need occur. For example, it might be the case that the optimal siting of an airport is
insensitive to the predicted air traffic over a large range of values, given the system’s beliefs about
the other relevant factors, so that the user can remain unruffled by his or her lack of expertise on
air traffic prediction.
