Knowledge in Learning 627

 

Section 21.1.

EXPLANATION.
LEARNING

* Or consider the case of the traveller to Brazil meeting her first Brazilian. On hearing
him speak Portuguese, she immediately concludes that Brazilians speak Portuguese, yet
on discovering that his name is Fernando, she does not conclude that all Brazilians are
called Fernando. Similar examples appear in science. For example, when a freshman
physics student measures the density and conductance ofa sample of copper at a particular
temperature, she is quite confident in generalizing those values to all pieces of copper. Yet
when she measures its mass, she does not even consider the hypothesis that all pieces of
copper have that mass. On the other hand, it would be quite reasonable to make such a
generalization over all pennies

+ Finally, consider the case ofa pharmacologically ignorant but diagnostically sophisticated
medical student observing a consulting session between a patient and an expert internist.
After a series of questions and answers, the expert tells the patient to take a course of
a particular antibiotic. The medical student infers the general rule that that particular
antibiotic is effective for a particular type of infection.

These are all cases in which the use ofbackground knowledge allows much faster learning than
one might expectfrom a pure induction program.

Some general schemes

In each of the preceding examples, one can appeal to prior knowledge to try to justify the
generalizations chosen. We will now look at what kinds of entailment constraints are operating
in each of these cases. The constraints will involve the Background knowledge, in addition to the
Hypothesis and the observed Descriptions and Classifications.

Tn the case of lizard toasting, the cavemen generalize by explaining the success of the
pointed stick: it supports the lizard while keeping the hand intact. From this explanation, they
can infer a general rule: that any long, thin, rigid, sharp object can be used to toast small, soft-
bodied edibles. This kind of generalization process has been called explanation-based learning,
or EBL. Notice that the general rule follows logically from the background knowledge possessed
by the cavemen. Hence, the entailment constraints satisfied by EBL are the following:

Hypothesis A Descriptions |: Classifications
Background = Hypothesis

The first constraint looks the same as Equation (21.1), so EBL was initially thought to be a
better way to learn from examples. But because it requires that the background knowledge be
sufficient to explain the Hypothesis, which in turn explains the observations, the agent does
not actually leam anything factually new from the instance. The agent could have derived the
example from what it already knew, although that might have required an unreasonable amount
of computation. EBL is now viewed as a method for converting first-principles theories into
useful, special-purpose knowledge. We describe algorithms for EBL in Section 21.2.

The situation of our traveller in Brazil is quite different. For she cannot necessarily
explain why Fernando speaks the way he does, unless she knows her Papal bulls. But the same
generalization would be forthcoming from a traveller entirely ignorant of colonial history. The
relevant prior knowledge in this case is that, within any given country, most people tend to speak
