Section 25.7.

Summary 813

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 25.26 An environment for online navigation.

 

 

 

d. Can the two-dimensional path-planning problem be solved using Voronoi diagrams instead
of visibility graphs? Explain the modifications that would be needed to the overall system.

25.8 Suppose a robot can see two point landmarks L\ and L2, and that it measures the angle
between them as 17°. What is the shape of the recognizable set corresponding to this sensor
reading? What is the shape of the recognizable set if the angle measurement has an uncertainty
of+1°? Sketch this situation.

259 For the environment in Figure 25.26, sketch the path taken by the robot in executing
the online navigation strategy. This strategy always completely circumnavigates any obstacle
it encounters, which is often unnecessary. Try to think of another strategy that will travel less
distance around some obstacles. Make sure your strategy will not get stuck in cycles. Your
strategy will probably have a worse worst-case bound than the one presented in this chapter, but
should be faster in typical cases.

25.10 Implement a general environment in which to exercise the online navigation algorithm,
such that arbitrary obstacles can be placed in the environment. Construct a specific environment
corresponding to Figure 25.26. Then implement an agent that incorporates the online algorithm,
and show that it works.

25.11 Explain how to approach the problem of online navigation for a cylindrical robot of
significant diameter. Does the point-robot algorithm need to be modified? What happens when
the robot is heading down a passageway that becomes too narrow to get through?

25.12 We stated in our discussion of online algorithms that some special classes ofenvironments
are amenable to online algorithms with constant competitive ratios. An example is shown in
Figure 25.27, which shows a robot on the bank of a river. We assume that the robot has an exact
position sensor. The robot is trying to find the bridge, which it knows is somewhere nearby, but is
not sure how far and in which direction. Unfortunately, there is a thick fog and the robot cannot
see the bridge unless it stumbles right onto it.

a. Describe an online algorithm for the robot that is guaranteed to find the bridge after a finite
search, no matter where the bridge is.

b. Calculate the total distance traversed by the robot using your algorithm, and compute its
competitive ratio.
