752

Chapter 24. Perception

 

GENERALIZED
‘LINDERS

First, let us consider the representation problem. The two most popular representations of
3-D objects in computer vision have been polyhedral approximations and generalized cylinders.
Polyhedral descriptions are general, but they get painfully long if a high accuracy is desired
in modeling curved objects. They are also very cumbersome for users to input. Generalized
cylinders (Figure 24.26) provide compact descriptions for a wide class of objects and have been
used in a number of object recognition systems.

A generalized cylinder is defined by a planar cross section, an axis (which may be curved),
and a sweeping rule which describes how the cross section changes along the axis. Many shapes
can be built up using generalized cylinders as parts. Generalized cylinders are not always ideal
for representing arbitrary objects; the object may have to be decomposed into many parts, each of
which is a generalized cylinder. In such situations, there can be many alternative decompositions
into parts with each part describable as a generalized cylinder in several ways. This leads to
difficulties at matching time. In general, the problem of effective shape representation for curved
objects is largely unsolved.

 

 

 

Figure 24.26 Some examples of generalized cylinders. Each of these shapes has a principal
axis and a planar cross-section whose dimensions may vary along the axis.

 

 

 

The alignment method

We wi 11 consider one particular version ofthe problem in greater detail—we are asked to identify a
three-dimensional object from its projection on the image plane. For convenience, the projection
process is modelled as a scaled orthographic projection. We do not know the pose of the
object—its position and orientation with respect to the camera.

The object is represented by a set of m features or distinguished points (1, #2,--+>/4m in
three-dimensional space—perhaps vertices for a polyhedral object. These are measured in some
coordinate system natural for the object. The points are then subjected to an unknown 3-D
rotation R, followed by translation by unknown amount t and projection to give rise to image

 
