486

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

 

 

Airport Site

 

 

 

V

 

 

Figure 16.5 A simplified representation of the airport-siting problem. Chance nodes corre-
sponding to outcome states have been factored out.

 

 

 

that omits these nodes can be used whenever the more general form can be used. Although the
simplified form contains fewer nodes, the omission of an explicit description of the outcome of 4
the siting decision means that it is less flexible with respect to changes in circumstances. For “4
example, in Figure 164, a change in aircraft noise levels can be reflected by a change in the -;
conditional probability table associated with the Noise node, whereas a change in the weight
accorded to noise pollution in the utility function can be reflected by a change in the utility table.
In the action-utility diagram, Figure 16.5, on the other hand, all such changes have to be reflected
by changes to the action-utility table. Essentially, the action-utility formulation is a compiled :
version of the original formulation. 4

Evaluating decision networks

Actions are selected by evaluating the decision network for each possible setting of the decision 4
node. Once the decision node is set, it behaves exactly like a chance node that has been set as an 4
evidence variable. The algorithm for evaluating decision networks is the following: '
1. Set the evidence variables for the current state.
2. For each possible value of the decision node:
(a) Set the decision node to that value.
(b) Calculate the posterior probabilities for the parent nodes of the utility node, using a
standard probabilistic inference algorithm.
(c) Calculate the resulting utility for the action.
3. Return the action with the highest utility.
This is a straightforward extension of the belief network algorithm, and can be incorporated
directly into the agent design given in Figure 14.1. We will see in Chapter 17 that the possibility
of executing several actions in sequence makes the problem much more interesting.

 
