Section 25.5

TRANSIT PATHS
TRANSFER PATHS
FOLIATION

Configuration Spaces: A Framework for Analysis 793

in space. The planning problem again reduces to finding a safe path for a point in the generalized
free space F.

If the other objects are not robots but are nonetheless movable, the problem is very much
harder. Unfortunately, this is also the most interesting case, because usually we would like a
robot to move inanimate things around. We can still construct a generalized configuration space,
and eliminate configurations where the robot overlaps an object, or two objects overlap. But
even if we find a path between two configurations cl and c> in generalized F, we may not be
able to execute it. The problem is that an unrestricted path in W will usually describe motion of
objects through midair without any help from the robot. We can partially address this problem
by restricting W to comprise configurations where objects are either held by the robot or are
supported by another object against gravity.

But legal paths in this W can still describe object motions without robot aid, such as
spontaneous sliding on a tabletop, which should be illegal. There is no easy solution to this
problem. We simply cannot think of W as a benign sea in which we can navigate freely. Instead,
we must follow certain shipping lanes, between which we transfer only at special configurations
Although generalized \’ has many degrees of freedom, (it+ m degrees using the notation above),
only & of these are actually controllable. Most of the time, we are changing only the robot
configuration q,...., gx, and the object configurations ),... ,,, stay fixed. Sometimes though,
if the robot is grasping an object, we can change both the robot and the objects configuration.
We are still moving in a &-dimensional subset of W, but no longer one involving only the g
(robot) coordinates. So we are in a (k +1)-dimensional sea with steerage only along two types of
k-dimensional lanes. Motions where the robot moves freely are called transit paths, and those
where the robot moves an object are called transfer paths.

The navigable W in this case is called a foliation, suggesting an abundance of small
randomly oriented sheets, but it is really more like a book. Each page of the book is a slightly
different free space for the robot, defined by slightly different positions for the movable objects.
Look again at Figure 25.12. On the left halfofthe figure, one of the objects has an arrow attached,
indicating possible motion. The variable b is a coordinate measuring the object's displacement.
The W for the system is now three-dimensional, and b is the new coordinate. For b fixed, a slice
through the W' describes the allowable motions of the robot with the obstacles fixed, and looks
like the C in the right half of the figure. Imagine constructing the C for many different values
of b, printing the results on separate pages, sorting them by b coordinate, and assembling the
pages into a book. Transit motion is possible within any page of the book, on which the object
positions are fixed, but not between pages. Transfer motions, in which an object is moving (or
being moved), form a kind of spine for the book, and allow motion between pages.

The difficulty of planning for movable objects is real: the towers of Hanoi problem’ is a
special case of it. The number of motions needed to move n Hanoi disks is exponential in n,
implying that planning for movable objects requires time that grows at least exponentially with
the dimension of W. At this time, there are no proved upper bounds for general planning with
n movable objects. Robot planners usually make some strong assumptions to avoid tackling this
problem head-on. One can do any of the following:

 

7 The towers of Hanoi problem is to move a set of disks of different sizes from one peg to another, using a third peg
for temporary storage. Disks are moved one at a time, and a larger disk cannot rest on a smaller one
