458

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

process covers one of the 32 major areas of pathology. The plan is to cover all of pathology
through consultations with leading experts in each area.

An evaluation of PATHFINDER III and IV used 53 actual cases of patients who were referred
toa lymph-node specialist. As referrals, these cases were probably of above-average difficulty. In
ablind evaluation, expert analysis ofthe diagnoses showed that PATHFINDER III scored an average
7.9 out of 10, and PATHFINDER IV scored 8.9, significantly better. The difference amounts to
saving one life every thousand cases or so. A recent comparison showed that Pathfinder is now
outperforming the experts who were consulted during its creation—those experts being some of
the world's leading pathologists.

 

15.6 OTH

 

 

I

 

R APPROACHES TO UNCERTAIN REASONING

 

 

 

 

 

Other sciences (e.g., physics, genetics, economics) have long favored probability as a model for
uncertainty. Pierre Laplace said in 1819 that "Probability theory is nothing but common sense
reduced to calculation." James Maxwell said in 1850that "the true logic for this world is the cal-
culus of Probabilities, which takes account of the magnitude of the probability which is, or ought
to be, in a reasonable man's mind." Stephen Jay Gould (1994) claimed that "misunderstanding
of probability may be the greatest of all general impediments to scientific literacy."

Given this long tradition, it is perhaps surprising that AT has considered many alternatives
to probability. The earliest expert systems ofthe 1970s ignored uncertainty and used strict logical
reasoning, but soon it became clear that this was impractical for most real-world domains. The
next generation of expert systems (especially in medical domains) used probabilistic techniques.
Initial results were promising, but they did not scale up because of the exponential number of
probabilities required in the full joint distribution. (Belief net algorithms were not known then.)
As a result, probabilistic approaches fell out of favor from roughly 1975 to 1988, and a variety
of alternatives were tried for a variety of reasons:

* One common view is that probability theory is essentially numerical, whereas human
judgmental reasoning is more "qualitative." Certainly, we are not consciously aware
of doing numerical calculations of degrees of belief. (On the other hand, it might be
that we have some kind of numerical degrees of belief encoded directly in strengths of
connections and activations in our neurons. In that case, the difficulty of conscious access
to those strengths is only to be expected.) One should also note that qualitative reasoning
mechanisms can be built directly on top of probability theory, so that the "no numbers"
argument against probability has little force. Nonetheless, some qualitative schemes have a
good deal of appeal in their own right. One ofthe most well-studied is default reasoning,
which treats conclusions not as "believed to a certain degree," but as "believed until a better
reason is found to believe something else."

Rule-based approaches to uncertainty also have been tried. Such approaches hope to build
on the success of logical rule-based systems, but add a sort of "fudge factor" to each rule to
accommodate uncertainty. These methods were developed in the mid-1970s, and formed
the basis for a large number of expert systems in medicine and other areas.

 
