22.3 Depth-first search 609

is contained entirely within the interval [v.d,u.f]. By Corollary 22.8, v must after
all be a descendant of w. /

Classification of edges

Another interesting property of depth-first search is that the search can be used
to classify the edges of the input graph G = (V, E). The type of each edge can
provide important information about a graph. For example, in the next section, we
shall see that a directed graph is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search yields no
“back” edges (Lemma 22.11).

We can define four edge types in terms of the depth-first forest G, produced by
a depth-first search on G:

1. Tree edges are edges in the depth-first forest G,. Edge (u,v) is a tree edge if v
was first discovered by exploring edge (u,v).

2. Back edges are those edges (u,v) connecting a vertex u to an ancestor v in a
depth-first tree. We consider self-loops, which may occur in directed graphs, to
be back edges.

3. Forward edges are those nontree edges (u,v) connecting a vertex u to a de-
scendant v in a depth-first tree.

4. Cross edges are all other edges. They can go between vertices in the same
depth-first tree, as long as one vertex is not an ancestor of the other, or they can
go between vertices in different depth-first trees.

In Figures 22.4 and 22.5, edge labels indicate edge types. Figure 22.5(c) also shows
how to redraw the graph of Figure 22.5(a) so that all tree and forward edges head
downward in a depth-first tree and all back edges go up. We can redraw any graph
in this fashion.

The DFS algorithm has enough information to classify some edges as it encoun-
ters them. The key idea is that when we first explore an edge (u,v), the color of
vertex v tells us something about the edge:

1. WHITE indicates a tree edge,

2. GRAY indicates a back edge, and

3. BLACK indicates a forward or cross edge.

The first case is immediate from the specification of the algorithm. For the sec-
ond case, observe that the gray vertices always form a linear chain of descendants
corresponding to the stack of active DFS-VIsIT invocations; the number of gray

vertices is one more than the depth in the depth-first forest of the vertex most re-
cently discovered. Exploration always proceeds from the deepest gray vertex, so
