964

Chapter 31 Number-Theoretic Algorithms

long—to resist possible advances in the art of factoring. At the time of this
writing (2009), RSA moduli were commonly in the range of 768 to 2048 bits.
To create moduli of such sizes, we must be able to find large primes efficiently.
Section 31.8 addresses this problem.

For efficiency, RSA is often used in a “hybrid” or “key-management” mode
with fast non-public-key cryptosystems. With such a system, the encryption and
decryption keys are identical. If Alice wishes to send a long message M to Bob
privately, she selects a random key K for the fast non-public-key cryptosystem and
encrypts M using K, obtaining ciphertext C. Here, C is as long as M, but K
is quite short. Then, she encrypts K using Bob’s public RSA key. Since K is
short, computing Pg(K) is fast (much faster than computing Pg(M)). She then
transmits (C, Pg(K)) to Bob, who decrypts Pg(K) to obtain K and then uses K
to decrypt C, obtaining M.

We can use a similar hybrid approach to make digital signatures efficiently.
This approach combines RSA with a public collision-resistant hash function h—a
function that is easy to compute but for which it is computationally infeasible to
find two messages M and M’ such that h(M) = h(M’). The value h(M) is
a short (say, 256-bit) “fingerprint” of the message M. If Alice wishes to sign a
message M, she first applies / to M to obtain the fingerprint )(M), which she
then encrypts with her secret key. She sends (M, S4(h(M))) to Bob as her signed
version of M. Bob can verify the signature by computing (M) and verifying
that P4 applied to S4(h(M)) as received equals i(M). Because no one can create
two messages with the same fingerprint, it is computationally infeasible to alter a
signed message and preserve the validity of the signature.

Finally, we note that the use of certificates makes distributing public keys much
easier. For example, assume there is a “trusted authority” JT whose public key
is known by everyone. Alice can obtain from T a signed message (her certificate)
stating that “Alice’s public key is P4.” This certificate is “self-authenticating” since
everyone knows Pr. Alice can include her certificate with her signed messages,
so that the recipient has Alice’s public key immediately available in order to verify
her signature. Because her key was signed by T, the recipient knows that Alice’s
key is really Alice’s.

Exercises

31.7-1

Consider an RSA key set with p = 11, ¢ = 29,n = 319, and e = 3. What
value of d should be used in the secret key? What is the encryption of the message
M = 100?
