10

Chapter 1. Introduction

 

LOGICAL POSITIVISM
(OBSERVATION

MEANS-ENOS
ANALYSIS

that general rules are acquired by exposure to repeated associations between their elements.
The theory was given more formal shape by Bertrand Russell (1872-1970) who introduced
logical positivism. This doctrine holds that all knowledge can be characterized by logical
theories connected, ultimately, to observation sentences that correspond to sensory inputs.’ The
confirmation theory of Rudolf Carnap and Carl Hempel attempted to establish the nature of the
connection between the observation sentences and the more general theories—in other words, to
understand how knowledge can be acquired from experience.

The final element in the philosophical picture of the mind is the connection between
knowledge and action. What form should this connection take, and how can particular actions
be justified? These questions are vital to AI, because only by understanding how actions are
justified can we understand how to build an agent whose actions are justifiable, or rational.
Aristotle provides an elegant answer in the Nicomachean Ethics (Book III. 3, 1112b):

We deliberate not about ends, but about means. Fora doctor does not deliberate whetherhe
shall heal, nor an orator whether he shall persuade. nor a statesman whether he shall produce
law and order, nor does any one else deliberate about his end. They assume the end and
consider how and by what means it is attained, and if it seems easily and best produced
thereby; while if it is achieved by one means only they consider how it will be achieved by
this and by what means this will be achieved, till they come to the first cause, which in the
order of discovery is last ... and what is last in the order of analysis seems to be first in the
order of becoming. And if we come on an impossibility. we give up the search, e.g. if we
need money and this cannot be got: but ifa thing appears possible we try to do it.

Aristotle's approach (with a few minor refinements) was implemented 2300 years later by Newell
and Simon in their GPS program, about which they write (Newell and Simon, 1972):

The main methods of GPS jointly embody the heuristic of means-ends analysis. Means~ends
analysis is typified by the following kind of common-sense argument:

I want to take my son to nursery school. What's the difference between what I
have and what I want? One of distance. What changes distance? My automobile.
My automobile won't work. What is needed to make it work? A new battery.
What has new batteries? An auto repair shop. I want the repair shop to put in a
new battery; but the shop doesn't know I need one. What is the difficulty? One
ofcommunication. What allows communication? A telephone ... and so on.

This kind of analysis—classifyingthings in terms of the functions they serve and oscillating
among ends, functions required, and means that perform them—forms the basie system of
heuristic of GPS.

Means-ends analysis is useful, but does not say what to do when several actions will achieve the
goal, or when no action will completely achieve it. Arnauld, a follower of Descartes, correctly
described a quantitative formula for deciding what action to take in cases like this (see Chapter 16).
John Stuart Mill's (1806-1873)book Utilitarianism (Mill, 1863)amplifies on this idea. The more
formal theory of decisions is discussed in the following section.

7 In this picture, all meaningful statements can be verified or falsified either by analyzing the meaning of the words or
by canying out experiments. Because this rules out most of metaphysics. as was the intention, logical positivism was
unpopular in some circles

 
