682

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

 

Finally, there can be ambiguity about what speech act has been performed. A hearer who
says, "yes" when asked, "Do you know what time it is?" has successfully interpreted the sentence
as ifit were question, but most likely it was actually intended as a request for information.

Disambiguation

As we said before, disambiguation is a question of diagnosis. The hearer maintains a model of
the world and, upon hearing a new speech act, adds the possible interpretations ofthe speech act
to the model as hypotheses. The uncertain reasoning techniques of Part V can then be used to
decide which interpretation is best. To do this well, the model must include a lot of information
about the world. For example, to correctly resolve the syntactic ambiguity in "Chris saw the
Grand Canyon flying to New York," one needs to know that it is more likely that Chris is doing
the flying than that the Grand Canyon is. Similarly, to understand "Donald keeps his money in the
bank," it helps to know that money is kept in savings institutions more often than in snowbanks.

One also needs a good model of the beliefs of speaker and hearer, in order to decide
what the speaker will bother to say. For example, the normal interpretation of the statement "I
am not a crook" is that the speaker is not a criminal. This is true even though an alternative
interpretation—that the speaker is not a hooked shepherd's staff—hasa higher probability of
being true. Similarly, "Howard doesn't keep his money in the bank" probably refers to saving 4
institutions, because it would not be worth remarking that he did not keep his money ina }
snowbank. In general, disambiguation requires the combination of four models:

1. The world model: the probability that a fact occurs in the world.

2. The mental model: the probability that the speaker forms the intention of communicating
this fact to the hearer, given that it occurs.? (This combines models of what the speaker
believes, what the speaker believes the hearer believes, and so on.)

3. The language model: the probability that a certain string of words will be chosen, given
that the speaker has the intention of communicating a certain fact.

4. The acoustic model: the probability that a particular sequence of sounds will be generated, 3
given that the speaker has chosen a given string of words. This will be taken up when we
consider perception in Chapter 24.

The final reason why it is hard to pick the right interpretation is that there may be several right
ones. Jokes rely on the fact that the hearer will entertain two interpretations simultaneously. In
"She criticized his apartment so he knocked her flat," we have three lexical and one syntactic j
ambiguity. But the joke would be lost on a hearer who simply accepted the best interpretation
and ignored the other. Poetry, advertising, political rhetoric, and murder mysteries are other
genres that make use of deliberate ambiguity. Most language understanding programs ignore this 4
possibility, just as many diagnosis systems ignore the possibility of multiple causes.
Context-free grammars do not provide a very useful language model (even when augmenta-
tions are included). The problem is that the grammar does not say which strings are more probable
than others—it simply divides the strings into two classes: grammatical and agrammatical.

% We should also consider the possibility that the speaker intends to convey some information given that it did nor occur,
that is, that the speaker is mistaken or lying.

 
