Section 17.6.

Dynamic Decision Networks 517

Lane Lane
Posttion.t Position.tet

 

  
    

‘Sensor
Fai

Figure 1715 A two-slice fragment ofa dynamic belief network for continuous monitoring of
the lane positioning of an automated vehicle. Evidence variables are shaded.

 

 

 

 

 

current and future time steps, notice that the network also contains the previous decision, D,_ \,
as an evidence node. It is treated as evidence because it has already happened.

The evaluation algorithm for DDNs is essentially the same as that for ordinary decision
networks. In the worst case, the DDN calculates the expected utility ofeach decision sequence
by fixing the decision nodes and applying probabilistic inference to calculate the final state. As
in our discussion of sequential decision problems earlier in the chapter, we must also be careful
to take into account the fact that, for each future decision, the agent does not currently know what
information will be available at the time the future decision is made. That is, for decision D,.i,
the agent will have available percepts E,,,, ..., E,.;; but currently, it does not know what those
percepts will be. For example, an autonomous vehicle might be contemplating a lane change at
time f + i, but it will not know until then ifthere is another car blocking its path.

In our earlier discussion, we handled this by iteratively computing a policy that associates
a decision with each state. With DDNs, we do not have this option because the states are
represented implicitly by the set of state variables. Furthermore, in inaccessible environments,
the agent will not know what state it is in anyway. What we must do instead is consider each
possible instantiation of the future sensor variables as well as each possible instantiation of the
future decision variables. The expected utility of each decision sequence is then the weighted
sum of the utilities computed using each possible percept sequence, where the weight is the
probability of the percept sequence given the decision sequence. Thus, the DDN provides
approximate solutions for partially observable Markov decision problems, where the degree of
approximation depends on the amount of lookahead.

The preceding paragraph boils down to this: in evaluating an action, one must consider
not only its effect on the environment, but also its effect on the internal state of the agent via the
percepts it generates (see also Section 16.6). In still plainer terms: such considerations allow the
agent to see the value of (actively) looking before leaping, to hunt for lost keys, and so on.
