548

DROPPING
CONDITIONS

Chapter 18. Learning from Observations

Patrons(x, Some), then one possible generalization is given by Cy(x) = Patrons(x, Some). This is
called dropping conditions. Intuitively, it generates a weaker definition and therefore allows a
larger set of positive examples. There are a number of other generalization operations, depending
on the language being operated on. Similarly, we can specialize a hypothesis by adding extra
conditions to its candidate definition or by removing disjuncts from a disjunctive definition. Let
us see how this works on the restaurant example, using the data in Figure 18.5.

+ The first example X\ is positive. Alrernate(X1) is true, so let us assume an initial hypothesis
Hy: Wx WillWait(x) <= Alternate(x)

+ The second example X? is negative. H. predicts it to be positive, so it is a false positive.
Therefore, we need to specialize H,. This can be done by adding an extra condition that
will rule out X2. One possibility is

Vx WillWait(x)<+ Alternate(x) A Patrons(x, Some)

 

The third example X3 is positive. H predicts it to be negative, so it is a false negative.
Therefore, we need to generalize H>. This can be done by dropping the A/rernare condition,
yielding

3: Vx WillWait(x) <= Patrons(x, Some)

The fourth example X, is positive. H predicts it to be negative, so it is a false negative.
We therefore need to generalize H;. We cannot drop the Patrons condition, because that
would yield an all-inclusive hypothesis that would be inconsistent with X>. One possibility
is to add a disjunct:

Hy: Vx WillWait(x) <= Patrons(x, Some) V (Patrons(x,Full) A FrifSat(x))

Already, the hypothesis is starting to look reasonable. Obviously, there are other possibilities
consistent with the first four examples; here are two of them:

Hi: Vx WillWait(x) <> —WaitEstimate(x,30-60)

i: Wx WillWait(x) <> Patrons(x, Some)
V(Patrons(xFull) A WaitEstimate(x,10-30))

TheCURRENT-BEST-LEARNINGalgorithmis describednondeterministically, becauseatany point,
there may be several possible specializations or generalizations that can be applied. The choices
that are made will not necessarily lead to the simplest hypothesis, and may lead to an unrecoverable
situation where no simple modification of the hypothesis is consistent with all of the data. In
such cases, the program must backtrack to a previous choice point.

TheCURRENT-BEST-LEARNINGalgorithmand its variantshave been used inamany machine
learning systems, starting with Patrick Winston's (1970) "arch-learning" program. With a large
number of instances and a large space, however, some difficulties arise:

1. Checking all the previous instances over again for each modification is very expensive.

2. It is difficult to find good search heuristics, and backtracking all over the place can take
forever. As we saw earlier, hypothesis space can be a doubly exponentially large place.

 
