Section 17.4.

Decision-Theoretic Agent Design 513

 

 

 

    

Temperature ¢

 

 

Figure 17.11 Measuring temperature using two separate gauges.

 

 

 

was detected within the sonar's range. This could be because the robot has wandered outside
or it could be because the sonar’s detector is broken. In the latter case, the robot could start
crashing into walls. Jn order for the system to handle sensor failure, the sensor model must
include the possibility of failure. For example, in the case of sonar, a sensor model that says
that the sensor is accurate to within 10 cm explicitly disallows the possibility of failure, and
therefore forces the robot to take the sonar reading literally. For any given actual distance, the
sonar model should allow the possibility that the observed distance will be "infinity." Then the
robot can handle sensor failure more appropriately. For example, if the robot is in a corridor,
its prediction will be that the closest object remains about 60 cm away. If the sonar suddenly
reports "infinity," then the most likely conclusion is that the sensor has failed, not that the corridor
has disappeared. Furthermore, if the robot has more than one distance sensor, the sensor fusion
process will automatically discount the readings of the failed sensor.

It is also possible to use more detailed models of sensor failure by incorporating additional
state variables representing the condition of the sensor. Figure 17.12 shows a model ofa vision-
based lane-position sensor. Such sensors are used in autonomous vehicles to keep them in the
center of their lane. They also could be used to sound a warning in a human-driven car when
it starts to stray off the road. The sensor's accuracy is directly affected by rain and an uneven
road surface. Furthermore, rain might also cause the sensor to fail by damaging the electronics,
as might a bumpy road. Sensor failure in turn affects the sensor's accuracy. This kind of model
is capable of some quite subtle reasoning. For example, if the system believes (perhaps from
another sensor's input) that it is raining, then that will alter the sensor accuracy variable, raising
the likelihood of larger error in the lane-position sensor. When an unexpected reading occurs, the
system will be less likely to assume that the car is out of position. Conversely, a large discrepancy
between expected and observed position can increase the system's belief that it is raining! A
really serious discrepancy would raise the posterior probability of sensor failure; hence this kind
of network can perform "diagnosis" of the sensors. In the next section, we will see how this
capability can be extended by reasoning over time
