Section 134.

Discussion and Extensions 407

 

 

‘Ontabie(A)
‘On(B.E)

   

- = 00(0.0)
a init;

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 13.16 After Move(C,D)is executed and dropped from the plan, the remaining open
condition On(C,D) is resolved by adding a causal link from the new START step. The plan is now
completed.

 

 

 

13.4 DISCUSSION AND ExTENSIONS

We have arrived at an agent design that addresses many of the issues arising in real domains:

The agent can use explicit domain descriptions and goals to control its behavior.

By using partial-order planning, it can take advantage of problem decomposition to deal
with complex domains without necessarily suffering exponential complexity.

By using the techniques described in Chapter 12, it can handle domains involving condi-
tional effects, universally quantified effects, object creation and deletion, and ramifications.
It can also use "canned plans" to achieve subgoals.

Itcan deal with errors in its domain description, and, by incorporating conditional planning,
it can plan to obtain information when more is needed.

It can deal with a dynamically changing world by incrementally fixing its plan as it detects
errors and unfulfilled preconditions

Clearly, this is progress. It is, however, a good idea to examine each advance in capabilities and
try to see where it breaks down.

Comparing conditional planning and replanning

Looking at conditional planning, we see that almost all actions in the real world have a variety of
possible outcomes besides the expected outcome. The number of possible conditions that must
be planned for grows exponentially with the number of steps in the plan. Given that only one set
of conditions will actually occur, this seems rather wasteful as well as impractical. Many of the
events being planned for have only an infinitesimal chance of occurring.

Looking at replanning, we see that the planner is basically assuming no action failures, and
then fixing problems as they arise during execution. This too has its drawbacks. The planner may
produce very "fragile" plans, which are very hard to fix if anything goes wrong. For example,
the entire existence of "spare tires" is a result of conditional planning rather than replanning. If
the agent does not plan for a puncture, then it will not see the need for a spare tire. Unfortunately,
without a spare tire, even the most determined replanning agent might be faced with a long walk.

 
