460

LOCALITY

DETACHMENT

TRUTH.
FUNCTIONALITY

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

+ Sometimes a system may draw a number of conclusions on the basis of a belief that is
later retracted. How can a system keep track of which conclusions need to be retracted
as a result? Conclusions that have multiple justifications, only some of which have been
abandoned, should be retained; whereas those with no remaining justifications should be
dropped. These problems have been addressed by truth maintenance systems, which are
discussed in Section 10.8.

How can beliefs that have default status be used to make decisions? This is probably the §
hardest issue for default reasoning. Decisions often involve trade-offs, and one therefore
needs to compare the strength of belief in the outcomes of different actions. In cases
where the same kinds of decisions are being made repeatedly, it is possible to interpret
default rules as "threshold probability" statements. For example, the default rule "My
brakes are always OK" really means "The probability that my brakes are OK, given no
other information, is sufficiently high that the optimal decision is for me to drive without
checking them." When the decision context changes—for example, when one is driving
a heavily laden truck down a steep mountain road—the default rule suddenly becomes
inappropriate, even though there is no new evidence to suggest that the brakes are faulty.

To date, no default reasoning system has successfully addressed all of these issues. Furthermore,
most systems are formally undecidable, and very slow in practice. There have been several
attempts to subsume default reasoning in a probabilistic system, using the idea that a default rule
is basically a conditional probability of 1 — e. For reasons already mentioned, such an approach
is likely to require a full integration of decision making before it fully captures the desirable
features of default reasoning.

Rule-based methods for uncertain reasoning

In addition to monotonicity, logical reasoning systems have three other important properties that
probabilistic reasoners lack:

0 Locality: In logical systems, whenever we have a rule ofthe formA = B, we can conclude
B given evidence 4, without worrying about any other rules. In probabilistic systems, we
need to consider all of the available evidence.

< Detachment: Once a logical proof is found for a proposition B, the proposition can be
used regardless of how it was derived. That is, it can be detached from its justification. 3
In dealing with probabilities, on the other hand, the source of the evidence for a belief is
important for subsequent reasoning.

0 Truth-functionality: In logic, the truth of complex sentences can be computed from the
truth of the components. Probability combination does not work this way, except under
strong independence assumptions.

These properties confer obvious computational advantages. There have been several attempts to
devise uncertain reasoning schemes by attaching degrees of belief to propositions and rules 1”
what is essentially a logical system. This means treating degree of belief as a generalized truth
value, in order to retain truth-functionality. That is, each proposition is assigned a degree of
belief, and the degree of belief in, say, A V B is a function of the beliefin A and the beliefin B.

 
