564

Chapter 19. Learning in Neural and Belief Networks

 

The network theme is continued in Section 19.6, where we discuss methods for learning
beliefnetworks from examples. The connection is deeper than the superficial similarity implied
by the word “network’-—not only do the two fields share some learning methods, but in some
cases, it can be shown that neural networks are belief networks.

 

 

 

19.1 How THE BRAIN WORKS

NEURON

"SOMA
DENDRITES
AXON

‘SYNAPSE

ACTION POTENTIAL

EXCITATORY
INHIBITORY
PLASTICTY

 

The exact way in which the brain enables thought is one of the great mysteries of science. It has
been appreciated for thousands of years that strong blows to the head can lead to unconsciousness,
temporary loss of memory, or even permanent loss of mental capability. This suggests that the
brain is somehow involved in thought. It has also long been known that the human brain is
somehow different; in about 335 B.C. Aristotle wrote, "Of all the animals, man has the largest
brain in proportion to his size.”> Still, it was not until the middle of the eighteenth century
that the brain was widely recognized as the seat of consciousness, and it was not until the late
nineteenth century that the functional regions of animal brains began to be mapped out. Before
the nineteenth century, candidate locations for the seat of consciousness included the heart, the
spleen, and the pineal body, a small appendage of the brain present in all vertebrates.

We do know that the neuron, or nerve cell, is the fundamental functional unit of all nervous
system tissue, including the brain. Each neuron consists of a cell body, or soma, that contains
acell nucleus. Branching out from the cell body are a number of fibers called dendrites and a
single long fiber called the axon. Dendrites branch into a bushy network around the cell, whereas
the axon stretches out for a long distance—usually about a centimeter (100 times the diameter
of the cell body), and as far as a meter in extreme cases. Eventually, the axon also branches
into strands and substrands that connect to the dendrites and cell bodies of other neurons. The
connecting junction is called a synapse. Each neuron forms synapses with anywhere from a
dozen to a hundred thousand other neurons. Figure 19.1 shows the parts of a neuron.

Signals are propagated from neuron to neuron by a complicated electrochemical reaction.
Chemical transmitter substances are released from the synapses and enter the dendrite, raising
or lowering the electrical potential of the cell body. When the potential reaches a threshold,
an electrical pulse or action potential is sent down the axon. The pulse spreads out along the
branches of the axon, eventually reaching synapses and releasing transmitters into the bodies of
other cells. Synapses that increase the potential are called excitatory, and those that decrease it
are called inhibitory. Perhaps the most significant finding is that synaptic connections exhibit
plasticity—long-term changes in the strength of connections in response to the pattern of stimu-
lation. Neurons also form new connections with other neurons, and sometimes entire collections
of neurons can migrate from one place to another. These mechanisms are thought to form the
basis for learning in the brain.

Most information processing goes on in the cerebral cortex, the outer layer of the brain.
The basic organizational unit appears to be a barrel-shaped module of tissue about 0.5 mm in

2 Since then, it has been discovered that some species of dolphins and whales have relatively larger brains. The large
size ofhuman brains is now thought to be enabled in part by recent improvements in its cooling system.

 
