 

SOLVING PROBLEMS BY

SEARCHING

 

 

 

PROBLEM-SOLVING
AGENT

In which we look at how an agent can decide what to do by systematically considering
the outcomes ofvarious sequences ofactions that it might take.

In Chapter 2, we saw that simple reflex agents are unable to plan ahead. They are limited in what
they can do because their actions are determined only by the current percept. Furthermore, they
have no knowledge of what their actions do nor of what they are trying to achieve.

In this chapter, we describe one kind of goal-based agent called a problem-solving agent.
Problem-solving agents decide what to do by finding sequences of actions that lead to desirable
states. We discuss informally how the agent can formulate an appropriate view of the problem it
faces. The problem type that results from the formulation process will depend on the knowledge
available to the agent: principally, whether it knows the current state and the outcomes of actions.
We then define more precisely the elements that constitute a "problem" and its "solution," and
give several examples to illustrate these definitions. Given precise definitions of problems, it
is relatively straightforward to construct a search process for finding solutions. We cover six
different search strategies and show how they can be applied to a variety ofproblems. Chapter 4
will then cover search strategies that make use of more information about the problem to improve
the efficiency of the search process.

This chapter uses concepts from the analysis of algorithms. Readers unfamiliar with the
concepts of asymptotic complexity and NP-completeness should consult Appendix A.

3.1 PROBLEM-SOLVING AGENTS

Intelligent agents are supposed to act in such a way that the environment goes through a sequence
of states that maximizes the performance measure. In its full generality, this specification is
difficult to translate into a successful agent design. As we mentioned in Chapter 2, the task is
somewhat simplified if the agent can adopt a goal and aim to satisfy it. Let us first look at how
and why an agent might do this

55
