Section 14.6.

Summary 435

 

14.10 Express the statement that_X and Y are conditionally independent given Z as a constraint
on the joint distribution entries for P(X, Y, Z).

14.11 (Adapted from Pearl (1988).) You are a witness of a night-time hit-and-run accident
involving a taxi in Athens. All taxis in Athens are blue or green. You swear, under oath, that
the taxi was blue. Extensive testing shows that under the dim lighting conditions, discrimination
between blue and green is 75% reliable. Is it possible to calculate the most likely color for the
taxi? (Hint: distinguish carefully between the proposition that the taxi is blue and the proposition
that it appears blue.)

What now, given that 9 out of 10 Athenian taxis are green?

14.12. (Adapted from Pearl (1988).) Three prisoners, A, B, and C, are locked in their cells. It
is common knowledge that one of them will be executed the next day and the others pardoned.
Only the governor knows which one will be executed. Prisoner A asks the guard a favor: "Please
ask the governor who will be executed, and then take a message to one ofmy friends B and C to
let him know that he will be pardoned in the morning." The guard agrees, and comes back later
and tells A that he gave the pardon message to B.

What are As chances of being executed, given this information? (Answer this mathemati-
cally, not by energetic waving of hands.)

14.13 This exercise concerns Bayesian updating in the meningitis example. Starting with a
patient about whom we know nothing, show how the probability of having meningitis, P(M),is
updated after we find the patient has a stiff neck. Next, show how P(M)is updated again when
we find the patient has a fever. (Say what probabilities you need to compute this, and make up
values for them.)
14.14 In previous chapters, we found the technique of reification useful in creating represen-
tations in first-order logic. For example, we handled change by reifying situations, and belief by
reifying sentences. Suppose we try to do this for uncertain reasoning by reifying probabilities,
thus embedding probability entirely within first-order logic. Which of the following are true?

a. This would not work.

b. This would work fine; in fact, it is just another way of describing probability theory.

c. This would work fine; it would be an alternative to probability theory.

14.15 Prove that the three axioms of probability are necessary for rational behavior in betting
situations, as shown by de Finetti.

 
