 

nr AGENTS THAT

COMMUNICATE

 

 

 

In which we see why agents might want to exchange information-carrying messages
with each other, and how they can do so.

It is dusk in the savanna woodlands of Amboseli National Park near the base of Kilimanjaro. A
group of vervet monkeys are foraging for food. One vervet lets out a loud barking call and the
group responds by scrambling for the trees, neatly avoiding the leopard that the first vervet had
seen hiding in the bush. The vervet has successfully communicated with the group.

Communication is such a widespread phenomenon that it is hard to pin down an exact

-¢ definition. In general, communication is the intentional exchange ofinformation brought about

I= by the production and perception of signs drawn from a shared system of conventional signs.
Most animals employ a fixed set of signs to represent messages that are important to their survival:
food here, predator nearby, approach, withdraw, let's mate. The vervet is unusual in having a
variety of calls for different predators: a loud bark for leopards, a short cough for eagles, and
a chutter for snakes. They use one kind of grunt in exchanges with dominant members of their
own social group, another kind with subordinate members, and yet another with vervets in other
social groups.

The leopard alarm (the loud bark) is a conventional sign that both alerts others that there is
danger in the bush nearby, and signals the action of escaping to the trees. But consider a vervet
that is too far away to hear the call, but can see the others heading for the trees. He too may climb
the nearest tree, but he has not participated in communication because he did not perceive any
intentionally conveyed signs, but rather used his general powers of perception and reasoning.

Humans use a limited number of conventional signs (smiling, shaking hands) to communi-
cate in much the same way as other animals. Humans have also developed a complex, structured

LANGUAGE system of signs known as language that enables them to communicate most of what they know
about the world. Although chimpanzees, dolphins, and other mammals have shown vocabularies
of hundreds of signs and some aptitude for stringing them together, humans are the only species
that can reliably communicate an unbounded number of qualitatively different messages.'

1 The bee's tail-wagging dance specifies the distance and angle from the sun at which food can be found, so in one sense
the bee can convey an infinite number of messages, but we do not count this as unbounded variation.

651
