SECTION 56 Memory-Reference Instructions 147

memory word into DR first and then transfer the content of DR into AC. The
reason for not connecting the bus to the inputs of AC is the delay encountered
in the adder and logic circuit. It is assumed that the time it takes to read from
memory and transfer the word through the bus as well as the adder and logic
Circuit is more than the time of one clock cycle. By not connecting the bus to
the inputs of AC we can maintain one clock cycle per microoperation.

STA: Store AC

This instruction stores the content of AC into the memory word specified by
the effective address, Since the output of AC is applied to the bus and the data
input of memory is connected to the bus, we can execute this instruction with
‘one microoperation:

DjT¢ MIAR] — AC, SC —0

BUN: Branch Unconditionally

This instruction transfers the program to the instruction specified by the
effective address. Remember that PC holds the address of the instruction to be
read from memory in the next instruction cycle. PC is incremented at time T;
to prepare it for the address of the next instruction in the program sequence.
The BUN instruction allows the programmer to specify an instruction out of
sequence and we say that the program branches (or jumps) unconditionally.
The instruction is executed with one microoperation:

Dil: PC — AR, SC —0

The effective address from AR is transferred through the common bus to PC.
Resetting SC to 0 transfers control to Te The next instruction is then fetched
and executed from the memory address given by the new value in PC.

BSA: Branch and Save Return Address

This instruction is useful for branching to a portion of the program called a
subroutine or procedure. When executed, the BSA instruction stores the ad-
dress of the next instruction in sequence (which is available in PC) into a
memory location specified by the effective address. The effective address plus
one is then transferred to PC to serve as the address of the first instruction in
the subroutine. This operation was specified in Table 54 with the following
register transfer:

MAR] — PC, PC — AR +1
