Section 2.5.

Summary 49

 

ENVIHONMENT
Class:

work in an environment class, a whole set of different environments. For example, we design
a chess program to play against any of a wide collection of human and machine opponents. If
we designed it for a single opponent, we might be able to take advantage of specific weaknesses
in that opponent, but that would not give us a good program for general play. Strictly speaking,
in order to measure the performance of an agent, we need to have an environment generator
that selects particular environments (with certain likelihoods) in which to run the agent. We are
then interested in the agent's average performance over the environment class. This is fairly
straightforward to implement for a simulated environment, and Exercises 2.5 to 2.11 take you
through the entire development of an environment and the associated measurement process.

A possible confusion arises between the state variable in the environment simulator and
the state variable in the agent itself (see REFLEX-AGENT-WITH-STATE). As a programmer imple-
menting both the environment simulator and the agent, it is tempting to allow the agent to peek
at the environment simulator's state variable. This temptation must be resisted at all costs! The
agent's version of the state must be constructed from its percepts alone, without access to the
complete state information.

2.5 _ SUMMARY

This chapter has been something of a whirlwind tour of Al, which we have conceived of as the
science of agent design. The major points to recall are as follows:

« An agent is something that perceives and acts in an environment. We split an agent into
an architecture and an agent program.

An ideal agent is one that always takes the action that is expected to maximize its perfor-
mance measure, given the percept sequence it has seen so far.

An agent is autonomous to the extent that its action choices depend on its own experience,
rather than on knowledge of the environment that has been built-in by the designer.

An agent program maps from a percept to an action, while updating an internal state.

There exists a variety of basic agent program designs, depending on the kind of information
made explicit andused in the decision process. The designs vary in efficiency, compactness,
and flexibility. The appropriate design of the agent program depends on the percepts,
actions, goals, and environment

Reflex agents respond immediately to percepts, goal-based agents act so that they will
achieve their goal(s), and utility-based agents try to maximize their own "happiness."
The process of making decisions by reasoning with knowledge is central to AI and to
successful agent design. This means that representing knowledge is important.

Some environments are more demanding than others. Environments that are inaccessible,
nondeterministic, nonepisodic, dynamic, and continuous are the most challenging
