Section 22.

 

A Formal Grammar for a Subset of English 663

 

 

function SIMPLE-COMMUNICATING-AGENT( percept) returns action
static: KB, a knowledge base
4, a counter, initially 0, indicating time

TELL(KB,MAKE-PERCEPT-SENTENCE(KB, 1)
words — SPEECH-PART( percept)
semantics — DISAMBIGUATE(SEMANTICS(PARSE(words))}
if TYPE[semantics]= Command then

action — CONTENTS[semantics]
else if TyPE|semantics|= Statement then

TELL(KB, CONTENTS|semantics])

action — ASk(KB, MAKE-ACTION-QUERY( percept, 2)
else if TYPF[semantics]= None then

action — ASk(KB, MAKE-ACTION-QUERY( percept, 1)
description — GENERATE-DESCRIPTION( percept)
return ~COMPOUND-ACTIONSAY (description )Do(action))

 

 

Figure 224 A communicating agent that accepts commands and statements, and returns a
compound action that both describes its percepts and does something else.

 

 

 

of a fixed set of letters (for written language) or sounds (for spoken language) that combine into
a relatively fixed set of words. Either level can be considered the symbols ofa formal language.
The symbols are formed into strings, and it is clear that strings such as "This is a sentence" are
part of the English language, and strings such as "A is sentence this" are not. We can come up
with a set of grammar rules that cover at least part of English, and compose phrases to form
arbitrarily complex sentences.

However, there are ways in which natural languages differ from formal ones. It is hard to
characterize a natural language as a set of strings for four reasons. First, not all speakers agree on
what is in the language. Some Canadians end sentences with “eh?,” some U.S. southerners use
“y'all” and one can start arguments in some circles by asking whether "This ain't a sentence" is.
Second, the language changes over time—the English of Shakespeare's day is quite different from
what we speak today. Third, some utterances that are clearly ungrammatical are nevertheless
understandable. Fourth, grammaticality judgments are often graded rather than absolute. That
means that there are some sentences that do not sound quite right, but are not clearly wrong,
either. The following sentences (for most speakers) range from good to bad:

To whom did you send the letter?

Next to whom did you stand?

Of whom did you meet a friend?

Of whom did you see the dealer that bought the picture that Vincent painted?

Even if we could agree on exactly which sentences are English and which are not, that would be
only a small part of natural language processing. The really hard parts are semantic interpretation
and disambiguation. Speech act interpretation (which takes place across the syntactic, semantic,
and pragmatic levels) also complicates the picture. In programming languages, every statement
