Section 12.6.

Summary 391

 

12.3. Give an example in the house-building domain of two abstract subplans that cannot be
merged into a consistent plan without sharing steps. (Hint: Places where two physical parts of
the house come together are also places where two subplans tend to interact.)

124 Construct an example of the violation of the downward solution property. That is, find an
abstract solution such that, when one of the steps is decomposed, the plan becomes inconsistent
in that one of its threats cannot be resolved.

12.5 Prove that the upward solution property always holds for approximation hierarchy planning
(see page 380). You may use Tenenberg (1988) for hints.

12.6 Add existential quantifiers (3) to the plan language, using whatever syntax restrictions you
find reasonable, and extend the planner to accommodate them.

12.7 Write operators for the shopping domain that will enable the planner to achieve the goal of
having three oranges by grabbing a bag, going to the store, grabbing the oranges, paying for them,
and returning home. Model money as a resource. Use universal quantification in the operators,
and show that the original contents of the bag will still be there at the end of the plan.

12.8 We said in Section 11.6 that the SELECT-SUB-GOAL part of the POP algorithm was not a
backtrack point—that we can work on subgoals in any order without affecting completeness (al-
though the choice certainly has an effect on efficiency). When we change the SELECT-SUB-GOAL
part to handle hierarchical decomposition, do we need to make it a backtrack point?

129 Some domains have resources that are monotonically decreasing or increasing. For
example, time is monotonically increasing, and if there is a Buy operator, but no Earn, Beg,
Borrow, or Steal, then money is monotonically decreasing. Knowing this can cut the search
space: if you have a partial plan whose steps require more money than is available, then you can
avoid considering any of the possible completions of the plan.

a. Explain how to determine ifa measure is monotonic, given a set of operator descriptions.

b. Design an experiment to analyze the efficiency gains resulting from the use of monotonic
resources in planning.

12.10 Some of the operations in standard programming languages can be modelled as actions
that change the state of the world. For example, the assignment operation changes the contents
of a memory location; the print operation changes the state of the output stream. A program
consisting of these operations can also be considered as a plan, whose goal is given by the
specification of the program. Therefore, planning algorithms can be used to construct programs
that achieve a given specification.

a. Write an operator schema for the assignment operator (assigning the value of one variable
to another),

b. Show how object creation can be used by a planner to produce a plan for exchanging the
values of two variables using a temporary variable.
