740

Chapter 24. Perception

 

EPIPOLAR LINES

 

Left :
eye :

  

Right Pr t
eye —<$ A$:

 

 

 

 

Figure 24.13 The relation between disparity and depth in stereopsis.

 

Note that unlike the case of motion, we have assumed that we know the viewing geometry,
or the relative orientation between the eyes. This is often a reasonable assumption. In the case of
the eyes, the brain has commanded a particular state of the ocular muscles to move the eyes, and
hence the positions of the eyes relative to the head are known. Similarly, in a binocular camera
system, one knows the relative configuration.

Knowledge of the viewing geometry is very useful in trying to measure disparity. As
in the case of optical flow, we can try to find corresponding points between the left and right
images by maximizing some measure of similarity. However, one does not have to search in
a two-dimensional region. Corresponding points must always lie along epipolar lines in the
images (see Figure 24.14). These lines correspond to the intersections of an epipolar plane (the
plane through a point in the scene and the nodal points of the two eyes) with the left and right
image planes. Exploiting this epipolar constraint reduces an initially two-dimensional search to
a one-dimensional one. Obviously determination of the epipolar lines requires a knowledge of
the viewing geometry.

A simple-minded approach for finding disparity would be to search along epipolar lines
looking to maximize the cross-correlation, just as in the case of optical flow. Given a point pr
in the left view, its comesponding point g; in the right view is obtained by searching along the
associated epipolar line in the other view. For each ofthe possible matches q, the cross-correlation
between windows centered at p; and q is computed. The corresponding point is declared to be
the pixel g; for which the cross-correlation is maximized.

One can do better by exploiting some additional constraints:

 

 

1. Uniqueness: a point in one image can correspond to at most one point in the other image.
We say at most one, because it is possible that the point may be occluded in the otherview.

2. Piecewise continuity of surfaces in the scene: the fact the world is usually piecewise contin-
uous means that nearby points in the scene have nearby values of depth, and consequently
of disparity, except across object boundaries and occlusions.

An example ofa system that exploits these multiple constraints is the work of Belhumeur (1993).
Belhumeur's results for an oblique view of a box (Figure 24.15) are shown in Figure 24.16. His
