658

Chapter 22 Agents that Communicate

 

ANALYSIS

PARSING

PARSE TREE

SEMANTIC
INTERPRETATION

PRAGMATIC.
INTERPRETATION

DISAMBIGUATION

INCORPORATION

esoteric to being commonplace within the last five years. For the example, let us assume that the
hearer perceives the sounds and recovers the spoken words perfectly. (In Chapter 24 we see how
this might be done.)

Analysis. We divide analysis into two main parts: syntactic interpretation (or parsing) and
semantic interpretation. Semantic interpretation includes both understanding the meanings of
words and incorporating knowledge of the current situation (also called pragmatic interpretation).

The word parsing is derived from the the Latin phrase pars orationis, or "part of speech,"
and refers to the process of assigning a part of speech (noun, verb, and so on) to each word ina
sentence and grouping the words into phrases. One way of displaying the result of a syntactic
analysis is with a parse tree, as shown in Figure 22.1. A parse tree is a tree in which interior
nodes represents phrases, links represent applications of grammar rules, and leaf nodes represent
words. We define the yield ofa node as the list of all the leaves below the node, in left-to-right
order, then we can say that the meaning of a parse tree is that each node with label X asserts that
the yield of the node is a phrase of category X.

Semantic interpretation is the process of extracting the meaning of an utterance as an
expression in some representation language. In Figure 22.1 we show two possible semantic
interpretations: that the wumpus is not alive, and that it is tired (a colloquial meaning of dead)
Utterances with several possible interpretations are said to be ambiguous. We use logic as the
representation language, but other representations could be used. Pragmatic interpretation is
the part of semantic interpretation that takes the current situation into account.” In the example,
all that pragmatics does is replace the constant Now with the constant $3, which stands for the
current situation.

Disambiguation. Most speakers are not intentionally ambiguous, but most utterances have
several legal interpretations. Communication works because the hearer does the work of figuring
out which interpretation is the one the speaker probably meant to convey. Notice that this is the
first time we have used the word probably, and disambiguation is the first process that depends
heavily on uncertain reasoning. Analysis generates possible interpretations; if more than one
interpretation is found, then disambiguation chooses the one that is best.

Incorporation. A totally naive agent might believe everything it hears, but a sophisticated
agent treats the words W and the derived interpretation P; as additional pieces of evidence that
get considered along with all other evidence for and against P:.

Note that it only makes sense to use language when there are agents to communicate
with who (a) understand a common language, (b) have a shared context on which to base the
conversation, and (c) are at least somewhat rational. Communication does not work when agents
are completely irrational, because there is no way to predict how an irrational agent will react toa
speech act. Interestingly, communication can work when agents are uncooperative. Even if you
believe that another wumpus world explorer would lead you astray in order to get the gold all for
itself, you can still communicate to help each other kill the wumpus or perform some other task
that is helpful to both agents. Returning to Africa for another example, when an antelope sees a

2 Thus, pragmatic interpretation associates meanings with uiterances made in specific contexts, whereas the rest of
semantic interpretation associates meanings with sirings in isolation. This is controversiai, and other authors draw the
line between semantics and pragmatics in different places, orjust group them together. Also, some authors use the term
parsing to encompass all of what we call analysis.
