Section 23.6. Discourse Understanding 717

 

¢ The waiter was employed by the restaurant.
Again, this is a mixture of general world knowledge—thatrestaurants employ waiters—and
knowledge about discourse conventions—that the definite article "the" is used for objects
that have been mentioned before, or at least have been implicitly alluded to; in this case,
by the eat-at-restaurant plan.

¢ John paid some of the $50 to the waiter and most of it to the restaurant.
This is another example of identifying a step in a currently active plan that matches a
sentence in the text, and unifying them to arrive at the interpretation that "He" is John, and
that the recipients of the deal are the restaurant and waiter.

The structure of coherent discourse

In logic, conjunction is commutative, so there is no difference between PAQARandRAPAQ.
But this is certainly not true of natural languages. Consider the following two discourses, which
contain the same sentences in different order:

Discourse (A) Discourse (B)

I visited Paris. I visited Paris.

I bought you some expensive cologne. Then I flew home.

Then I flew home. I went to Kmart.

I went to Kmart I bought you some expensive cologne.
I bought some underwear. I bought some underwear.

In (A), the preferred interpretation is that the cologne comes from Paris, whereas in (B) it comes
from Kmart. Both discourses have a sequential structure in which the sentences that come later in
the discourse also occur later in time. But there is more to the understanding of these discourses
thanjust temporal ordering. In (A), we understand that a (or the) reason for going to Kmart was
to buy the underwear. Similarly, we understand that visiting Paris enabled the speaker to buy
cologne there, but that was not necessarily the purpose of the trip.

We need a theory of how discourses are put together. We will say that discourses are

‘SEGMENTS composed of segments, where a segment can be a clause, a complete sentence, or a group of
several consecutive sentences. There are several theories built on the idea that each segment of
COHERENCE the discourse is related to the previous one by a coherence relation that determines the role that

each segment plays in the unfolding discourse. For example, the coherence relation between the
first two sentences of (A) is one of enablement. Coherence relations serve to bind the discourse
together. A speaker knows that she can extend a discourse by adding a sentence that stands ina
coherence relation to the existing text, and the hearer knows that in addition to interpreting and
disambiguating each sentence, he is supposed to recover the coherence relations that bind the
segments together. This means that the hearer of a discourse is doing more work than the hearer
in Chapter 22, who only had to worry about interpreting and disambiguating a single sentence.
But it also means that the hearer of a discourse has some help, because the coherence relations
constrain the possible meanings of each sentence. So even though the individual sentences may
have many possible meanings, the discourse as a whole will have few meanings (preferably one)

 

 
