Section 22.8.

Ambiguity and Disambiguation 681

 

 

LEXICAL AMBIGUITY

SYNTACTIC.
AMBIGUITY

SEMANTIC.
ANBIGUITY

REFERENTIAL
ANBIGUITY

PRAGMATIC
ANIBIGUITY

LOCAL AMBIGUITY

VAGUE

will not be heard. But the biggestproblem is that most utterances are ambiguous. Here are some
examples taken from newspaper headlines:

Squad helps dog bite victim.

Red-hot star to wed astronomer.

Helicopter powered by human flies.

Once-sagging cloth diaper industry saved by full dumps.

and the World War II favorite:
American pushes bottle up Germans.

The simplest type of ambiguity is lexical ambiguity, where a word has more than one meaning.
For example, the adjective "hot" can mean warm or spicy or electrified or radioactive or vehement
or sexy or popular or stolen. Lexical ambiguity can cut across categories: "back" is an adverb in
"go back," an adjective in "back door," a noun in "the back ofthe room," and a verb in "back up
your files."

Syntactic ambiguity (also known as structural ambiguity) can occur with or without
lexical ambiguity. For example, the string "I smelled a wumpus in 2,2" has two parses: one
where the propositional phrase modifies the noun, and one where it modifies the verb. The
syntactic ambiguity leads to a semantic ambiguity, because one parse means the wumpus is in
2,2 and the other means that a stench is in 2,2. In this case, getting the wrong interpretation could
be a deadly mistake. The lexical ambiguities of the previous paragraph also lead to semantic
ambiguities. On the other hand, semantic ambiguity can occur even in phrases with no lexical
or syntactic ambiguity. For example, the noun phrase "cat person" can be someone who likes
felines or the lead of the movie Attack of the Cat People. A “coast road" can be a road that
follows the coast, or a road that leads to the coast.

One pervasive form of semantic ambiguity is referential ambiguity. Anaphoric expres-
sions such as "it" can refer to almost anything. Referential ambiguity occurs because natural
languages consist almost entirely of words for categories, not for individual objects. There is no
word for the-apple-I-had-for-lunch-today, justategories like apple.

One type of pragmatic ambiguity occurs when the speaker and hearer disagree on what
the current situation is. Ifthe speaker says "I'll meet you next Friday" thinking that they're
talking about the 17th, and the hearer thinks that they are talking about the 24th, then there is
miscommunication. The example on page 659 about “Now” also involves pragmatic ambiguity.

Sometimes a phrase or sentence has local ambiguity, where a substring can be parsed
several ways, but only one of those ways fits into the larger context of the whole string. For
example, in the C programming language, the string *c means "pointer to c” when it appears in
the declaration char *c; but it means "multiply by c" when it appears in the expression 2 *c.
In English, "the radio broadcasts" is a noun phrase in "the radio broadcasts inform" and a noun
phrase followed by a verb in "the radio broadcasts information." It is possible for a phrase or
sentence to be syntactically ambiguous but semantically unambiguous. For example, “S, and Sz
and $3” has two different parses. But they both have the same meaning (at least in £2), because
conjunction is associative.

Natural languages are also vague. When we say, "It's hot outside," it says something about
the temperature, but it is open to a wide range ofinterpretation because "hot" is a vague term. To
some it might mean the temperature is above 75°F, and to others it might mean 90°F.
