 

 

MAKING COMPLEX

DECISIONS

 

‘SEQUENTIAL
DECISION,
PROBLEMS.

 

In which we examine methods for deciding what to do today, given that we will have
a chance to act again tomorrow.

In this chapter, we address the computational issues involved in making decisions. Whereas
Chapter 16 was concerned with single decision problems, in which the utility of each action's
outcome was well-known, in this chapter we will be concerned with sequential decision prob-
lems, where the agent's utility depends on a sequence of decisions. Sequential decision problems,
which include utilities, uncertainty, and sensing, generalize the search and planning problems
described in Parts II and IV.

The chapter divides roughly into two parts. Sections 17.1 through 17.3 deal with classical
techniques from control theory, operations research, and decision analysis that were developed to
solve sequential decision problems under uncertainty. They operate in much the same way that
the search algorithms of Part II solved sequential decision problems in deterministic domains:
by looking for a sequence of actions that leads to a good state. The difference is that what they
return is not the fixed sequence of actions, but rather a poliey—that is, a set of situation-action
tules for each state—arrived at by calculating utilities for each state

The second part, Sections 17.4 through 17.6, develops a complete sketch of a decision-
theoretic agent using a richer representation of states in terms of random variables in a belief
network. We also show how to efficiently update the network over time, and how to be able to
safely forget things about the past.

17.1 _ SEQUENTIAL DECISION PROBLEMS

Suppose that an agent is situated in the environment shown in Figure 17.1. Beginning in the start
state, it must execute a sequence of actions. The environment terminates when the agent reaches
one of the states marked +1 or -1. In each location, the available actions are called North, South,
East, and West. We will assume for now that the agent knows which state it is in initially, and
that it knows the effects of all of its actions on the state of the world. q

498

 
