 

694

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

TEXT
INTERPRETATION

The advantages of systems like this are obvious. The disadvantage is that the user never knows
which wordings of a query will succeed and which are outside the system's competence. For
example, CHAT handles "south of the equator" and "with latitude less than zero," but not "in the
southern hemisphere." There is no principled reason why this last paraphrase should not work; it
just happens that “hemisphere” is not in the dictionary (nor is this sense of "in"). Similarly, the
final sample question could not be phrased as "What ocean borders both African countries and
Asian?" because the grammar does not allow that kind of conjunction.

Over the last decade, some commercial systems have built up large enough grammars and
lexicons to handle a fairly wide variety of inputs. The main challenge for current systems is to
follow the context of an interaction. The user should be able to ask a series of questions where
some of them implicitly refer to earlier questions or answers:

What countries are north of the equator?
How about south?

Show only the ones outside Australasia.
What is their total area?

Some systems (e.g.. TEAM (Grosz et al., 1987))handle problems like this to a limited degree.
We return to the problem in Section 23.6.

In the 1990s, companies such as Natural Language Inc. and Symantec are still selling
database access tools that use natural language, but customers are less likely to make their buying
decisions based on the strength of the natural language component than on the graphical user
interface or the degree of integration of the database with spreadsheets and word processing.
Natural language is not always the most natural way to communicate: sometimes it is easier to
point and click with a mouse to express an idea (e.g., "sum that column of the spreadsheet").

The emphasis in practical NLP has now shifted away from database access to the broad
field of text interpretation. In part, this is a reflection of a change in the computer industry.
In the early 1980s, most online information was stored in databases or spreadsheets. Now the
majority ofonline information is text: email, news, journal articles, reports, books, encyclopedias.
Most computer users find there is too much information available, and not enough time to sort
through it. Text interpretation programs help to retrieve, categorize, filter, and extract information
from text. Text interpretation systems can be split into three types: information retrieval, text
categorization, and data extraction.

Information retrieval

In information retrieval (IR), the task is to choose from a set of documents the ones that are
relevant to a query. Sometimes a document is represented by a surrogate, such as the title and a
list of keywords and/or an abstract. Now that so much text is online, it is more common to use
the full text, possibly subdivided into sections that each serve as a separate document for retrieval
purposes. The query is normally a list of words typed by the user. In early information retrieval
systems, the query was a Boolean combination of keywords. For example, the query "(natural
and language) or (computational and linguistics)” would be a reasonable query to find documents
related to this chapter. However, users found it difficult to get good results with Boolean queries
When a query finds no documents, for example, it is not clear how to relax the query to find

 
