 

Section 23.4.

Scaling Up the Grammar TL

 

‘SUBLECT-AUX
INVERSION

To represent filler-gap relationships, we augment most of the category predicates with a gap
argument. This argument says what is missing from the phrase. For example, the sentence "I
saw him" has no gaps, which we represent as S(Gap(None)). The phrases “saw him" and 'I
saw ,,” are both represented as S(Gap(NP)).
To define relative clauses, all we have to do is say that an NP can be modified by following
it with a relative clause, and that a relative clause consists of a relative pronoun followed by a
sentence that contains an NP gap. This allows us to handle both "the person that I saw ,,” and
“the person that saw him." Here are the rules with all other augmentations removed:
NP(gap) — NP(gap) RelClause
RelClause — Pronoun(Relative) S(Gap(NP))}
We also have to say that the empty string, ¢, comprises an NP with an NP gap in it:
NP(Gap(NP))— 6
The rest of the grammar has to cooperate by passing the gap argument along; for example:
S(Gap(Concat(g), g2))) — NP(Gap(g1)) VP(Gap(g2))

Here Concat(g), g>)means g\ and g; together. Ifg\ and g> are both Gap(None),then the S as a
whole has no gap. But if, say, gy is Gap(NP) and g> is Gap(None),then the Shas an NP gap.

Questions

In English, there are two main types of questions:

0 Yes/No: Did you see that?
< Wh (gapped): What did you see ,?
A yes/no question, as the name implies, expects a yes or no as answer. It isjust like a declarative
sentence, except that it has an auxiliary verb that appears before the subject NP. We call this
subject-aux inversion and use the category Sinv to denote a sentence that has it. If there are
several auxiliary verbs, only the first one comes before the subject: "Should you have been seeing
that?" Thus, the grammar rules covering simple yes/no sentences are as follows:
S— Question
Question — Sinv
Sinv — Aux NP VP
Wh questions (pronounced “double-U H”) expect a noun phrase as an answer. In the simplest
case, they start with an interogative pronoun (who, what, when, where, why, how), which is
followed by a gapped Sinv:
Question — Pronoun(Interrogative) Sinv(Gap(NP))
There are also some less common question constructions, as these examples show:
0 Echo: You saw what?
0 Raising intonation: You see something?
Yes/No with "be": Is it safe?
0 Wh subject: What is the frequency, Kenneth?
