512

SENSOR FUSION

DATA FUSION

Chapter 17. Making Complex Decisions

 

NO

Temperature

    
     

Pressure
Reading;

 
   

    

Temperature
Reading

@ o)

 

 

Figure 17.10 (a) Belief network fragment showing the general relationship between state
variables and sensor variables. (b) An example with pressure and temperature gauges.

 

 

 

that (somehow) measure Pressure/Temperature and Pressure x Temperature. Each of the two
state nodes would have to be connected to both sensor nodes, resulting in large CPTs for the
sensor models.

Often, we will have several sensors that are measuring the same state variable. In Fig-
ure 17.11,we show an example where two gauges are being used to measure the actual temperature
of some object, perhaps a superconductor. The crucial thing to notice here is that the sensor
values are conditionally independent ofeach other, given the actual value. The reasoning here is
similar to the reasoning for the conditional independence of symptoms given a disease. Although
the sensors are not unconditionally independent—in fact, they will usually display approximately
the same reading—they are correlated only inasmuch as they depend on the actual temperature.
When we have multiple sensors for the same state variables, the resulting inference process is
called sensor fusion or data fusion. To see how important this can be, consider the situation
when Gauge 1 reads 13.6°K, while Gauge 2 reads 14.4°K. If each gauge is accurate to within
0.5°K, as represented in the sensor models, then the network will infer that the actual temperature
is between 13.9°K and {4,1°K. Integrating the results of multiple sensors can provide greater
accuracy than any one sensor on its own. This is true whether the sensors are similar, as in the |
case of temperature gauges, or very different, as in the case of sonar and infrared distance sensors
used in robotics. Detailed sensor models have been built for both sonar and infrared, which have
somewhat complementary performance. Sonar has a long range, butis s.bject to "ghost" images
caused by multiple reflections and specularities. Infrared is only accurate over short distances.
By using sensor fusion, it is often possible to create an accurate model of the robot's environment
in cases where the sensors used separately would be lost.

Anyone with hands-on experience ofrobotics, computerized process control, or other forms
of automatic sensing will readily testify to the fact that sensors fail. When a sensor fails, it does
not necessarily send a signal saying, "Oh, by the way, the data I'm about to send you is a load of
nonsense." Instead, it simply sends the nonsense. This can be dangerous if taken literally. For 4
example, a robot's sonar distance sensor might start sending "infinity," meaning that no object

 
