Section 20.1.

Introduction 599

 

PASSIVE LEARNER
ACTIVE LEARNER

ACTIONVALUE
Q-LEARNING

due to which actions. A game-playing agent may play flawlessly except for one blunder, and at
the end of the game get a single reinforcement that says "you lose." The agent must somehow
determine which move was the blunder.

Within our framework of agents as functions from percepts to actions, a reward can be
provided by a percept, but the agent must be "hardwired" to recognize that percept as a reward
rather than as just another sensory input. Thus, animals seem to be hardwired to recognize pain
and hunger as negative rewards, and pleasure and food as positive rewards. Training a dog is
made easier by the fact that humans and dogs happen to agree that a low-pitched sound (either
a growl or a "bad dog!”) is a negative reinforcement. Reinforcement has been carefully studied
by animal psychologists for over 60 years.

In many complex domains, reinforcement learning is the only feasible way to train a
program to perform at high levels. For example, in game playing, it is very hard for a human
to provide accurate and consistent evaluations of large numbers of positions, which would be
needed to train an evaluation function directly from examples. Instead, the program can be told
when it has won or lost, and can use this information to leam an evaluation function that gives
reasonably accurate estimates of the probability of winning from any given position. Similarly,
it is extremely difficult to program a robot to juggle; yet given appropriate rewards every time a
ball is dropped or caught, the robot can learn to juggle by itself.

In a way, reinforcement learning is a restatement of the entire AT problem. An agent in
an environment gets percepts, maps some of them to positive or negative utilities, and then has
to decide what action to take. To avoid reconsidering all of AI and to get at the principles of
reinforcement learning, we need to consider how the learning task can vary:

The environment can be accessible or inaccessible. In an accessible environment, states
can be identified with percepts, whereas in an inaccessible environment, the agent must
maintain some internal state to try to keep track ofthe environment

The agent can begin with knowledge of the environment and the effects of its actions; or it
will have to learn this model as well as utility information.

Rewards can be received only in terminal states, or in any state.

Rewards can be components of the actual utility (points for a ping-pong agent or dollars
for a betting agent) that the agent is trying to maximize, or they can be hints as to the actual
utility ("nice move" or "bad dog").

The agent can be a passive learner or an active learner. A passive learner simply watches
the world going by, and tries to learn the utility of being in various states; an active learner
must also act using the leamed information, and can use its problem generator to suggest
explorations of unknown portions of the environment.

Furthermore, as we saw in Chapter 2, there are several different basic designs foragents. Because
the agent will be receiving rewards that relate to utilities, there are two basic designs to consider:

+ The agent learns a utility function on states (or state histories) and uses it to select actions
that maximize the expected utility of their outcomes

+ The agent leams an action-value function giving the expected utility of taking a given
action in a given state. This is called Q-learning.
