796

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

recognizable set o~'(so) the robot is in. From there, the planner can determine where the robot
might move next, given a motion command with uncertainty, and what the next sensor reading
s; could be. Thinking of recognizable sets as states of the robot, the motion command caused a
nondeterministic transition from the state 7~!(so)to one of the states «7! (s;). Although there are
infinitely many such states with a continuous sensor, it is still possible to represent the possible
transitions, and to find a correct plan if one exists. Unfortunately, the complexity of doing this is
extremely high—in fact, doubly exponential in the number of plan steps (Canny and Reif, 1987).

25.6 NAVIGATION AND MOTION PLANNING

DECOMPOSITION

We now turn to the question of how to move around successfully. Given our analysis of robotics
problems as motion in configuration spaces, we will begin with algorithms that handle C directly.
These algorithms usually assume that an exact description ofthe space is available, so they cannot
be used where there is significant sensor error and motion error. In some cases, no description of
the space is available until the robot actually starts moving around in it.

We can identify five major classes of algorithms, and arrange them roughly in order of the
amount of information required at planning time and execution time:

Cell decomposition methods break continuous space into a finite number of cells, yielding
a discrete search problem.

> Skeletonization methods compute a one-dimensional "skeleton" of the configuration
space, yielding an equivalent graph search problem.

< Bounded-error planning methods assume bounds on sensor and actuator uncertainty, and
in some cases can compute plans that are guaranteed to succeed even in the face of severe
actuator error.

0 Landmark-based navigation methods assume that there are some regions in which the
robot's location can be pinpointed using landmarks, whereas outside those regions it may
have only orientation information.

< Online algorithms assume that the environment is completely unknown initially, although
most assume some form of accurate position sensor.

As always, we are interested in establishing some of of the properties of these algorithms,
including their soundness, completeness, and complexity. When we talk about the complexity
ofa planning method, we must keep in mind both offline costs (before execution) and the online
cost of execution.

Cell decomposition

Recalling that motion planning for a robot reduces to navigating a point in free space F. the basic
idea of celldecomposition is easy to state:

 
