22.5 Strongly connected components 617

The following linear-time (i.e., 0(V + E)-time) algorithm computes the strongly
connected components of a directed graph G = (V,£) using two depth-first
searches, one on G and one on G".

STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS(G)

1 call DFS(G) to compute finishing times u.f for each vertex u

2 compute GT

3 call DFS(G*), but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices
in order of decreasing u.f (as computed in line 1)

4 output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in line 3 as a
separate strongly connected component

The idea behind this algorithm comes from a key property of the component
graph GSS = (VS, ESC), which we define as follows. Suppose that G
has strongly connected components C,,C3,..., Cy. The vertex set VS is
{Vp.V2,0005 vz}, and it contains a vertex v; for each strongly connected compo-
nent C; of G. There is an edge (v;, v;) € ES“ if G contains a directed edge (x, y)
for some x € C; and some y € Cj. Looked at another way, by contracting all
edges whose incident vertices are within the same strongly connected component
of G, the resulting graph is GS°°. Figure 22.9(c) shows the component graph of
the graph in Figure 22.9(a).

The key property is that the component graph is a dag, which the following
lemma implies.

Lemma 22.13

Let C and C’ be distinct strongly connected components in directed graph G =
(V, E), let u,v € C, let u’,v’ € C’, and suppose that G contains a path u ~ wu’.
Then G cannot also contain a path v’ ~ v.

Proof \f G contains a path v’ ~+ v, then it contains paths u ~+ u’ ~+ v’ and
vp’ a+ v~+u. Thus, u and v’ are reachable from each other, thereby contradicting
the assumption that C and C’ are distinct strongly connected components. .

We shall see that by considering vertices in the second depth-first search in de-
creasing order of the finishing times that were computed in the first depth-first
search, we are, in essence, visiting the vertices of the component graph (each of
which corresponds to a strongly connected component of G) in topologically sorted
order.

Because the STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure performs two
depth-first searches, there is the potential for ambiguity when we discuss u.d
or u.f. In this section, these values always refer to the discovery and finishing
times as computed by the first call of DFS, in line 1.
