Section 4.2.

| 42

 

H

 

 

 

Heuristic Functions 101

function grows no faster than the logarithm of the actual path cost. In mathematical notation, the
condition for subexponential growth is that

{h(n) — h°(n)| < Ollogh*(n)),

where h*(n)is the true cost of getting from n to the goal. For almost all heuristics in practical use,
the error is at least proportional to the path cost, and the resulting exponential growth eventually
overtakes any computer. Of course, the use of a good heuristic still provides enormous savings
compared to an uninformed search. In the next section, we will look at the question of designing
good heuristics.

Computation time is not, however, A*'s main drawback. Because it keeps all generated
nodes in memory, A* usually runs out of space long before itruns out of time. Recently developed
algorithms have overcome the space problem without sacrificing optimality or completeness.
These are discussed in Section 4.3.

EURISTIC FUNCTIONS

So far we have seen just one example of a heuristic: straight-line distance for route-finding
problems. In this section, we will look at heuristics for the 8-puzzle. This will shed light on the
nature of heuristics in general.

The 8-puzzle was one ofthe earliest heuristic search problems. As mentioned in Section 3.3,
the object of the puzzle is to slide the tiles horizontally or vertically into the empty space until
the initial configuration matches the goal configuration (Figure 4.7).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Start State

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4.7 A typical instance of the 8-puzzle.

 

The 8-puzzle is just the right level of difficulty to be interesting. A typical solution is about
20 steps, although this of course varies depending on the initial state. The branching factor is
about 3 (when the empty tile is in the middle, there are four possible moves; when it is in a comer
there are two; and when it is along an edge there are three). This means that an exhaustive search
to depth 20 would look at about 3°° = 3.5 x 10° states. By keeping track of repeated states, we
could cut this down drastically, because there are only 9! = 362, 880 different arrangements of
9 squares. This is still a large number of states, so the next order of business is to find a good
