Section 22.7.

Semantic Interpretation 679

 

INDEXICALS.

ANAPHORA

 

S( 3e e€ Perceive a Agent(a)], [Aw Wumpus(w)],Nose))
ADuring(Now,e)

   

VP( hx 3e e€ Perceive(x, [Aw Wumpus(w)].Nose))

‘ADuring(Now,e)
NP([va Agent(a)]) NP([3x° Wumpus(w)])
TN Ax 3e e€ Perceive(x, y, Nose)) Jn
‘ADuring(Now,e)
Article() NountAgent) “Article(3) Noun(Wumpus)
agent smells a wumpus

 

 

 

Figure 22.18 Parse tree for the sentence “Every agent smells a wumpus," showing both
syntactic structure and semantic interpretations.

 

 

 

The most obvious need for pragmatic information is in resolving the meaning ofindexicals,
which are phrases that refer directly to the current situation. For example, in the sentence "I
am in Boston today," the interpretation ofthe indexicals "T' and "today" depend on who uttered
the sentence when. We represent indexicals by Skolem constants (such as Speaker), which are
interpreted as fluents. The hearer who perceives a speech act should also perceive who the
speaker is, and use this information to resolve the indexical. For example, the hearer might know
T((Speaker = Agentg), Now).

Another important concern is anaphora, the occurrence of phrases referring to objects that
have been mentioned previously. Consider the passage:

"John was hungry. He entered a restaurant."

To understand that "he" in the second sentence refers to John, we need to have processed the
first sentence and used it as part of the situational knowledge in interpreting the second sentence.
Anaphoric reference can also be made with definite noun phrases like "the man." In fact,
the pattern of reference can be rather complicated, requiring a thorough understanding of the
discourse. Consider the following sentence:

“After John proposed to Marsha, they found a preacher and got married. For the
honeymoon, they went to Hawaii."

Here the definite noun phrase "the honeymoon" refers to something that was only implicitly
alluded to by the verb "married." The pronoun "they" refers to a group that was not explicitly
mentioned before: John and Marsha (but not the preacher).

When pronouns are used to refer to things within the same sentence, we at least get some
help from syntax. For example, in "He saw him in the mirror" the two pronouns must refer to

 
