654

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

 

UNDERSTANDING

PLAN RECOGNITION

FORMAL LANGUAGES

NATURAL
LANGUAGES

The hard part for an agent is to decide when a speech act of some kind is called for,
and to decide which speech act, out of all the possibilities, is the right one. At one level,
this is just the familiar planning problem—an agent has a set of possible actions to choose
from, and must somehow try to choose actions that achieve the goal of communicating some

information to another agent. All the difficulties that make planning hard (see Chapter 12)
apply to planning speech acts. It would be impossibly complex to plan English conversations
at the level of individual movements of the mouth and tongue, so we need to plan with several
levels of hierarchical abstraction—words, phrases and sentences, at least. Another problem is
nondeterminism. Whereas most actions in the wumpus world are deterministic, speech acts are
not. Consider the action Speak("TurnRight!"). If another agent perceives the words, and if the
agent interprets it as a command to turn right, then that agent may do so. Or then again, the agent
may ignore the command and choose another action. The nondeterminism means that we will
need conditional plans. Instead of planning a conversation from beginning to end, the best we
can do is construct a general plan or policy for the conversation, generate the first sentence, stop
to perceive the reply, and react to it.

The problem of understanding speech acts is much like other understanding problems,
such as image understanding or medical diagnosis. We are given a set of ambiguous inputs,
and from them we have to work backwards to decide what state of the world could have created
the inputs. Part of the speech act understanding problem is specific to language. We need
to know something about the syntax and semantics of a language to determine why another
agent performed a given speech act. The understanding problem also includes the more general
problem of plan recognition. If we observe an agent turning and moving toward the gold, we
can understand the actions by forming a model of the agent's beliefs that says the agent has the
goal of getting the gold. A similar kind of mental model building is required to understand the
agent who turns toward the gold and says, “I’m going to grab it." Even though there may be other
objects nearby, it is fairly clear that "it" refers to the gold.

Part of the understanding problem can be handled by logical reasoning. We will see that
logical implications are a good way of describing the ways that words and phrases combine to
form larger phrases. Another part of the understanding problem can only be handled by uncertain
reasoning techniques. Usually, there will be several states of the world that could all lead to the
same speech act, so the understander has to decide which one is more probable.

Now that we have seen how communication fits into our general agent design, we can turn |
our attention to language itself. As we focus more and more on the way language acuually is,
rather than on the general properties of communication methods, we will find ourselves moving
into the realm of natural science—that is, science that works by finding out things about the real
world rather than about programs or other artifacts. Natural language understanding is one of the
few areas of AI that has this property.

Fundamentals of language

We distinguish between formal Janguages—the ones like Lisp and first-order logic that are
invented and rigidly defined—and natural languages—the ones like Chinese, Danish, and
English that humans use to talk to one another. Although we are primarily interested in natural
