404

Chapter 13 Planning and Acting

 

plan in the light of unexpected changes in the environment, which might include recovering from
execution errors or removing steps that have been made redundant by serendipitous occurrences.
Obviously, when it first gets a new goal the agent will have no actions ready to execute, so it
will spend a while generating a partial plan. It is quite possible, however, for the agent to begin
execution before the plan is complete, especially when it has independent subgoals to achieve
The situated agent continuously monitors the world, updating its world model from new percepts
even if its deliberations are still continuing.

As in the discussion of the conditional planner, we will first go through an example and
then give the planning algorithm. We will keep to the formulation of steps and plans used by
the partial-order planner POP, rather than the more expressive languages used in Chapter 12. It
is, of course, possible to incorporate more expressive languages, as well as conditional planning
techniques, into a situated planner.

The example we will use is a version of the blocks world. The start state is shown in
Figure 13.10(a), and the goal is On(C.D) A On(D,B). The action we will need is Move(x,y),
which moves blockx onto blocky, provided both are clear. Its action schema is

Op(ACTION:Move(x, ¥),

PRECOND:Clear(x)A Clear(yyA On(x.z),
EFFECT: On(x,y) A Clear(z)A 7On(x, 2A Clear(y))

 

 

 

 

Figure 13.10 The sequence of states as the situated planning agent tries to reach the goal state
On(C, D) A On(D,B) as shown in (d). The start state is (a). At (b), another agent has interfered,
putting D on B. At(c), the agenthas executed Move(C,D) but has failed, dropping C on A instead.
Itretries Move(C, D),reaching the goal state (4).

 

 

 

The agent first constructs the plan shown in Figure 13.11. Notice that although the
preconditions of both actions are satisfied by the initial state, there is an ordering constraint

putting Move(D, B)before Move(C, D). This is needed to protect the condition Clear(D) until 4

Move(D,B) is completed.
At this point, the plan is ready to be executed, but nature intervenes. An external agent
moves D onto B (perhaps the agent's teacher getting impatient), and the world is now in the state

shown in Figure 13.10(b). Now Clear(B) and On(D,G)are no longer true in the initial state, 4

which is updated from the new percept. The causal links that were supplying the preconditions

Clear(Byand On(D, G) for the Move(D,B) action become invalid, and must be removed from the 4

plan. The new plan is shown in Figure 13.12. Notice that two ofthe preconditions for Move(D,B)

 
