7710

Chapter 24. Perception

 

ARCHITECTURE

posthumously. That book conveys the excitement of working in vision better than any written
since, despite the fact that many of the specific hypotheses and models proposed by Marr have
not stood the test of time.

Under Marr’s influence, reconstruction of the three-dimensional scene from various cues
became the dominant ideology af the day. This of course proved to be a difficult problem, and
it was inevitable that people would question whether it was really necessary. The old ideas of
Gibson—active vision and affordances—came back. The most solid proof that reconstruction
was not necessary for many (or most) tasks came from the work of Dickmanns in Germany,
who demonstrated robust driving using a control system perspective (Dickmanns and Zapp,
1987). As a general philosophy, active vision was advocated by Ruzena Bajesy (1988) and John
Aloimonos (1988). A number of papers are collected in a special issue of CVG/P (Aloimonos,
1992). In the 1990s, the dominant perspective is that of vision as a set of processes aimed at
extracting information for manipulation, navigation, and recognition.

Eye, Brain and Vision by David Hubel (1988) and Perception by Irvin Rock (1984) pro-
vide excellent introductions to the field of biological vision. A Guided Tour of Computer
Vision (Nalwa, 1993) is a good general introduction to computer vision; Robot Vision (Hom,
1986) and Three-Dimensional Computer Vision (Faugeras, 1993) cover more advanced topics.
Two of the main journals for computer vision are the IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence and the International Journal of Computer Vision. Computer vision
conferences include ICCV (International Conference on Computer Vision), CVPR (Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition), and ECCV (European Conference on Computer Vision).

The hidden Markov model was first used to model language by Markov himself in a
letter-sequence analysis of the text of Eugene Onegin (Markov, 1913). Early development of
algorithms for inferring Markov models from data was carried by Baum and Petrie (1966). These
were applied to speech by Baker (1975) and Jelinek (1976). In 1971, the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States Department of Defense, in cooperation
with a number of research centers, set out a five-year plan for speech recognition research. The
two most significant systems to emerge from this massive effort were HEARSAY-II (Erman et al.,
1980)and HARPY (Lowerre and Reddy, 1980). HARPY was the only system that clearly met the
rigorous specifications of the five-year plan. It used a highly compiled network representation for
all possible meaningful sequences of speech elements. HEARSAY-II, however, has had a greater
influence on other research because of its use of the blackboard architecture. HEARSAY-II was
designed as an expert system with a number of more or less independent, modular knowledge
sources which communicated via a common blackboard from which they could write and read.
Because this representation was less compiled and more modularthan HARP Y'S, HEARSAY-II was
much easier to comprehend and modify, but was not fast enough to meet the DARPA criteria

A good introduction to speech recognition is given by Rabiner and Juang (1993). Waibel
and Lee (1990) collect important papers in the area, including some tutorial ones. Lee (1989)
describes a complete modem speech recognition system. The presentation in this chapter drew
on the survey by Kay, Gawron, and Norvig (1994), and on an unpublished manuscript by Dan
Jurafsky. Speech recognition research is published in Computer Speech and Language and the
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, and at the DARPA Workshops
on Speech and Natural Language Processing.

 
