   
 
 
    
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
   
   

464 Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

157___ SUMMARY

Both Chapter 9 and this chapter are concerned with reasoning properly, but there is a difference
injust what that means. In first-order logic, proper reasoning means that conclusions follow from
premises—that if the initial knowledge base faithfully represents the world, then the inferences
also faithfully represent the world. In probability, we are dealing with beliefs, not with the state
of the world, so "proper reasoning" means having beliefs that allow an agent to act rationally.

In Chapter 10, we saw a variety of approaches to the problem of implementing logical
reasoning systems. In this chapter, we see much more of a consensus: efficient reasoning
with probability is so new that there is one main approach—beliefnetworks—with a few minor
variations. The main points are as follows:

 

Conditional independence information is a vital and robust way to structure information
about an uncertain domain.

Belief networks are a natural way to represent conditional independence information. The
links between nodes represent the qualitative aspects of the domain, and the conditional
probability tables represent the quantitative aspects.

A beliefnetwork is a complete representation for the joint probability distribution for the
domain, but is often exponentially smaller in size.

Inference in belief networks means computing the probability distribution ofa set of query
variables, given a set of evidence variables.

Belief networks can reason causally, diagnostically, in mixed mode, or intercausally. No
other uncertain reasoning mechanism can handle all these modes.

The complexity of beliefnetwork inference depends on the network structure. In polytrees
(singly connected networks), the computation time is linear in the size of the network.
There are various inference techniques for general belief networks, all of which have
exponential complexity in the worst case. In real domains, the local structure tends to
make things more feasible, but care is needed to construct a tractable network with more
than a hundred nodes.

It is also possible to use approximation techniques, including stochastic simulation, to get
an estimate of the true probabilities with less computation 3
Various alternative systems for reasoning with uncertainty have been suggested. All the
truth-functional systems have serious problems with mixed or intercausal reasoning.

—— eee
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES
The use of networks to represent probabilistic information began early in the twentieth century,

with the work of Sewall Wright on the probabilistic analysis of genetic inheritance and animal
growth factors (Wright, 1921; Wright, 1934). One of his networks appears on the cover of this :
