  

Section 14.2.

Basic Probability Notation 421

 

      
  
 

PROBABILITY
DISTRIBUTION

‘CONDITIONAL
POSTERIOR

PRODUCT RULE

vector of values for the probabilities of each individual state ofthe weather. Given the preceding
values, for example, we would write

P( Weather) = {0.7, 0.2, 0.08, 0.02)

This statement defines a probability distribution for the random variable Weather.

We will also use expressions such as P( Weather, Cavity) to denote the probabilities of all
combinations ofthe values ofa set ofrandom variables. In this case, P( Weather, Cavity) denotes
a4 x 2 table of probabilities. We will see that this notation simplifies many equations.

We can also use logical connectives to make more complex sentences and assign probabil-
ities to them. For example,

P(Cavity A 7Insured)- 0.06
says there is an 6% chance that a patient has a cavity and has no insurance.

Conditional probability

Once the agent has obtained some evidence conceming the previously unknown propositions
making up the domain, prior probabilities are no longer applicable. Instead, we use conditional
or posterior probabilities, with the notation P(A\B). This is read as "the probability of A given
that all we know is B.” For example,

P(Cavity|Toothache) - 08
indicates that ifa patient is observed to have a toothache, and no other informationis yet available,
then the probability of the patient having a cavity will be 0.8. It is important to remember that
P(A\B) can only be used when all we know is B. As soon as we know C, then we must compute
P(A\B A C) instead of P(A|B). A prior probability P/4) can be thought of as a special case of
conditional probability P(A] ), where the probability is conditioned on no evidence

We can also use the P notation with conditional probabilities. P(X\ Y) is a two-dimensional
table giving the values of P(X =x;|Y=y;) for each possible i,j. Conditional probabilities can be
defined in terms of unconditional probabilities. The equation
P(A AB)

P(B)

holds whenever P(B) > 0. This equation can also be written as

P(A A B) = P(A|B)P(B)
which is called the product rule. The product rule is perhaps easier to remember: it comes from
the fact that ford and B to be true, we need B to be true, and then 4 to be true given B. We can
also have it the other way around:

P(A 4 B) = P(B\A)P(A)
In some cases, it is easier to reason in terms of prior probabilities of conjunctions, but for the
most part, we will use conditional probabilities as our vehicle for probabilistic inference.

We can also extend our P notation to handle equations like these, providing a welcome
degree of conciseness. For example, we might write

P(X, Y) = PRX|Y)PCY)

P(A|B) = (14.1)

 
