Section 15.2.

The Semantics of Belief Networks 441

 

 

LOCALLY
‘STRUCTURED
SPARSE

 

Because each node is only connected to earlier nodes, this construction method guarantees that
the network is acyclic. Another important property of belief networks is that they contain no
redundant probability values, except perhaps for one entry in each row of each conditional
probability table. This means that it is impossible for the knowledge engineer or domain expert
to create a beliefnetwork that violates the axioms ofprobability. We will see examples of the
application of the construction method in the next section.

Compactness and node ordering

As well as being a complete and nonredundant representation of the domain, a beliefnetwork can
often be far more compact than the fulljoint. This property is what makes it feasible to handle
a large number of pieces of evidence without the exponential growth in conditional probability
values that we saw in the discussion of Bayesian updating in Section 14.4.

The compactness of belief networks is an example of a very general property of locally
structured (also called sparse) systems. In a locally structured system, each subcomponent
interacts directly with only a bounded number of other components, regardless of the total
number of components. Local structure is usually associated with linear rather than exponential
growth in complexity. In the case of belief networks, it is reasonable to suppose that in most
domains each random variable is directly influenced by at most k others, for some constant k. If
we assume Boolean variables for simplicity, then the amount of information needed to specify the
conditional probability table for a node will be at most 2‘ numbers, so the complete network can
be specified by n2‘ numbers. In contrast, the joint contains 2" numbers. To make this concrete,
suppose we have 20 nodes (n= 20) and each has at most 5 parents (k = 5). Then the beliefnetwork
requires 640 numbers, but the full joint requires over a million.

There are domains in which each variable can be influenced directly by all the others, so
that the network is fully connected. Then specifying the conditional probability tables requires
the same amount of information as specifying the joint. The reduction in information that occurs
in practice comes about because real domains have a lot of structure, which networks are very
good at capturing. In some domains, there will be slight dependencies that should strictly be
included by adding a new link. But if these dependencies are very tenuous, then it may not be
worth the additional complexity in the network for the small gain in accuracy. For example, one
might object to our burglary network on the grounds that if there is an earthquake, then John
and Mary would not call even if they heard the alarm, because they assume the earthquake is the
cause. Whether to add the link from Earthquake to JohnCalls and MaryCalls(and thus enlarge
the tables) depends on the importance of getting more accurate probabilities compared to the cost
of specifying the extra information.

Even in a locally structured domain, constructing a locally structured belief network is
not a trivial problem. We require not only that each variable is directly influenced by only a
few others, but also that the network topology actually reflects those direct influences with the
appropriate set ofparents. Because of the way that the construction procedure works, the "direct
influencers” will have to be added to the network first ifthey are to become parents of the node
they influence. Therefore, the correct order to add nodes is to add the “rootcauses" first, then
the variables they influence, and so on until we reach the "leaves," which have no direct causal
influence on the other variables.
