Section 23.1.

Practical Applications 693

 

misled if the store closed at night without removing the banner. The two signs use the identical
word to convey different meanings. In some other languages, the same word or phrase would be
used in both cases, but in German, the sign on the door would be “Offen” while the banner would
read “Neu Eroffnet.”

The problem is that different languages categorize the world differently. A majority of the
situations that are covered by the English word "open" are also covered by the German word
“offen,” but the boundaries of the category differ across languages. In English, we extend the
basic meaning of "open" to cover open markets, open questions, and open job offerings. In
German, the extensions are different. Job offerings are “freie,” not open, but the concepts of
loose ice, private firms, and blank checks all use a form of "offen."

To do translation well, a translator (human or machine) must read the original text, under-
stand the situation to which it is referring, and find a corresponding text in the target language that
does a good job of describing the same or a similar situation. Often this involves a choice. For
example, the English word "you" can be translated into French as either the formal “vous” or the
informal “tu.” There is just no way that one can refer to the concept of "you" in French without
also making a choice of formal or informal. Translators (both machine and human) sometimes
find it difficult to make this choice.

Database access

The first major success for natural language processing (NLP) was in the area of database access.
Circa 1970, there were many databases on mainframe computers, but they could be accessed
only by writing complicated programs in obscure programming languages. The staff in charge
of the mainframes could not keep up with all the requests of users who needed to get at this data,
and the users understandably did not want to leam how to program their own requests. Natural
language interfaces provided a solution to this dilemma.

The first such interface was the LUNAR system, a prototype built by William Woods (1973)
and his team for the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. It enabled a geologist to ask questions
about the chemical analysis data of lunar rock and soil samples brought back by the Apollo
missions. The system was not put into real operational use, but in one test it successfully
answered 78% of queries such as

What is the average modal plagioclase concentration for lunar samples that contain
rubidium?
Fernando Pereira's CHAT system (Pereira, 1983) is at a similar level of complexity. It generates
the following answers to questions about a geographical database:

Q Which countries are bordered by two seas?

A: Egypt, Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia and Turkey

& What are the countries from which a river flows into the Black sea?

A: Romania, Soviet Union

Q: What is the total area of countries south of the equator and not in Australasia?
A: 10,228,000 square miles

Q: What is the ocean that borders African countries and that borders Asian countries?
A: Indian Ocean
