430

Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

145 WHERE Do PROBABILITIES COME FROM?

FREQUENTIST

OBJECTIMIST

SUBJECTIVIST

REFERENCE CLASS

There has been endless debate over the source and status ofprobability numbers. The frequentist
position is that the numbers can come only from experiments: ifwe test 100 people and find that
10 of them have a cavity, then we can say the probability of a cavity is approximately 0,1, A
great deal of work has gone into making such statistical assessments reliable. The objectivist
view is that probabilities are real aspects of the universe—propensities of objects to behave in
certain ways—rather than being just descriptions of an observer's degree of belief. In this view,
frequentist measurements are attempts to observe the real probability value. The subjectivist
view describes probabilities as a way of characterizing an agent's beliefs, rather than having any
external physical significance. This allows the doctor or analyst to make these numbers up, to
say, "In my opinion, I expect the probability of a cavity to be about 0.1.” Several more reliable
techniques, such as the betting systems described earlier, have also been developed for eliciting
probability assessments from humans.

In the end, even a strict frequentist position involves subjective analysis, so the difference
probably has little practical importance. Consider the probability that the sun will still exist
tomorrow (a question first raised by Hume's Inquiry). There are several ways to compute this:

The probability is undefined, because there has never been an experiment that tested the
existence ofthe sun tomorrow.

The probability is 1, because in all the experiments that have been done (on past days) the
sun has existed.

The probability is 1 —e, where e is the proportion of stars in the universe that go supernova
and explode per day.

The probability is (d+ 1 )/(d +2), where dis the number of days that the sun has existed so
far. (This formula is due to Laplace.)

though we have never observed another star with those exact properties.
The first three of these methods are frequentist, whereas the last two are subjective. But even if

The probability can be derived from the type, age, size, and temperature of the sun, even 3

you prefer not to allow subjective methods, the choice of which of the first three experiments to ;

use is a subjective choice known as the reference class problem. It is the same problem faced
by the doctor who wants to know the chances that a patient has a particular disease. The doctor

wants to consider other patients who are similar in important ways—age, symptoms, perhaps

sex and see what proportion of them had the disease. But if the doctor considered everything
that is known about the patient—weight to the nearest gram, hair color, maternal grandmother s
maiden name—the result would be that there are no other patients who are exactly the same, and

thus no reference class from which to collect experimental data. This has been a vexing problem 4

in the philosophy of science. Carnap (along with other philosophers) tried in vain to find a way
of reducing theories to objective truth—to show how a series of experiments necessarily leads
to one theory and not another. The approach we will take in the next chapter is to minimize the
number of probabilities that need to be assessed, and to maximize the number of cases available
for each assessment, by taking advantage of independence relationships in the domain

 
