94 Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

 

 

HISTORY OF "HEURISTIC"

By now the space aliens had mastered my own language, but they still made
simple mistakes like using “hermeneutic” when they meant "heuristic."
—a Louisiana factory worker in Woody Alien's The UFO Menace

   

The word "heuristic" is derived from the Greek verb heuriskein, meaning "to find"
or “to discover." Archimedes is said to have run naked down the street shouting
“Heureka’ (I have found it) after discovering the principle of flotation in his bath.
Later generations converted this to Eureka.

The technical meaning of "heuristic" has undergone several changes in the history
of AI. In 1957, George Polya wrote an influential book called How to Solve Itthat used
"heuristic" to refer to the study of methods for discovering and inventing problem-
solving techniques, particularly for the problem of coming up with mathematical
proofs. Such methods had often been deemed not amenable to explication.

Some people use heuristic as the opposite of algorithmic. For example, Newell,
Shaw, and Simon stated in 1963,"A process that may solve a given problem, but offers
no guarantees of doing so, is called a heuristic for that problem." But note that there
is nothing random or nondeterministic about a heuristic search algorithm: it proceeds
by algorithmic steps toward its result. In some cases, there is no guarantee how long
the search will take, and in some cases, the quality of the solution is not guaranteed
either. Nonetheless, it is important to distinguish between “nonalgorithmic” and "not
precisely characterizable.”

Heuristic techniques dominated early applications of artificial intelligence. The
first "expert systems" laboratory, started by Ed Feigenbaum, Brace Buchanan, and
Joshua Lederberg at Stanford University, was called the Heuristic Programming
Project (HPP). Heuristics were viewed as "rules of thumb" that domain experts could
use to generate good solutions without exhaustive search. Heuristics were initially
incorporated directly into the structure of programs, but this proved too inflexible
when a large number of heuristics were needed. Gradually, systems were designed
that could accept heuristic information expressed as "rules," and rule-based systems
were born.

Currently, heuristic is most often used as an adjective, referring to any technique
that improves the average-case performance on a problem-solving task, but does
not necessarily improve the worst-case performance. In the specific area of search
algorithms, it refers to a function that provides an estimate of solution cost.

A good article on heuristics (and one on hermeneutics!) appears in the Encyclo-
pedia of AI (Shapiro, 1992).

 

 

 
