Section 3.2

Formulating Problems 61

 

seanc COST
sora. COST

Measuring problem-solving performance

The effectiveness ofa search can be measured in at least three ways. First, does it rind a solution
at all? Second, is it a good solution (one with a low path cost)? Third, what is the search cost
associated with the time and memory required to find a solution? The total cost of the search is
the sum ofthe path cost and the search cost.

For the problem of finding a route from Arad to Bucharest, the path cost might be pro-
portional to the total mileage of the path, perhaps with something thrown in for wear and tear
on different road surfaces. The search cost will depend on the circumstances. In a static en-
vironment, it will be zero because the performance measure is independent of time. If there is
some urgency to get to Bucharest, the environment is semidynamic because deliberating longer
will cost more. In this case, the search cost might vary approximately linearly with computation
time (at least for small amounts of time). Thus, to compute the total cost, it would appear that
we have to add miles and milliseconds. This is not always easy, because there is no "official
exchange rate" between the two. The agent must somehow decide what resources to devote to
search and what resources to devote to execution. For problems with very small state spaces, it
is easy to find the solution with the lowest path cost. But for large, complicated problems, there
is a trade-off to be made—the agent can search for a very long time to get an optimal solution,
or the agent can search for a shorter time and get a solution with a slightly larger path cost. The
issue of allocating resources will be taken up again in Chapter 16; for now, we concentrate on
the search itself.

Choosing states and actions

Now that we have the definitions out of the way, let us start our investigation of problems with
an easy one: "Drive from Arad to Bucharest using the roads in the map in Figure 3.3." An
appropriate state space has 20 states, where each state is defined solely by location, specified as
a city. Thus, the initial state is "in Arad" and the goal test is "is this Bucharest?" The operators
correspond to driving along the roads between cities

One solution is the path Arad to Sibiu to Rimnicu Vilcea to Pitesti to Bucharest. There are
lots of other paths that are also solutions, for example, via Lugoj and Craiova. To decide which
of these solutions is better, we need to know what the path cost function is measuring: it could
be the total mileage, or the expected travel time. Because our current map does not specify either
of these, we will use the number of steps as the cost function. That means that the path through
Sibiu and Fagaras, with a path cost of 3, is the best possible solution

The real art of problem solving is in deciding what goes into the description of the states
and operators and what is left out. Compare the simple state description we have chosen, "in
Arad," to an actual cross-country trip, where the state of the world includes so many things: the
travelling companions, what is on the radio, what there is to look at out of the window, the vehicle
being used for the trip, how fast it is going, whether there are any law enforcement officers nearby,
what time it is, whether the driver is hungry or tired or running out of gas, how far it is to the next

5 In theoretical computer science and in robotics, the search cost (the part you do before interacting with the environment)
is called the offline cost and the path cost is called the online cost.
