20.3 The van Emde Boas tree 547

stored in min does not appear in any of the clusters, but the element stored in max
does.

Since the base size is 2, a vEB(2) tree does not need the array A that the cor-
responding proto-vEB(2) structure has. Instead, we can determine its elements
from its min and max attributes. In a vEB tree with no elements, regardless of its
universe size u, both min and max are NIL.

Figure 20.6 shows a vEB(16) tree V holding the set {2,3,4,5,7, 14,15}. Be-
cause the smallest element is 2, V.min equals 2, and even though high(2) = 0, the
element 2 does not appear in the vEB(4) tree pointed to by V.cluster[0]: notice
that V.cluster[0].min equals 3, and so 2 is not in this vEB tree. Similarly, since
V.cluster[0].min equals 3, and 2 and 3 are the only elements in V.cluster[0], the
vEB(2) clusters within V. cluster[0] are empty.

The min and max attributes will turn out to be key to reducing the number of
recursive calls within the operations on vEB trees. These attributes will help us in
four ways:

1. The MINIMUM and MAXIMUM operations do not even need to recurse, for they
can just return the values of min or max.

2. The SUCCESSOR operation can avoid making a recursive call to determine
whether the successor of a value x lies within high(x). That is because x’s
successor lies within its cluster if and only if x is strictly less than the max
attribute of its cluster. A symmetric argument holds for PREDECESSOR and
min,

3. We can tell whether a vEB tree has no elements, exactly one element, or at least
two elements in constant time from its min and max values. This ability will
help in the INSERT and DELETE operations. If min and max are both NIL, then
the vEB tree has no elements. If min and max are non-NIL but are equal to each
other, then the vEB tree has exactly one element. Otherwise, both min and max
are non-NIL but are unequal, and the vEB tree has two or more elements.

4. If we know that a vEB tree is empty, we can insert an element into it by updating
only its min and max attributes. Hence, we can insert into an empty vEB tree in
constant time. Similarly, if we know that a vEB tree has only one element, we
can delete that element in constant time by updating only min and max. These
properties will allow us to cut short the chain of recursive calls.

Even if the universe size u is an odd power of 2, the difference in the sizes
of the summary vEB tree and the clusters will not turn out to affect the asymptotic
running times of the vVEB-tree operations. The recursive procedures that implement
the vEB-tree operations will all have running times characterized by the recurrence

T(u) < T( Vu) + OU). (20.4)
