798

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

‘SKELETONIZATION
‘SKELETON

 

ioal

Start

 

 

 

 

Figure 25.13 A vertical strip cell decomposition of the configuration space for a two-link
robot. The obstacles are dark blobs, the cells are rectangles, and the solution is contained within
the grey rectangles.

 

 

 

second difference is that the width of the cylinders is not fixed, but determined by the geometry
of the environmerit. This is a key aspect of the exact method. To be useful for planning, the cell
shapes must be kept simple. Otherwise, we could declare all of free space as a single cell. This
does not help because there is no simple way to move around in such a cell. The cells in the
cylindrical decomposition are easy to move in, because their left and right boundaries are straight
lines (although sometimes of zero length).

To construct a cylindrical decomposition of a two-dimensional set, we first find critical
points of the boundary. These are the points where the boundary curve is vertical. Equivalently,
imagine sweeping a vertical line from left to right across Figure 25.14. At every instant, the line
can be divided into segments that lie in free space or in the obstacle. Critical points are exactly
those points where segments split orjoin as the line moves. As the line moves within a cylindrical
cell, there are no splitting or joining events, and this makes it easy to plan paths within the cell
For example, to move from the left boundary to the right boundary ofa cylindrical cell, we could
use this sweeping line. A single segment of the line would always lie in this cell, and its midpoint
would give us the path we want.

Skeletonization methods

Rather than producing a decomposition into a finite number of discrete chunks of space, skele-
tonization methods collapse the configuration space into a one-dimensional subset, or skeleton.
They simplify the task of navigating in a high-dimensional space by requiring paths to lie along
the skeleton. The skeleton is essentially a web with a finite number of vertices, and paths within
the skeleton can be computed using graph search methods. If the start and goal points do not
lie on the skeleton, short path segments are computed joining them to the nearest point on it
Skeletonization methods are generally simpler than cell decomposition, because they provide a

 

 
