Section 22.1.

Communication as Action 657

 

INTENTION

GENERATION

SYNTHESIS

PERCEPTION

Let us look at these seven processes in the context of the example shown in Figure 22.1.

Intention. Somehow, the speaker decides that there is something that is worth saying to
the hearer. This often involves reasoning about the beliefs and goals of the hearer, so that the
utterance will have the desired effect. For our example, the speaker has the intention of having
the hearer know that the wumpus is no longer alive.

Generation. The speaker uses knowledge about language to decide what to say. In many
ways, this is harder than the inverse problem ofunderstanding (i.e., analysis and disambiguation)
Generation has not been stressed as much as understanding in AI, mainly because we humans
are anxious to talk to machines, but are not as excited about them talking back. For now, wejust
assume the hearer is able to choose the words "The wumpus is dead."

Synthesis. Most language-based AI systems synthesize typed output on a screen or paper,
which is a trivial task. Speech synthesis has been growing in popularity, and some systems are
beginning to sound human. In Figure 22.1, we show the agent synthesizing a string of sounds
written in the phonetic alphabet defined on page 758: “[thaxwahmpahsihzdeyd].” The details of
this notation are unimportant; the point is that the sounds that get synthesized are different from
the words that the agent generates. Also note that the words are run together; this is typical of
quickly spoken speech.

Perception. When the medium is speech, the perception step is called speech recognition;
when it is printing, it is called optical character recognition. Both have moved from being

 

SPEAKER
Intention: Generation: Synthesis:

Know(H,7 Alive(Wumpus,S3)) "The wumpus is dead" | {thaxwahmpahsihzdeyd]

HEARER
Perception: Ss Disambiguation:

"The wumpus is dead" N A Alive(Wumpus,S3)

Article Noun Verb Adjective
! I I I
The — wumpus is dead Incorporation:

(Semantic Interpretation): — Alive( Wumpus,Now)

Tired Wumpus, Now); TELL( KB,

(Pragmatic Interpretation): 5 Alive(Wumpus,s) | A’Ne(WumpusSs)

Tired( Wumpus, Ss)

 

 

 

Figure 22.1. Seven processes involved in communication, using the example sentence "The

 

 

wumpus is dead.”

 
