A88 Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

The value of information derives from the fact that with the information, one's course of
action may change to become more appropriate to the actual situation. One can discriminate
according to the situation, whereas without the information one has to do what's best on average
over the possible situations. In general, the value of a given piece of information is defined to be
the difference in expected value between best actions before and after information is obtained.

A general formula

It is simple to derive a general mathematical formula for the value of information. Usually, we
assume that exact evidence is obtained about the value of some random variable £j, so the phrase

eer eCT value of perfect information (VPI) is used. Let the agent's current knowledge be Z. Then the
value of the current best action a is defined by

EU(a{E) = max” U(Result;(A))P(Result(A)|E, Do(A))
a—

and the value of the new best action (after the new evidence Ej is obtained) will be

EU(ar,|E,E}) = max ) 7 U(Result{A)) P(Result(A)|E, Do(A), Ej)
7

But £ is a random variable whose value is currently unknown, so we must average over all
possible values ¢;; that we might discover for Hj, using our current beliefs about its value. The
value of discovering j is then defined. as
\
VPIe( Ej ( So PER en EVEU (oe, |E EF ex) ) ~~ BU(a|E)
VK 1

In order to get some intuition for this formula, consider the simple case where there are
only two actions A; and Az from which to choose. Their current expected utilities are U\ and U2.
The information j will yield some new expected utility Uj and U} for the actions, but before
we obtain Hj, we will have some probability distributions over the possible values of Uj and U}
(which we will assume are independent).

Suppose that 4| and Ao represent two different routes through a mountain range in winter.
A, is anice, straight highway through a low pass, and A is a winding dirt road over the top. Just
given this information, A is clearly preferable, because it is quite likely that the second route is
blocked by avalanches, whereas it is quite unlikely that the first route is blocked by traffic. U1 is
therefore clearly higher than U3. It is possible to obtain satellite reports Hj on the actual state of
each road, which would give new expectations U and U, for the two crossings. The distributions
for these expectations are shown in Figure 16.6(a). Obviously, in this case, it is not worth the
expense of obtaining satellite reports, because it is so unlikely that they will cause a change of
plan. With no change of plan, information has no value

Now suppose that we are choosing between two different winding dirt roads of slightly
different lengths, and we are carrying a seriously injured passenger. Then, although U\ and U2
may be quite close, the distributions of Ujand U; are very broad. There is a significant possibility
that the second route will turn out to be’ clear whereas the first is blocked, and in this case the
difference in utilities will be very high. The VPI formula indicates that it might be worth getting |
the satellite reports. This situation is shown in Figure 16.6(b).

 
