472

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

EXPECTED UTIUTY

MAXIMUM EXPECTED
umluTY

 

‘ONE-SHOT
DECISIONS:

We will use the notation U(S) to denote the utility of state S according to the agent that
is making the decisions. For now, we will consider states as complete snapshots of the world,
similar to the situations of Chapter 7. This will simplify our initial discussions, but it can become
rather cumbersome to specify the utility of each possible state separately. In Section 16.4, we
will see how states can be decomposed under some circumstances for the purpose of utility
assignment.

An nondeterministic action A will have possible outcome states Resulti(A), where i
ranges over the different outcomes. Prior to execution of 4, the agent assigns probability
P(Result;(A)|Do(A), Eto each outcome, where E summarizes the agent's available evidence
about the world, and Do(A) is the proposition that action A is executed in the current state.
Then we can calculate the expected utility of the action given the evidence, FU/(A|F), using the
following formula:

EU(A\E) = > PeResult,(A)|E, DotA) U (Result(A)) (16.1)

The principle of maximum expected utility (MEU) says that a rational agent should choose an
action that maximizes the agent's expected utility.

Ina sense, the MEU principle could be seen as defining all of AI.' All an intelligent agent
has to do is calculate the various quantities, maximize over its actions, and away it goes. But this
does not mean that the AI problem is solved by the definition!

Although the MEU principle defines the right action to take in any decision problem,
the computations involved can be prohibitive, and sometimes it is difficult even to formulate
the problem completely. Knowing the initial state of the world requires perception, leaming,
knowledge representation, and inference. Computing P(Result;(A)\Do(A), E) requires a complete
causal model of the world and, as we saw in Chapter 15, NP-complete updating of belief nets.
Computing the utility ofeach state, U(Resuly(A)), often requires search or planning, because an
agent does not know how good a state is until it knows where it can get to from that state. So,
decision theory is not a panacea that solves the AI problem. But it does provide a framework in
which we can see where all the components ofan AI system fit in.

The MEU principle has a clear relation to the idea of performance measures introduced in
Chapter 2. The basic idea is very simple. Consider the possible environments that could lead to
an agent having a given percept history, and consider the different possible agents that we could
design. Jfan agent maximizes a utilityfinction that correctly reflects the performance measure
by which its behavior is beingjudged, then it will achieve the highestpossible performance score,
ifwe average over the possible environments in which the agent could be placed. This is the
central justification for the MEU principle itself.

In this chapter, we will only be concerned with single or one-shot decisions, whereas
Chapter 2 defined performance measures over environment histories, which usually involve
many decisions. In the next chapter, which covers the case of sequential decisions, we will show
how these two views can be reconciled.

1 Actually, itis not quite true that Al is, even in principle, a field that attempts to build agents that maximize their expected
utility. We believe, however, that understanding such agents is a good place to start. This is a difficult methodological
question, to which we retum in Chapter 27

 
