Chapter 2. Intelligent Agents

 

umuty

rules. Of course, the goal-based agent is also more flexible with respect to reaching different
destinations. Simply by specifying a new destination, we can get the goal-based agent to come
up with a new behavior. The reflex agent's mules for when to turn and when to go straight will
only work for a single destination; they must all be replaced to go somewhere new.

Figure 2.11 shows the goal-based agent's structure. Chapter 13 contains detailed agent
programs for goal-based agents.

 

 

What the world

& is like now
What it will be like

if | do action A

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2.11 An agent with explicit goals.

 

 

 

Utility-based agents

Goals alone are not really enough to generate high-quality behavior. For example, there are many
action sequences that will get the taxi to its destination, thereby achieving the goal, but some
are quicker, safer, more reliable, or cheaper than others. Goals just provide a crude distinction
between "happy" and "unhappy" states, whereas a more general performance measure should
allow a comparison of different world states (or sequences of states) according to exactly how
happy they would make the agent if they could be achieved. Because "happy" does not sound
very scientific, the customary terminology is to say that if one world state is preferred to another,
then it has higher utility for the agent.®

Utility is therefore a function that maps a state” onto a real number, which describes the
associated degree of happiness. A complete specification of the utility function allows rational
decisions in two kinds of cases where goals have trouble. First, when there are conflicting goals,
only some of which can be achieved (for example, speed and safety), the utility function specifies
the appropriate trade-off. Second, when there are several goals that the agent can aim for, none

8 The word “utility” here refers to "the quality of being useful,” not to the electric company or water works
% Or sequence of states, if we are measuring the utility of an agent over the long run.
