Section 15,5, Knowledge Engineering for Uncertain Reasoning 457

 

have an initial set of factors, we can extend the model by asking, "What directly influences
this factor?" and "What does this factor directly influence?"
« Decide on a vocabulary of random variables. Determine the variables you want to use,
and what values they can take on. Sometimes it is useful to quantize a continuous-valued.
variable into discrete ranges
Encode general knowledge about the dependence between variables. Here there is a qual-
itative part, where we say what variables are dependent on what others, and a quantitative
part, where we specify probability values. The values can come either from the knowledge
engineer's (or expert's) subjective experience, or from measurements of frequencies in a
database of past experiences, or from some combination of the two.
Encode a description of the specific problem instance. For example, we say that the
particular patient we are interested in is a 34-year-old female with moderate to severe pain
in the lowerjaw.
Pose queries to the inference procedure and get answers. The most common query is to
ask for the value of some hypothesis variable. For example, given the patient's symptoms,
what is the probability of gum disease, or of any other disorder. It is also common to use
sensitivity analysis to determine how robust the answers are with respect to perturbations
in the conditional probability table values.

.

e

Case study: The Pathfinder system

PATHFINDER is a diagnostic expert system for lymph-node diseases, built by members of the
Stanford Medical Computer Science program during the 1980s (see Heckerman (1991) for a
discussion). The system deals with over 60 diseases and over 100 disease findings (symptoms
and test results). Four versions of the system have been built, and the history is instructive
because it shows a trend toward increasing sophistication in reasoning with uncertainty.

PATHFINDER I was arule-based system written with the logical metareasoning system MRS.
It did not do any uncertain reasoning.

PATHFINDER II experimented with several methods for uncertain reasoning, including
certainty factors and the Dempster-Shafer theory (see Section 15.6). The results showed that
a simplified Bayesian model (in which all disease findings were assumed to be independent)
outperformed the other methods. One interesting result of the experiment was that 10% of cases
were diagnosed incorrectly because the expert had given a probability of zero to an unlikely but
possible event.

PATHFINDER III used the same simplified Bayesian model, but with a reassessment of the
probabilities using a different protocol and paying attention to low-probability events.

PATHFINDER IV used a belief network to represent the dependencies that could not be
handled in the simplified Bayesian model. The author of the system sat down with an expert
physician and followed the knowledge engineering approach described earlier. Deciding on a
vocabulary took 8 hours, devising the topology of the network took 35 hours, and making the
14,000 probability assessments took another 40 hours. The physician reportedly found it easy to

SARE, think in terms of probabilities on causal links, and a concept called similarity networks made
it easier for the expert to assess a large number of probabilities. The network constructed in this
