Section 22.1.

Communication as Action 6.5

 

STRINGS
TERMINAL SYMBOLS

PHRASE STRUCTURE

NOUN PHRASE

VERB PHRASE
‘SENTENCE

NONTERMINAL
‘SYMBOLS

REWRITE RULES

languages, we will make use of all the tools of formal language theory, starting with the Backus-
Naur form (BNF) notation, which is described in Appendix B on page 854.

A formal language is defined as a set of strings, where each string is a sequence of symbols
taken from a finite set called the terminal symbols. For English, the terminal symbols include
words like a, aardvark, aback, abacus, and about 400,000 more.

One of the confusing things in working with both formal and natural languages is that
there are so many different formalisms and notations for writing grammars (see the Historical
Notes section for this chapter). However, most of them are similar in that they are based on
the idea of phrase structure—that strings are composed of substrings called phrases, which
come in different categories. For example, the phrases "the wumpus," "the king," and "the agent
in the corner" are all examples of the category noun phrase (or NP for short). There are two
reasons for identifying phrases in this way. First, phrases are convenient handles on which we can
attach semantics. Second, categorizing phrases helps us to describe the allowable strings of the
language. We can say that any ofthe noun phrases can combine with a verb phrase (or VP) such
as "is dead" to form a phrase of category sentence (or 5). Without the intermediate notions ofnoun
phrase and verb phrase, it would be difficult to explain why "the wumpus is dead" is a sentence
whereas "wumpus the dead is" is not. Grammatical categories are essentially posited as part ofa
scientific theory of language that attempts to account for the difference between grammatical and
ungrammatical categories. It is theoretically possible, although perhaps unlikely, that in some
future theory of the English language, the NP and VP categories may not exist.

Categories such as NP, VP, and S are called nonterminal symbols. In the BNF notation,
rewrite rules consist of a single nonterminal symbol on the left-hand side, and a sequence of
terminals or nonterminals on the right-hand side. The meaning of a rule such as

S — NP VP

is that we can take any phrase categorized as a NP, append to it any phrase categorized as a VP,
and the result will be a phrase categorized as an S.

The component steps of communication

A typical communication episode, in which speaker S wants to convey proposition P to hearer H
using words W, is composed of seven processes. Three take place in the speaker:

Intention: 5 wants H to believe P (where S typically believes P)

Generation: S chooses the words W (because they express the meaning P)

Synthesis: 5 utters the words W (usually addressing them to H)

Four take place in the hearer:

Perception: H perceives W (ideally W’= W, but misperception is possible)

Analysis: A infers that W has possible meanings P;,..., P,, (words and
phrases can have several meanings)

Disambiguation: H infers that S intended to convey P, (where ideally Pj = P,
but misinterpretation is possible)

Incorporation: H decides to believe P, (or rejects it if it is out of line with
what H already believes)
