Section 23.4.

Scaling Up the Grammar 709

 

So far, the rules are simple, and the mapping from strings to quasi-logical form is easy. The hard
part is translating from quasi-logical form to logical form. Here are two examples of the logical
form we would like to end up with:

Three women carried a piano.

As Cardinality(s= 3 AVw (w£s = Woman(w))
A dp Piano(p) Ade (e € Carry,(s,p, Past)))

(There is a set of 3 women; this set carried the piano.)

Three women carried a baby.
35 Cardinality(s)= 3 AVw ((wGs > Woman(w))
Ab Baby(b) A Je (e € Carry2(w,p, Past)))

(There is a set of 3 women; each woman in the set carried a baby.)
These examples are ambiguous. In the most likely interpretations, it is the set of women, s,
who are carrying the piano together in the first example, whereas in the second example, each
woman is separately carrying a different baby. The subscripts on Carry indicate different senses.
To account for these two different interpretations, we will have to make the rule for translating
[3 w Woman(w)]capable of equating either the variable denoting the set (s) or the variable
denoting the elements of the set (w) with the variable representing the subject of the verb phrase.

Noun phrases revisited

Now we look at the rules for noun phrases. The rule for pronouns is unchanged from Chapter 22,
and the old rule for Article plus Noun could be updated simply by changing Article to Det and
including case information and agreement in person and number, yielding the following rule:

NP(case, Person(3), number, [qx sem(x)])— Det(number, q) Noun(number, sem)

We stick to the convention that the semantics is always the last argument. The case variable
is unbound, indicating that the NP can be used in either the subjective or objective case. The
number variable can take on the values Singular or Plural, and the rule says that the Det and Noun
must have the same number. For example, "a dog" and "those dogs" are grammatical because
they agree in number, but "a dogs" and "those dog" are ungrammatical because they disagree.
Note that some determiners (like "the") and some nouns (like "sheep") can be either singular or
plural.

Besides playing a role inside the noun phrase, the number variable is also important
externally: in the S — NP VP rule, the subject noun phrase must agree with the verb phrase
in number and person. All nouns are in the third person, which we have denoted Person(3).
Pronouns have more variety; the pronoun "you," for example, is in the second person and "I" is in
the third. Verbs are also marked for person and number. For example, the verb "am" is Singular
and Person(I), and therefore "I am" is grammatical, while "you am" is not. Here is a rule that
enforces subject/verb agreement:

S(rel(obj))— NP(Subject, person, number, obj) VP(personjumber, rel)

It is also possible to form a noun phrase from a noun with no determiner. There are several ways
to do this. One is with a name, such as "John" or "Berkeley." There are several choices for the
