section 3.8. Summary 4
aaa

3.8 SUMMARY

This chapter has introduced methods that an agent can use when it is not clear which immediate
action is best. In such cases, the agent can consider possible sequences of actions; this process is
called search.

Before an agent can start searching for solutions, it must formulate a goal and then use the
goal to formulate a problem.

A problem consists of four parts: the initial state, a set of operators, a goal test function,
and a path cost function. The environment of the problem is represented by a state space.
A path through the state space from the initial state to a goal state is a solution.

In real life most problems are ill-defined; but with some analysis, many problems can fit
into the state space model.

A single general search algorithm can be used to solve any problem; specific variants of
the algorithm embody different strategies.

Search algorithms are judged on the basis of completeness, optimality, time complexity,
and space complexity. Complexity depends on b, the branching factor in the state space,
and d, the depth of the shallowest solution.

Breadth-first search expands the shallowest node in the search tree first. It is complete,
optimal for unit-cost operators, and has time and space complexity of O(b"). The space
complexity makes it impractical in most cases

Uniform-cost search expands the least-cost leaf node first. It is complete, and unlike
breadth-first search is optimal even when operators have differing costs. Its space and time
complexity are the same as for breadth-first search.

Depth-first search expands the deepest node in the search tree first. It is neither complete
nor optimal, and has time complexity of O(b")and space complexity of O(bm), where m is
the maximum depth. In search trees of large or infinite depth, the time complexity makes
this impractical.

Depth-limited search places a limit on how deep a depth-first search can go. Ifthe limit
happens to be equal to the depth of shallowest goal state, then time and space complexity
are minimized.

Iterative deepening search calls depth-limited search with increasing limits until a goal is
found. It is complete and optimal, and has time complexity of O(b“)and space complexity
of O(bd).

Bidirectional search can enormously reduce time complexity, but is not always applicable.
Its memory requirements may be impractical.
