Section 18.3.

Learning Decision Trees 531

 

design of learning algorithms for belief networks is also a very active area of research, and a
brief sketch is provided in Section 19.6.

The choice of representation for the desired function is probably the most important issue
facing the designer ofa learning agent. As well as affecting the nature of the learning algorithm,
it can affect whether the problem is feasible at all. As with reasoning, in learning there is
a fundamental trade-off between expressiveness—is the desired function representable in the
representation language—and efficiency—ishe leaming problem going to be tractable for a
given choice of representation language. If one chooses to learn sentences in a nice, expressive
language such as first-order logic, then one will probably have to pay a heavy penalty in terms of
both computation time and the number of examples required to leam a good set of sentences.

By “a good set of sentences," we mean a set that not only correctly reflects the experiences
the agent has already had, but also one that correctly predicts its future experiences. Therein
lies one of the most vexing philosophical problems of all time. How can one possibly know that
one's learning algorithm has produced a theory that will correctly predict the future? And if one
does not, then how can one say that the algorithm is any good? Certainly, ifone cannot say for
sure that an algorithm is any good, then one cannot hope to design good learning algorithms!
In Section 18.6, we discuss a mathematical approach to the study of induction algorithms that
provides tentative answers to these questions, and also sheds considerable light on the complexity
of leaming different kinds of function representations.

18.3 LEARNING DECISION TREES

Decision TREE

GOAL PREDICATE

Decision tree induction is one ofthe simplest and yet most successful forms of learning algorithm.
It serves as a good introduction to the area of inductive learning, and is easy to implement. We
first describe the performance element, and then show how to leam it. Along the way, we will
introduce many of the ideas and terms that appear in all areas of inductive learning.

Decision trees as performance elements

A decision tree takes as input an object or situation described by a set ofproperties, and outputs a
yes/no "decision." Decision trees therefore represent Boolean functions. Functions with a larger
range of outputs can also be represented, but for simplicity we will usually stick to the Boolean
case. Each internal node in the tree corresponds to a test of the value of one of the properties,
and the branches from the node are labelled with the possible values of the test. Each leaf node
in the tree specifies the Boolean value to be returned if that leafis reached.

As an example, consider the problem of whether to wait for a table ata restaurant. The aim
here is to leam a definition for the goal predicate’ Wil/Wait,where the definition is expressed as a

4 The term goak concept is often used. Unfortunately, the word "concept" has been used in so many different ways in
machine learning that we think it best to avoid it for a few years.
