644 Chapter 21. Knowledge in Learning

 

2. Equality and inequality literals: these relate variables already appearing in the clause. For
example, we might add z#x. These literals can also include user-specified constants. In the
family domain, there will not usually be any such "special" constants, whereas in leaming
arithmetic, we might use 0 and 1, and in list functions, the empty list [ ].

3. Arithmetic comparisons: when dealing with functions of continuous variables, literals such
as x > y and y < = can be added. As in decision-tree learning, one can also use constant
threshold values that are chosen to maximize the discriminatory power of the test.

All this adds up to a very large branching factor in the search space (see Exercise 21.6). Imple-
mentations of FOIL may also use type information to restrict the hypothesis space. For example,
ifthe domain included numbers as well as people, type restrictions would prevent NEW-LITERALS
from generating literals such as Parent(x,n), where x is a person and n is a number.

CHOOSE-LITERAL uses a heuristic somewhat similar to information gain (see page 541) to
decide which literal to add. The exact details are not so important here, particularly as a number
of different variations are currently being tried out. One interesting additional feature of FOIL is
the use of Ockham’s razor to eliminate some hypotheses. Ifa clause becomes longer (according
to some metric) than the total length of the positive examples that the clause explains, that clause
is not considered as a potential hypothesis. This technique provides a way to avoid overcomplex
clauses that fit noise in the data. For an explanation of the connection between noise and clause
length, see Section 19.6.

FOIL and its relatives have been used to leam a wide variety of definitions. One of the
most impressive demonstrations (Quinlan and Cameron-Jones, 1993) involved solving a long
sequences of exercises on list-processing functions from Bratko's (1986) Prolog textbook. In
each case, the program was able to leam a correct definition of the function from a small set of
examples, using the previously leamed functions as background knowledge.

21.5 __ SUMMARY

This chapter has investigated various ways in which prior knowledge can help an agent to learn
from new experiences.

The use of prior knowledge in learning leads to a picture of cumulative learning, in which
learning agents improve their learning ability as they acquire more knowledge.

Prior knowledge helps learning by eliminating otherwise consistent hypotheses and by
"filling in" the explanation of examples, thereby allowing for shorter hypotheses. These
contributions improve both the sample complexity and computation complexity of learning.

Understanding the different logical roles played by prior knowledge, as expressed by
entailment constraints, helps to define a variety of learning techniques.

Explanation-based learning (EBL) extracts general rules from single examples by ey-
plaining the examples and generalizing the explanation. It provides a deductive method to
tum first-principles knowledge into useful, efficient, special-purpose expertise
