Section 16.6.

The Value of Information 487

 

16.6 THE VALUE OF INFORMATION

INEQRMATION VALUE
THEORY

In the preceding analysis, we have assumed that all relevant information, or at least all available
information, is provided to the agent before it makes its decision. In practice, this is hardly ever
the case. One ofthe most importantparts ofdecision making is knowing what questions to ask.
For example, a doctor cannot expect to be provided with the results of allpossible diagnostic tests
and questions at the time a patient first enters the consulting room.® Tests are often expensive and
sometimes hazardous (both directly and because of associated delays). Their importance depends
on two factors: whether the different possible outcomes would make a significant difference to
the optimal course of action, and the likelihood of the various outcomes.

This section describes information value theory, which enables an agent to choose what
information to acquire. The acquisition of information is achieved by sensing actions, as
described in Chapter 13. Because the agent's utility function seldom refers to the contents of the
agent's internal state, whereas the whole purpose of sensing actions is to affect the intemal state,
we must evaluate sensing actions by their effect on the agent's subsequent actions. Information
value theory is therefore a special kind of sequential decision making.

A simple example

Suppose an oil company is hoping to buy one of n indistinguishable blocks of ocean drilling
rights. Let us assume further that exactly one of the blocks contains oil worth C dollars, and that
the price ofeach block is C/ndollars. If the company is risk-neutral, then it will be indifferent
between buying a block or not

Now suppose that a seismologist offers the company the results ofa survey of block number
3, which indicates definitively whether the block contains oil. How much should the company
be willing to pay for the information? The way to answer this question is to examine what the
company would do if it had the information:

* With probability I/n, the survey will show that block 3 contains the oil. In this case, the
company will buy block 3 for C/n dollars, and make a profit of C— Cin = (n — 1)C/n
dollars.

* With probability (n — \)/n, the survey will show that the block contains no oil, in which
case the company will buy a different block. Now the probability of finding oil in one of
the other blocks changes from 1/n to V(n - 1), so the company makes an expected profit
of Clin - 1) - C/n= Cin - 1) dollars.

Now we can calculate the expected profit given the survey information:
1 Mm-NC.n-1 Cc
x + x — =
n n n nin— 1)

Therefore, the company should be willing to pay the seismologist up to C/n dollars for the
information: the information is worth as much as the block itself.

Cn

 

9 In the United States, the only question that is always asked beforehand is whether the patient has insurance
