440

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

A method for constructing belief networks

Equation (15.1) defines what a given belief network means. It does not, however, explain how to
construct a belief network such that the resulting joint distribution is a good representation of a
given domain. We will now show that Equation (15.1) implies certain conditional independence
relationships that can be used to guide the knowledge engineer in constructing the topology of
the network. First, we rewrite the joint in terms of a conditional probability using the definition
of conditional probability:

POs «125 Xn) = POnlnaty oes MP On—-15-- 5 m1)

Then we repeat this process, reducing each conjunctive probability to a conditional probability
anda smaller conjunction. We end up with one big product:

PO sees Xn) = PO pEn—1s oes MVP Qn 1X25 os 1) POL POI)

[] Pails... xp
i=l

 

Comparing this with Equation (15.1), we see that the specification of the joint is equivalent to the
general assertion that

P(X|Xi-1, «--. X1) = P(Xi|Parents(X;)) (15.2)

provided that Parents(X;)C {xj-1,.....x1}. This last condition is easily satisfied by labelling
the nodes in any order that is consistent with the partial order implicit in the graph structure.

What the preceding equation says is that the beliefnetworkis a correct representation of the
domain only if each node is conditionally independent of its predecessors in the node ordering,
given its parents. Hence, in order to construct a belief network with the correct structure for the
domain, we need to choose parents for each node such that this property holds. Intuitively, the
parents of node X; should contain all those nodes in X;, ..., X;_, that directly influence X;. For
example, suppose we have completed the network in Figure 15.1 except for the choice of parents
for MaryCalls. MaryCallsis certainly influenced by whether or not there is a Burglary or an
Earthquake, butit is not directly influenced. Intuitively, our knowledge of the domain tells us that
these events only influence Mary’s calling behavior through their effect on the alarm. Also, given
the state of the alam, whether or not John calls has no influence on Mary's calling. Formally
speaking, we believe that the following conditional independence statement holds:

P(MaryCallsJohnCalls, Alarm, Earthquake, Burglary) = P(MaryCalls|Alarm)
The general procedure for incremental network construction is as follows:
1. Choose the set of relevant variables X, that describe the domain.
2. Choose an ordering for the variables.
3. While there are variables left:
(a) Pick a variable X; and add a node to the network for it.
(b) Set Parents(X;)to some minimal set of nodes already in the net such that the condi-

tional independence property (15.2) is satisfied.
(c) Define the conditional probability table for X;.

 
