508

Chapter 17. Making Complex Decisions

 

17.4 DECISION-THEORETIC AGENT DESIGN

DECISIONCYCLE

‘STATE VARIABLES

 

 

 

 

In this section, we outline a comprehensive approach to agent design for environments with
uncertainty. It ties together belief and decision networks with the techniques for sequential
decision problems discussed earlier. It addresses the problem of large state spaces by decomposing
the state description into a set of random variables, much as the planning algorithms in Part IV
used logical representations to decompose the state space used by search algorithms. We begin
by describing the basic approach, which harks back to the sketch of the utility-based agent
provided in Chapter 2. We then show how sensing works in an uncertain, partially accessible
environment. Section 17.5 extends the idea of beliefnetworks to cover environments that change
over time, and then Section 17.6 includes decisions, providing a complete agent design.

The decision cycle of a rational agent

Figure 17.8 repeats the schematic agent design for rational agents first shown in Figure 14.1. At
each step, the processing done by the agent is called the decision cycle. In this section, we will
make components of the cycle more precise. We begin with the first step, that of determining the
current state of the world.

 

function DECISION-THEORETIC-AGENT( percept) returns action

calculate updated probabilities for current state based on

available evidence including current percept and previous action
calculate outcome probabilities for actions

given action descriptions and probabilities of current states
select action with highest expected utility

given probabilities of outcomes and utility information
return action

 

 

 

 

Figure 178 _A decision-theoretic agent (repeat of earlier figure).

 

 

 

In general, we will assume that we have a set of random variables X, that refer to the
current state of the world. We will call these the state variables. For example, if the agent is a
robot moving in the X-Y plane, then we might use X, and Y, to refer to the robot's position at
time t, and X, and Y, to refer to the velocity. Notice the similarity to the propositional version
of situation calculus used in Chapter 6 for the first logical-agent design. This similarity is not
a coincidence: probability theory essentially combines propositional logic with uncertainty. As
in situation calculus, it is important to distinguish between beliefs about a changing world and
changing beliefs about a given world. The former is achieved by having different propositions
referring to different times, and the latter by conditioning the probability of a given proposition
on additional evidence. Thus, if the percept history up to and including time f is Ey, .... Ex

 
