Section 15,6.

Other Approaches to Uncertain Reasoning 461

 

CERTAINTY FACTORS

The bad news for truth-functional systems is that the properties of Jocality, detachment,
and truth-finctionality are simply not appropriatefor uncertain reasoning. Let us look at truth-
functionality first. Let H; be the event of a coin coming up heads on a fair flip, let 7\ be the
event of the coin coming up tails on that same flip, and let H2 be the event of the coin coming
up heads on a second flip. Clearly, all three events have the same probability, 0.5, and so a
truth-functional system must assign the same belief to the conjunction of any two of them. But
we can see that the probability of the conjunction depends on the events themselves, and notjust
on their probabilities:

 

P(AY P(B) P(A V By

P(H,)=0.5|| PC, V H1) = 0.50
P(Hy} = 0.5] P(T;) = 0.5 || PH; VT) = 1.00
P(H2)= 0.5 || PCH V Hz) = 0.75

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

It gets worse when we chain evidence together. Truth-functional systems have rules of the form
A +B, which allow us to compute the belief in B as a function of the belief in the rule and the
belief in 4. Both forward- and backward-chaining systems can be devised. The belief in the
tule is assumed to be constant, and is usually specified by the knowledge engineer, for example,
A oy B.

Consider the wet-grass situation from Section 15.4. If we wanted to be able to do both
causal and diagnostic reasoning, we would need the two rules:

Rain ~ WetGrass and WetGrass ~ Rain

Ifwe are not careful, these two rules will act ina feedback loop so that evidence for Rain increases
the beliefin WetGrass, which in turn increases the belief in Rain even more. Clearly, uncertain
reasoning systems need to keep track of the paths along which evidence is propagated.

Intercausal reasoning (or explaining away) is also tricky. Consider what happens when we
have the two rules:

Sprinkler — WetGrass and WetGrass + Rain

Suppose we see that the sprinkler is on. Chaining forward through our rules, this increases the
belief that the grass will be wet, which in turn increases the belief that it is raining. But this
is ridiculous: the fact that the sprinkler is on explains away the wet grass, and should reduce
the belief in rain. In a truth-functional system, the transitively derived rule Sprinkler + Rain is
unavoidable

Given these difficulties, how is it possible that truth-functional systems were ever consid-
ered useful? The answer lies in restricting the tasks required ofthem, and in carefully engineering
the rule base so that undesirable interactions do not occur. The most famous example ofa truth-
functional system for uncertain reasoning is the certainty factors model, which was developed
for the MYCIN medical diagnosis program and widely used in expert systems of the late 1970s and
1980s. Almost all uses of certainty factors involved rule sets that were either purely diagnostic
(as in MYCIN) or purely causal. Furthermore, evidence was only entered at the "roots" of the rule
set, and most rule sets were singly connected. Heckerman (1986) has shown that under these
circumstances, a minor variation on certainty-factor inference was exactly equivalent to Bayesian
