708

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

DETERMINER

This is called intersective semantics, because the meaning of "smelly wumpus" is the intersection
of smelly things and things that are wumpuses. Both nouns and adjectives are represented by
predicates that define categories; this was the first scheme for representing categories shown in
Section 8.4. If all adjectives had intersective semantics, it would be easy to handle them. We
would add a rule for Noun, saying it can be composed of an Adjective and another Noun:
Noun(Xx sem,(x) A sem (x)) + Adjective(sem,)Noun(sem2)

Unfortunately, the semantic relation between adjective and noun is often more complicated than
just intersection. For example:

+ A "red book" has a red cover, but not red pages or lettering. A "red pen" has red ink or a
red body. In general, color adjectives refer to a major, salient, visible part of the object.
"Red hair" is orangish, not red. This implies that the modification is dependent on both
the noun and the adjective.

A "ted herring" is an irrelevant distraction, not a fish nor something red. In this case, the
phrase has an idiomatic meaning that is completely independent of its parts.

A "small moon" is bigger than a "large molecule" and is clearly not the intersection of
small things and things that are moons.

A "mere child" is the same as a child: you cannot take a group of children and separate
them into the children and the mere children. The adjective "mere" refers to the speaker's
attitude about the noun, and not to actual properties of the noun at all.

In “alleged murderer," the adjective again says something about the attitude of some
person (not necessarily the speaker), but the phrase makes no commitment as to whether
the referent actually is a murderer.

"Real leather" is no different from "leather," but the adjective is used when the listener
might expect artificial leather.

A "fake gun" is not a gun at all. Its appearance is similar to a gun's, but it lacks the
functional properties.

These kinds of semantic relations can be handled by reifying the categories that were formerly
represented as predicates. This is the second scheme for representing categories in Section 8.4.
For example, instead of the predicate Gun, we will use the object Guns to represent the class ofall
guns. Then "a gun" is represented by 3 g (g 6 Guns) and "a fake gun" is 3g (g G Fake(Guns).

Determiners

In Chapter 22, we showed how articles such as "a" and "the" can be part of noun phrases.
Articles are just one type ofthe more general class of determiner, which we abbreviate as Der.
Determiners can become quite complicated, as in “[p,,my brother's neighbor's] dog" and “[per
all but three of her many] good friends." For our £; language, we allow only one new kind of
determiner, a number, as in "three dogs." We will use the quasi-logical form [3x Dog(x)]to
represent this. This gives us the following grammar rules:

Det(q) — Article(q)

Det(q) — Number(q)

NP(Iqx noun(x)}) + Det(q) Noun(noun)

 
