152. cuaPrernve Basic Computer Organization and Design

output register

set to 1 when new information is available in the input device and is cleared
to Owhen the information is accepted by the computer. The flag is needed to
synchronize the timing rate difference between the input device and the
computer. The process of information transfer is as follows Initially, theinput
flag FGI is cleared to 0. When a key is struck in the keyboard, an 8-bit alphanu-
meric code is shifted into INPR and the input flag FGI is set to 1. As long as
the flag is set, the information in INPR cannot be changed by striking another
key. The computer checks the flag bit; ifit is 1, the information from INPR is
transferred in parallel into AC and FGIis cleared to 0. Once the flag is cleared,
new information can be shifted into INPR by striking another key.

The output register OUTR works similarly but the direction of informa-
tion flow is reversed. Initially, the output flag FGO is set to 1. The computer
checks the flag bit; if itis 1, the information from AC is transferred in parallel
to OUTR and FGO is cleared to 0. The output device accepts the coded infor-
mation, prints the corresponding character, and when the operation is com-
pleted, it sets FGO to1. The computer does not load anew character into OUTR
when FGO is 0 because this condition indicates that the output device is in the
process of printing the character.

Input—Output Instructions

Input and output instructions are needed for transferring information to and
from AC register, for checking the flag bits, and for controlling the interrupt
facility. Input-output instructions have an operation code 1111 and are recog-
nized by the control when D; = 1 and I = 1 The remaining bits of the instruc-
tion specify the particular operation. The control functions and microopera-
tions for the input-output instructions are listed in Table 5-5. These instructions
are executed with the clock transition associated with timing signal Ts. Each
control function needs a Boolean relation D;IT, which we designate for con-
venience by the symbol p. The control function is distinguished by one of the
bits in 1R(6-11). By assigning the symbol B, to bit i of IR, all control functions

TABLE 5-5 Input-Output Instructions

 
 
   

(common to all input-output instructions)

 

TR() = B; bit in IR(6-11) that specifies the instruction]
sc-o Clear SC
‘AC(O-T)“INPR, FGI-O Input character
OUTR~AC(0-7),_FGO<-0 Output character
If (FGI = 1) then (PC+-PC + 1) Skip on input flag

 

If (FGO = 1) then (PC PC +1) Skip on output flag
: IEN|1 Interrupt enable on
IEN—0 Interrupt enable off

 
