410 Chapter 13. Planning and Acting

 

of taxpayers will send in their tax returns by any given date. At the level of individual taxpayers,
there is almost complete uncertainty, but at the aggregate level, the system is reliable. Similarly,
in trying to pour water from one bottle into another using a funnel, it would be hopeless to plan
the path of each water molecule because of uncertainty as well as complexity, yet the pouring as
an aggregated action is very reliable.

The discussion of abstraction leads naturally to the issue of the connection between plans
and physical actions. Our agent designs have assumed that the actions returned by the planner
(which are concrete instances of the actions described in the knowledge base) are directly
executable in the environment. A more sophisticated design might allow planning at a higher
level of abstraction and incorporate a "motor subsystem" that can take an action from the plan and
generate a sequence of primitive actions to be carried out. The subsystem might, for example,
generate a speech signal from an utterance description returned by the planner; or it might
generate stepper-motor commands to turn the wheels of a robot to carry out a "move" action ina
motion plan. We discuss the connection between planning and motor programs in more detail in
Chapter 25. Note that the subsystem might itselfbe a planner of some sort; its goal is to find a
sequence of lower-level actions that achieve the effects of the higher-level action specified in the
plan. In any case, the actions generated by the higher-level planner must be capable of execution
independently of each other, because the lower-level motor system cannot allow for interactions
or interleavings among the subplans that implement different actions.

 

13.5 SUMMARY

The world is not a tidy place. When the unexpected or unknown occurs, an agent needs to do
something to get back on track. This chapter shows how conditional planning and replanning
can help an agent recover.

Standard planning algorithms assume complete and correct information. Many domains
violate this assumption.

Incomplete information can be dealt with using sensing actions to obtain the information
needed. Conditional plans include different subplans in different contexts, depending on
the information obtained.

Incorrect information results in unsatisfied preconditions for actions and plans. Execution
monitoring detects violations of the preconditions for successful completion of the plan.
Action monitoring detects actions that fail.

A simple replanning agent uses execution monitoring and splices in subplans as needed.

A more comprehensive approach to plan execution involves incremental modifications to
the plan, including execution of steps, as conditions in the environment evolve.

Abstraction and coercion can overcome the uncertainty inherent in most real domains.

 
