Section 18.2.

Inductive Learning 529

 

Bringing it all together

Each of the seven components of the performance element can be described mathematically as
a function: for example, information about the way the world evolves can be described as a
function from a world state (the current state) to a world state (the next state or states); a goal can
be described as a function from a state to a Boolean value (0 or 1) indicating whether the state
satisfies the goal. The key point is that al/ learning can be seen as learning the representation of
afunction. We can choose which component of the performance element to improve and how it
is to be represented. The available feedback may be more or less useful, and we may or may not
have any prior knowledge. The underlying problem remains the same.

18.2__ INDUCTIVE LEARNING

EXAMPLE

PURE INDUCTIVE
INFERENCE

HYPOTHESIS

BIAS:

INCREMENTAL
LEARNING

 

In supervised learning, the learning element is given the correct (or approximately correct) value
of the function for particular inputs, and changes its representation of the function to try to match
the information provided by the feedback. More formally, we say an example is a pair (x, f(x),
where x is the input and f(x) is the output ofthe function applied tox. The task of pure inductive
inference (or induction) is this: given a collection of examples of /, retum a function h that
approximates f. The function h is called a hypothesis.

Figure 18.2shows an example ofthis from plane geometry. The examples in Figure 18.2(a)
are (x,y)points in the plane, where y = f(x), and the task is to find a function /(x) that fits the
points well. In Figure 18.2(b) we have a piecewise-linear / function, while in Figure 18.2(c) we
have a more complicated h function. Both functions agree with the example points, but differ
on the y values they assign to other x inputs. In (d) we have a function that apparently ignores
one of the example points, but fits the others with a simple function. The true f is unknown,
so there are many choices for h, but without further knowledge, we have no way to prefer (b),
(c), or (d). Any preference for one hypothesis over another, beyond mere consistency with the
examples, is called a bias. Because there are almost always a large number of possible consistent
hypotheses, all learning algorithms exhibit some sort of bias. We will see many examples in this
and subsequent chapters.

To get back to agents, suppose we have a reflex agent’ that is being taught by a teacher.
Figure 18.3 shows that the REFLEX-LEARNING-ELEMENT updates a global variable, examples,
that holds a list of (percept, action) pairs. The percept could be a chess board position,
and the action could be the best move as determined by a helpful grandmaster. When the
REFLEX-PERFORMANCE-ELEMENT is faced with a percept it has been told about, it chooses the
corresponding action. Otherwise, it calls a learning algorithm INDUCE on the examples it has
seen so far. INDUCE returns a hypothesis / which the agent uses to choose an action.

There are many variants on this simple scheme. For example, the agent could perform
incremental learning: rather than applying the learning algorithm to the entire set of examples
each time a new prediction is needed, the agent couldjust try to update its old hypothesis whenever

3 Recall that reflex agents map directly from percepts to actions
