Section 16.5.

Decision Networks 485

 

DECISION NODES

UTILITY NODES

ACTi
3louenury

 

 

Airport Site

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 164 A simple decision network for the airport-siting problem.

 

 

 

on the site chosen. Each chance node has associated with it a conditional probability table
(CPT) that is indexed by the state of the parent nodes. In decision networks, the parent
nodes can include decision nodes as well as chance nodes. Note that each of the current-
state chance nodes could be part ofa large belief network for assessing construction costs,
air traffic levels, or litigation potential. For simplicity, these are omitted.

0 Decision nodes (rectangles) represent points where the decision-maker has a choice of
actions. In this case, the AirportSite action can take on a different value for each site under
consideration. The choice influences the cost, safety, and noise that will result. In this
chapter, we will assume that we are dealing with a single decision node. Chapter 17 deals
with cases where more than one decision must be made.

} Utility nodes (diamonds) represent the agent's utility function.® The utility node has as
parents all those variables describing the outcome state that directly affect utility. The table
associated with a utility node is thus a straightforward tabulation of the agent's utility as a
function of the attributes that determine it. As with canonical CPTs, multiattribute utility
functions can be represented by a structured description rather than a simple tabulation.

A simplified form is also used in many cases. The notation remains identical, but the
chance nodes describing the outcome state are omitted. Instead, the utility node is connected
directly to the current-state nodes and the decision node. In this case, rather than representing
a utility function on states, the table associated with the utility node represents the expected
utility associated with each action, as defined in Equation (16.1). We therefore call such tables
action-utility tables. Figure 16,5 shows the action-utility representation of the airport problem.

Notice that because the Noise, Deaths, and Cost chance nodes in Figure 164 refer to future
states, they can never have their values set as evidence variables. Thus, the simplified version

8 These nodes are often called value nodes in the literature. We prefer to maintain the distinction between utility and
value functions, as discussed earlier, because the outcome state may represent a lottery.
