Section 25.7. Summary 811

 

one wishes a robot arm (for instance) to undertake, and then design physical devices and control
systems to carry out the motions described. The mechanics and control of multilink robot arms
are among the most complex problems studied in applied mathematics today.

Robot Manipulators: Mathematics, Programming, and Control (Paul, 1981) is a classic
guide to the basics of robot arm design. Yoshikawa (1990) provides a more up-to-date text
in this area. Latombe (1991) presents a good specialized textbook on motion planning. The
robot motion planning problem, stated in the most natural way, is PSPACE-hard (Reif, 1979)
(see page 853 for a description of PSPACE). Canny (1988) gives a book-length treatment of the
computational complexity ofrobot motion planning, dealing with a number of ways of stating the
problem. The major conference for robotics is the JEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation. Robotics journals include JEEE Robotics and Automation, the International
Journal of Robotics Research, and Robotics and Autonomous Systems.

 

EXERCISES

25.1 (This exercise was first devised by Michael Genesereth and Nils Nilsson.) Humans are so
adept at basic tasks such as picking up cups or stacking blocks that they often forget what it was
like to try such things as newbom babies. The idea of this exercise is to make explicit some of
the difficulties involved, in a very direct manner. As you solve these difficulties, you should find
yourself recapitulating the last 20 years of developments in robotics.

First, pick a task. The task should not be too difficult! (For example, making a column
from three cereal boxes standing on end takes over an hour.) Set up the initial environment.
Then, build a robot out of four other humans as follows:

© Brain: the job of the Brain is to come up with a plan to achieve the goal, and to direct the
hands in the execution of the plan. The Brain receives input from the Eyes, but cannot see
the scene directly.

< Eyes: the Eyes' job is to report a brief description of the scene to the Brain. The Eyes
should stand a few feet away from the working environment, and can provide qualitative
descriptions (such as "There is a red box standing on top ofa green box, which is on its
side") or quantitative descriptions ("The green box is about two feet to the left of the blue
cylinder"). Eyes can also answer questions from the Brain such as, "Is there a gap between
the Left Hand and the red box?" The Eyes should not know what the goal is.

0 Hands (Left and Right): one person plays each Hand. The two Hands stand next to each
other; the Left Hand uses only his or her left hand, and the Right Hand only his or her
righthand. The Hands execute only simple commands from the Brain—for example, "Left
Hand, move two inches forward." They cannot execute commands other than motions; for
example, "Pick up the box" is not something a Hand can do. To discourage cheating, you
might want to have the hands wear gloves, or have them operate tongs. As well as being
ignorant of the goal, the Hands must be blindfolded. The only sensory capability they have
is the ability to tell when their path is blocked by an immovable obstacle such as a table or
the other Hand. In such cases, they can beep to inform the Brain of the difficulty.

 
