432

Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

‘CONFIRMATION

INDUCTIVE Logic

Pascal used probability in ways that required both the objective interpretation, as a property
of the world based on symmetry or relative frequency, and the subjective interpretation as degree
of belief: the former in his analyses of probabilities in games of chance, the latter in the famous
"Pascal's wager" argument about the possible existence of God. However, Pascal did not clearly
realize the distinction between these two interpretations. The distinction was first drawn clearly
by James Bernoulli (1654-1705).

Leibniz introduced the "classical" notion of probability as a proportion of enumerated,
equally probable cases, which was also used by Bernoulli, although it was brought to prominence
by Laplace (1749-1827). This notion is ambiguous between the frequency interpretation and
the subjective interpretation. The cases can be thought to be equally probable either because of
anatural, physical symmetry between them, or simply because we do not have any knowledge
that would lead us to consider one more probable than another. The use of this latter, subjective
consideration to justify assigning equal probabilities is known as the principle of indifference
(Keynes, 1921).

The debate between objective and subjective interpretations of probability became sharper
in the twentieth century. Kolmogorov (1963), R. A. Fisher (1922), and Richard von Mises(1928)
were advocates of the relative frequency interpretation. Karl Popper's (1959, first published in
German in 1934) "propensity" interpretation traces relative frequencies to an underlying physical
symmetry. Frank Ramsey (1931), Bruno de Finetti (1937), R. T. Cox (1946), Leonard Savage
(1954), and Richard Jeffrey (1983) interpreted probabilities as the degrees of belief of specific
individuals. Their analyses of degree of belief were closely tied to utilities and to behavior,
specifically to the willingness to place bets. Rudolf Carnap, following Leibniz and Laplace,
offered a different kind of subjective interpretation of probability: not as any actual individual's
degree of belief, but as the degree of beliefthat an idealized individual should have in a particular
proposition p given a particular body of evidence £. Carnap attempted to go further than Leibniz
or Laplace by making this notion of degree of confirmation mathematically precise, as a logical
relation between p and EZ. The study of this relation was intended to constitute a mathematical
discipline called inductive logic, analogous to ordinary deductive logic (Carnap, 1948; Camap,
1950). Carnap was not able to extend his inductive logic much beyond the propositional case,
and Putnam (1963) showed that some fundamental difficulties would prevent a strict extension
to languages capable of expressing arithmetic.

The question of reference classes is closely tied to the attempt to find an inductive logic. The
approach of choosing the "most specific" reference class of sufficient size was formally proposed
by Reichenbach (1949). Various attempts have been made to formulate more sophisticated
policies in order to avoid some obvious fallacies that arise with Reichenbach's rule, notably by
Henry Kyburg (1977; 1983), but such approaches remain somewhat ad hoc. More recent work
by Bacchus, Grove, Halpern, and Koller (1992) extends Carnap’s methods to first-order theories
on finite domains, thereby avoiding many of the difficulties associated with reference classes.

Bayesian probabilistic reasoning has been used in AI since the 1960s, especially in medical
diagnosis. It was used not only to make a diagnosis from available evidence, but also to select
further questions and tests when available evidence was inconclusive (Gorry, 1968; Gory et
al., 1973), using the theory of information value (Section 16.6). One system outperformed ;
human experts in the diagnosis of acute abdominal illnesses (de Dombal ef al., 1974). These
early Bayesian systems suffered from a number of problems, however. Because they lacked any

 
