Section 25.7. Summary 809

 

25.7 _ SUMMARY

Robotics is a challenging field for two reasons. First, it requires hardware (sensors and effectors)
that actually work, areal challenge for mechanical engineering. Second, robots have to work in
the physical world, which is more complex than most of the simulated software worlds that we
have used for our examples in other chapters. Some robots finesse this problem by operating in a
restricted environment. But modern autonomous robots with sophisticated sensors and effectors
provide a challenging testbed for determining what it takes to build an intelligent agent.

+ In general, the physical world is inaccessible, nondeterministic, nonepisodic, and dynamic.
Robots have made an economic impact in many industries, and show promise for exploring
hazardous and remote environments.

Robots consist ofa body with rigid links connected to each other by joints. The movement
of the links is characterized by the degrees of freedom of the joints.

Robots can have sensors of various types, including vision, force sensing, tactile (touch)
sensing, sonar, and a sense of where their own body parts are.

In a dynamic world, it is important to be able to take action quickly. Robots are designed
with this in mind.

The problem of moving a complex-shaped object (i.e., the robot and anything it is carrying)
through a space with complex-shaped obstacles is a difficult one. The mathematical notion
of a configuration space provides a framework for analysis.

Cell decomposition and skeletonization methods can be used to navigate through the
configuration space. Both reduce a high-dimensional, continuous space to a discrete
graph-search problem.

Some aspects of the world, such as the exact location of a bolt in the robot's hand, will
always be unknown. Fine-motion planning deals with this uncertainty by creating a
sensor-based plan that will work regardless of the exact initial conditions.

Uncertainty applies to sensors at the large scale as well. In the landmark model, a robot
uses certain well-known landmarks in the environment to determine where it is, even in
the face of uncertainty.

Ifa map of the environment is not available, then the robot will have to plan its navigation
as it goes. Online algorithms do this. They do not always choose the shortest route, but
we can analyze how far offthey will be.

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

The word robot was popularized by Czech playwright Karel Capek in his 1921 play R.U.R.
(Rossum's Universal Robots). The theme of the play—the dehumanization of mankind in a
technological society—appealed to audiences in war-torn Europe and the United States. The

 
