Section 21.5. Summary 647

 

expressed as expert system rules to guide its search for concepts and conjectures in elementary
number theory. In sharp contrast with most systems designed for mathematical reasoning,
AM lacked a concept of proof and could only make conjectures. It rediscovered Goldbach's
Conjecture and the Unique Prime Factorization Theorem. AM's architecture was generalized
in the Eurtsko system (Lenat, 1983) by adding a mechanism capable of rewriting the system's
own discovery heuristics. EURISkO was applied in a number of areas other than mathematical
discovery, although with less success than AM. The methodology of AM and EURISKO has been
controversial (Ritchie and Hanna, 1984; Lenat and Brown, 1984).

Another class of discovery systems aims to operate with real scientific data to find new
laws. The systems DALTON, GLAUBER, and STAHL (Langley ef a/., 1987) are rule-based systems
that look for quantitative relationships in experimental data from physical systems; in each
case, the system has been able to recapitulate a well-known discovery from the history of
science. AUTOCLASS (Cheeseman ef al, 1988) takes a more theoretically grounded approach to
concept discovery: it uses Bayesian probabilistic reasoning to partition given data into the "most
likely" collection of classes. AUTOCLASS has been applied to a number of real-world scientific
classification tasks, including the discovery of new types of stars from spectral data and the
analysis of protein structure (Hunter and States, 1992).

 

EXERCISES

21.1 Show, by translating into conjunctive normal form and applying resolution, that the con-
clusion drawn on page 633 concerning Brazilians is sound.

212 For each ofthe followingdeterminations, write down the logical representation and explain
why the determination is true (ifit is):

a. Zip code determines the state (U.S.).

b. Design and denomination determine the mass ofa coin.

c. For a given program, input determines output.

d. Climate, food intake, exercise, and metabolism determine weight gain/loss.

e. Baldness is determined by the baldness (or lack thereof) of one's matemal grandfather.

213 Would a probabilistic version of determinations be useful? Suggest a definition.

214 Fill in the missing values for the clauses C\ and/or C2 in the following sets of clauses,

given that C is the resolvent of C\ and C).
a C= True > P(A,B), Ci, = Ply
b. C= True > P(AB), C; =11,
c C=Pluy) > POufO))C1 =I, C2 =11

If there is more than one possible solution, provide one example of each different kind.

 

= Oy), Cz =?

 

 
