100

Chapter 4. Informed Search Methods

 

LOCALLY FINITE
GRAPHS

 

Start

c® G,

 

 

Figure 4.6 Situation at the point where a suboptimal goal state G, is about to be expanded.
Node 17 is a leaf node on an optimal path from the start node to the optimal goal state G.

 

 

 

But because G2is a goal state, we have A(Gz) = 0; hence f(G2) = g(G2). Thus, we have proved,
from our assumptions, that

fF 2 g(G2).

This contradicts the assumption that G: is suboptimal, so it must be the case that A* never selects
a suboptimal goal for expansion. Hence, because it only returns a solution after selecting it for
expansion, A* is an optimal algorithm.

Proof of the completeness of A*

We said before that because A* expands nodes in order ofincreasing f, it must eventually expand
toreach a goal state. This is true, ofcourse, unless there are infinitely many nodes with f(n) < f*.
The only way there could be an infinite number of nodes is either (a) there is a node with an
infinite branching factor, or (b) there is a path with a finite path cost but an infinite number of
nodes along it.?

Thus, the correct statement is that A* is complete on locally finite graphs (graphs with a
finite branching factor) provided there is some positive constant 6 such that every operator costs
at least 6.

Complexity of A*

That A* search is complete, optimal, and optimally efficient among all such algorithms is rather
satisfying. Unfortunately, it does not mean that A* is the answer to all our searching needs. The
catch is that, for most problems, the number of nodes within the goal contour search space is still
exponential in the length of the solution. Although the proof of the result is beyond the scope of
this book, it has been shown that exponential growth will occur unless the error in the heuristic

2 Zeno’s paradox, which purports to show that a rock thrown at a tree will never seach it, provides an example that
violates condition (b). The paradox is created by imagining that the trajectory is divided into a series of phases, each of
which covers half the remaining distance to the tree; this yields an infinite sequence of steps with a finite total cost.
