Section 16.8.

Summary 493

 

16.8

SUMMARY

 

This chapter shows how to combine utility theory with probability to enable an agent to select
actions that will maximize its expected performance.

 

Probability theory describes what an agent should believe on the basis of evidence, utility
theory describes what an agent wants, and decision theory puts the two together to describe
what an agent should do.

We can use decision theory to build a system that makes decisions by considering all
possible actions and choosing the one that leads to the best expected outcome. Such a
system is known as a rational agent.

Utility theory shows that an agent whose preferences between lotteries are consistent with
a set of simple axioms can be described as possessing a utility function; furthermore, the
agent selects actions as if maximizing its expected utility.

Multiattribute utility theory deals with utilities that depend on several distinct attributes
of states. Stochastic dominance is aparticularly useful technique for making unambiguous
decisions even without precise utility values for attributes.

Decision networks provide a simple formalism for expressing and solving decision prob-
lems. They are a natural extension ofbeliefnetworks, containing decision and utility nodes
in addition to chance nodes.

Sometimes solving a problem involves finding more information before making a decision.
The value ofinformation is defined as the expected improvement in utility compared to
making a decision without the information.

Expert systems that incorporate utility information have additional capabilities compared
to pure inference systems. In addition to being able to make decisions, they can decide
to acquire information based on its value, and they can calculate the sensitivity of their
decisions to small changes in probability and utility assessments.

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

One of the earliest applications of the principle of maximum expected utility (although a deviant
one involving infinite utilities) was Pascal's Wager, first published as part of the Port-Royal Logic
(Amauld, 1662), The derivation of numerical utilities from preference (utility ordering) was first
carried out by Ramsey (1931); the axioms for preference in the present text are closer in form to
those rediscovered in Theory ofGames and Economic Behavior (Von Neumann and Morgenstern,
1944). A good presentation of these axioms, in the course ofa discussion on risk preference, is
given by Howard (1977). Ramsey had derived subjective probabilities (not just utilities) from an
agent's preferences; Savage (1954) and Jeffrey (1983) carry out more recent constructions of this

kind.

Von Winterfeldt and Edwards (1986) provide a modern perspective on decision analysis

and its relationship to human preference structures.
