716

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

Autonomy is also essential in remote environments (such as the surface of Mars) where
communication delays are too long to allow human guidance. A robot for hazardous environments
should be able to negotiate very rough ground without falling or tipping over.' It should have
sensing modalities that work with no light present. It should above all avoid doing harm to
humans who may be present but unconscious or disabled in its environment. Achieving this level
of autonomy along with reliability is a challenge for robotics. But the return is very great, and
this area of research is bound to continue its growth.

Telepresence and virtual reality

As computers spread from scientific/business applications to a consumer technology, telepresence
and virtual reality continue to captivate the public imagination. The idea of staying in one's home
and being able to sense exotic environments, either real (telepresence) or imaginary (virtual
reality) is indeed compelling, and is a driving force behind some major moves in the computer
and entertainment industries. Among the possible environments to which one might connect,
there are many important applications. Today, New York City police use teleoperated robots to
answer many of the city's estimated 9000 yearly bomb scares. Architects and customers can
walk through or fly over a building before it is built.? Oceanographers can collect samples with
a deep-sea submersible off the Pacific coast without leaving their offices. Medical specialists
can examine patients hundreds of miles away. Surgeons can practice new techniques on virtual
organ models. Or they can operate with miniature implements through a catheter inserted in a
tiny incision.

Much of the research in telepresence and virtual reality fall in the robotics category.
Robotics researchers have for many years been studying, designing, and improving anthropo-
morphic hands. They have also built exoskeletons and gloves that provide both control and
sensory feedback for those hands. Tactile sensing research opens the possibility ofa true remote
sense of touch. Realistic virtual environments require object models with a full set of physical
attributes. Simulation requires algorithms that accurately factor in those attributes, including
inertia, friction, elasticity, plasticity, color, texture, and sound. There remains much work to do
to fully exploit the possibilities of remote and virtual presence.

Augmentation of human abilities

A precursor to telepresence involves putting a human inside a large, strong robot. In 1969,
General Electric built the Quadrupedal Walking Machine, an | |-foot, 3000-pound robot with a
control harness in which a human operator was strapped. Project leader Ralph Mosher remarked
that the man-machine relationship "is so close that the experienced operator begins to feel as if
those mechanical legs are his own. You imagine that you are actually crawling along the ground

| The robot Dawre-II caused embarrassment to its sponsors when it tipped over while exploring a volcano in July, 1994.
2. The cover of this book shows a tiny model of Soda Hall, the computer science building at Berkeley. The model was
used for walkthroughs prior to actual construction

3 The first medical telepresence system was deployed in 1971, under NASA sponsorship. A mobile van parked at the
Papago Indian Reservation near Tucson, Arizona, allowed patients to be diagnosed remotely

 

 
