856

Appendix B. Notes on Languages and Algorithms

 

ORACLE

Another way to think ofnondeterministic algorithms is to imagine an oracle that magically
advises the algorithm to make the correct choice at every choice point. If such an oracle could
be found, the algorithm would be deterministic; it would never need to backtrack. You can think
of the agenda as a slower means of simulating the advice of the oracle.

Nondeterministic algorithms are often clearer than deterministic versions, but unfortunately
only a few programming languages support nondeterminism directly—Prolog and ICON are
probably the best known. choose and fail can be implemented in SCHEME in about 15 lines of
code, using the function call-with-current-continuation.

Here is an example of a nondeterministic function: the function call INTEGER(start) returns
an integer greater than or equal to start, chosen nondeterministically.

 

function INTEGER(starf) returns an integer
return choose(start, INTEGER(start+ 1))

 

 

 

It is important to understand what the code fragment PRINT(INTEGER (0)); fail will do. First, it
will print some integer, although we cannot say which one without knowing what control strategy
is used by choose. Then fail will return control to one of the choice points in one of the recursive
calls to INTEGER. Eventually, a different integer will be chosen and printed, and then fail will be
executed again. The result is an infinite loop, with a single integer printed each time.

We sometimes use the term pick to mean a choice that is not a backtracking point. For
example, an algorithm to sum the elements ofa set is to initialize the total to 0, pick an element
from the set and add it to the total, and continue until there are no more elements to pick. There
is no need to backtrack, because any order of picking will get the job done.

Static variables

We use the keyword static to say that a variable is given an initial value the first time a function
is called and retains that value (or the value given to it by a subsequent assignment statement)
on all subsequent calls to the function. Thus, static variables are like global variables in that
they outlive a single call to their function, but they are only accessible within the function. The
agent programs in the book use static variables for "memory." Programs with static variables
can be implemented as "objects" in object-oriented languages such as C++ and Smalltalk. In
functional languages, they can be implemented easily by executing lambda-expressions within
an environment in which the required variables are defined.

Functions as values

Functions and procedures have capitalized names and variables have lower case italic names.
So most of the time, a function call looks like SoME-FUNCTION(variable). However, we allow
the value of a variable to be a function; for example, if the value of variable is the square root
function, then variable(9) returns 3.

 
