714

METONYMY

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

As another example, here are five sentences, along with the most likely interpretation of the
relation represented by the word "with." Each of the sentences has a lexical ambiguity ("with"
has several senses) and a syntactic ambiguity (the PP can attach to either "spaghetti" or "ate"),
but each is resolved by semantic evidence.

Sentence : Relation

Tate spaghetti with meatballs. (ingredient of spaghetti)
Tate spaghetti with salad. (side dish of spaghetti)
Tate spaghetti with abandon. (manner of eating)

Tate spaghetti with a fork. (instrument of eating)

I ate spaghetti with a friend. (accompanier of eating)

It is certainly possible to use meatballs as a utensil with which to eat spaghetti, but it is unlikely
(not to mention messy), so we prefer interpretations that refer to more likely events. Of course,
likeliness of events or situations is not the only factor. In Chapter 22, we saw that the right
interpretation of "I am not a crook" is not the most likely situation. It is perfectly coherent to
use language to talk about unlikely or even impossible situations: "I ran a mile in one minute" or
"This square is a triangle."

Metonymy

A metonymy is a figure of speech in which one object is used to stand for another. When we
hear "Chrysler announced a new model," we do not interpret it as saying that companies can talk;
rather we understand that a spokesperson representing the company made the announcement
Metonymy is common in many kinds of text, and often goes unnoticed by human readers.
Unfortunately, our grammar as it is written is not so facile. To handle the semantics of metonymy
properly, we need to introduce a whole new level of ambiguity. We do this by providing two
objects for the semantic interpretation of every phrase in the sentence: one for the object that
the phrase literally refers to (Chrysler), and one for the metonymic reference (the spokesperson).
We then have to say that there is a relation between the two. In our current grammar, "Chrysler
announced" gets interpreted as

3x,e@ Chrysler(x)A e € Announce(x, Past)
We need to change that to
Im,x,e Chrysler“A Metonymy(m.x) A e E Announce(m, Past)

This gives a representation for the problem, but not a solution. The next step is to define what
kinds of metonymy can occur, that is, to define constraints on the Mefonymy relation. The
simplest case is when there is no metonymy at all—the literal object x and the metonymic object
mare identical:

Vim,x (m =x) = Metonymy(m.x)
For the Chrysler example, a reasonable generalization is that an organization can be used to stand
for a spokesperson of that organization:

Vim, x Organization(XA Spokesperson(mx) => Metonymy(m.)

 
