Section 22.2. Types of Communicating Agents 661

 

might introduce the symbols P\ and P) to denote the two pits that caused the breezes, and
must then do some reasoning to decide if P; = P2. But the problem is harder for multiple
agents because they share fewer symbols to begin with, and thus have less common ground
to reason with. In particular, agent B has the problem of deciding how the situation S49
relates to its own situation symbols. This problem can be lessened by minimizing the
number of new symbols. For example, 4 could tell B that there is a pit in [2,3] without
introducing any new dynamic symbols with the following action:

TELL(KBs.Sp,s Pit(p) A At(p, [2,31,5)”)

This sentence is weaker than the one containing P4, and S49 because it does not say which
pit is in [2,3], nor when it was there, but it turns out that these facts do not really matter for
the wumpus world. Note that this sentence is similar to the English sentence "There is a
pit in 2,3," which also fails to uniquely identify the pit and the time.

3. The final difficulty is in reconciling the differences between different agents’ knowledge
bases. If communication is free and instantaneous, then all agents can adopt the policy of
broadcasting each new fact to everyone else as soon as they learn it. That way everyone
will have all the same knowledge. But in most applications, the bandwidth between agents
is limited, and they are often completely out of touch with each other for periods of time.
When they come back into contact, they have the problem ofdeciding what new information
is worth communicating, and of discovering what interesting facts the other agent knows.

Another problem with telepathic agents as we have described them is that they are vulnerable to
sabotage. Another agent could TELL lies directly into the knowledge base and make our naive
telepathic agent believe anything.

Communicating using formal language

Because of the sabotage problem, and because it is infeasible for everyone to have the same
internal language, most agents communicate through language rather than through direct access
to knowledge bases. Figure 22.3 shows a diagram of this type of communication. Agents
can perform actions that produce language, which other agents can perceive. The extemal
communication language can be different from the internal representation language, and the
agents can each have different internal languages. They need not agree on any intemal symbols
at all as long as each one can map reliably from the external language to its own internal symbols.

An external communication language brings with it the problems of generation and analysis,
and much of the effort in natural language processing (NLP) has gone into devising algorithms
for these two processes. But the hardest part of communication with language is still problem
(3) from the previous section: reconciling the differences between different agents’ knowledge
bases. What agent 4 says, and how agent B interprets A’s statement depends crucially on what 4
and B already believe (including what they believe about each other's beliefs). This means that
agents that have the same internal and external language would have an easy time with generation
and analysis, but they would still find it challenging to decide what to say to each other.
