 

Section 26.3.

On the Possibility of Achieving Intelligent Behavior 827

 

is far too complex to be captured by any simple set of rules; and because computers can do no
more than follow a set ofrules, they cannot generate behavior as intelligent as that of humans.

The principal proponent of this view has been the philosopher Hubert Dreyfus, who
has produced a series of powerful critiques of artificial intelligence: What Computers Can't
Do (1972; 1979), What Computers Still Can't Do (1992), and, with his brother Stuart, Mind
Over Machine (1986). Terry Winograd, whose PhD thesis (Winograd, 1972) on natural language
understanding is criticized fiercely by Dreyfus (1979), has also expressed views similar to those
of Dreyfus in his recent work (Winograd and Flores, 1986).

The position they criticize came to be called "Good Old-Fashioned AI,” or GOFAI, a term
coined by Haugeland (1985). GOFAI is supposed to claim that all intelligent behavior can be
captured by a system that reasons logically from a set of facts and rules describing the domain.
It therefore corresponds to the simplest logical agent described in Chapter 6. Dreyfus claims that

when Minsky or Turing claims that man can be understood as a Turing machine, they must
mean that a digital computer can reproduce human behavior... . byprocessing data represent-
ing factsabout the world using logical operations that can be reduced to matching, classifying
and Boolean operations. (Dreyfus, 1972, p. 192)

It is important to point out, before continuing with the argument, that AI and GOFAI are not the
same thing. In fact, it is not clear whether any substantial section of the field has ever adhered
to GOFAI in this extreme form, although the phrase "facts and rules" did appear in Turing's two-
sentence speculation concerning how systems might be programmed to pass the Turing Test.?
One only has to read the preceding chapters to see that the scope of AI includes far more than
logical inference. However, we shall see that Dreyfus’ criticisms of GOFAI make for interesting
reading and raise issues that are of interest for all of AI.

Whether or not anyone adheres to GOFAL it has indeed been a working hypothesis of most
Al research that the knowledge-based approach to intelligent system design has a major role to
play. Hubert Dreyfus has argued that this presumption is based in a long tradition of rationalism
going back to Plato (see Section 1.2). He cites Leibniz as providing a clear statement of the goals
of the modern "expert systems" industry:

The most important observations and turns of skill in all sorts of trades and professions are as
yet unwritten ... We can also write up this practice, since it is at bottom just another theory.

Furthermore, he claims that the presumption is wrong; that competence can be achieved without
explicit reasoning or rule following. The Dreyfus critique therefore is not addressed against
computers per se, but against one particular way of programming them. It is reasonable to
suppose, however, that a book called What First-Order Logical Rule-Based Systems Can't Do
might have had less impact.

Dreyfus's first target is the supposition that early successes of GOFAI justify optimism that
the methodology will succeed in scaling up to human-level intelligence. Many AI programs
in the 1960s and early 1970s operated in microworlds—small, circumscribed domains such
as the Blocks World. In microworlds, the totality of the situation can be captured by a small
number of facts. At the time, many AI researchers were well aware that success in microworlds
could be achieved without facing up to a major challenge in the real world: the vast amount of

% Significantly, Turing also said that he expected AI to be achieved by a learning machine, not a preprogrammed store.

 
