46 Chapter 2. Intelligent Agents

 

Properties of environments

Environments come in several flavors. The principal distinctions to be made are as follows:

ACCESSIBLE 0 Accessible vs. inaccessible.
If an agent's sensory apparatus gives it access to the complete state of the environment,
then we say that the environment is accessible to that agent. An environment is effectively
accessible if the sensors detect all aspects that are relevant to the choice of action. An
accessible environment is convenient because the agent need not maintain any internal state
to keep track of the world.

DETERMINISTIC 0 Deterministic vs. nondetermini:
Ifthe next state of the environment is completely determined by the current state and the
actions selected by the agents, then we say the environment is deterministic. In principle,
an agent need not worry about uncertainty in an accessible, deterministic environment. If
the environment is inaccessible, however, then it may appear to be nondeterministic. This
is particularly true if the environment is complex, making it hard to keep track ofall the
inaccessible aspects. Thus, it is often better to think of an environment as deterministic or
nondeterministic from the point of view of the agent.

EPISODIC 0 Episodic vs. nonepisodic.
Inan episodic environment, the agent's experience is divided into "episodes." Each episode
consists of the agent perceiving and then acting. The quality of its action depends just on
the episode itself, because subsequent episodes do not depend on what actions occur in
previous episodes. Episodic environments are much simpler because the agent does not
need to think ahead.

STATIC 0 Static vs. dynamic.
Ifthe environment can change while an agent is deliberating, then we say the environment
is dynamic for that agent; otherwise it is static. Static environments are easy to deal with
because the agent need not keep looking at the world while it is deciding on an action,
nor need it worry about the passage of time. If the environment does not change with the
passage of time but the agent's performance score does, then we say the environment is

‘SEMIDVNAMIC. semidynamic.

DISCRETE 0 Discrete vs. continuous.
Ifthere are a limited number of distinct, clearly defined percepts and actions we say that
the environment is discrete. Chess is discrete—there are a fixed number of possible moves
on each turn. Taxi driving is continuous—the speed and location of the taxi and the other
vehicles sweep through a range of continuous values.!°

 

We will see that different environment types require somewhat different agent programs to deal
with them effectively. It will turn out, as you might expect, that the hardest case is inaccessible,
nonepisodic, dynamic, and continuous. It also turns out that most real situations are so complex
that whether they are really deterministic is a moot point; for practical purposes, they must be
treated as nondeterministic

10 At a fine enough level of granularity, even the taxi driving environment is discrete, because the camera image is

digitized to yield discrete pixel values. But any sensible agent program would have to abstract above this level, up toa
level of granularity that is continuous.
