23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree 625

 

Figure 23.1 A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph. The weights on edges are shown,
and the edges in a minimum spanning tree are shaded. The total weight of the tree shown is 37. This
minimum spanning tree is not unique: removing the edge (b,c) and replacing it with the edge (a, h)
yields another spanning tree with weight 37.

to problems. For the minimum-spanning-tree problem, however, we can prove that
certain greedy strategies do yield a spanning tree with minimum weight. Although
you can read this chapter independently of Chapter 16, the greedy methods pre-
sented here are a classic application of the theoretical notions introduced there.

Section 23.1 introduces a “generic” minimum-spanning-tree method that grows
a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time. Section 23.2 gives two algorithms
that implement the generic method. The first algorithm, due to Kruskal, is similar
to the connected-components algorithm from Section 21.1. The second, due to
Prim, resembles Dijkstra’s shortest-paths algorithm (Section 24.3).

Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must define a tree in
terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well. Although this chapter focuses
on trees in terms of their edges, we shall operate with the understanding that the
vertices of a tree T are those that some edge of T is incident on.

 

23.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

Assume that we have a connected, undirected graph G = (V, £) with a weight
function w : E — R, and we wish to find a minimum spanning tree for G. The
two algorithms we consider in this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem,
although they differ in how they apply this approach.

This greedy strategy is captured by the following generic method, which grows
the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time. The generic method manages a set
of edges A, maintaining the following loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration, A is a subset of some minimum spanning tree.

At each step, we determine an edge (u,v) that we can add to A without violating
this invariant, in the sense that A U {(1, v)} is also a subset of a minimum spanning
