SECTION 1-4 Map Simplification 13,

adjacent. The same applies to the top and bottom squares ofa column. Asa
result, the four corner squares of a map must also be considered to be adjacent.

‘A Boolean function represented by a truth table is plotted into the map
by inserting 1’s in those squares where the function is 1. The squares contain-
ing Y's arecombinedin groups of adjacent squares. These groups must contain
a number of squares that is an integral power of 2. Groups of combined
adjacent squares may share one or more squares with one or more groups.
Each group of squares represents an algebraic term, and the OR of those terms
gives the simplifiedalgebraicexpression for the function. The following exam-
ples show the use of the map for simplifying Boolean functions.

In the first example we will simplify the Boolean function

F(A,B, C) = 2 3,4,6,7)

 

The three-variable map for this function is shown in Fig. 1-8. There are four
squares marked with 1's, one for each minterm that produces 1 for the func-
tion. These squares belong to minterms 3, 4, 6, and 7 and are recognized from
Fig. 1-7(b). Two adjacent squares are combined in the third column. This
column belongs to both B and C and produces the term BC. The remaining two
squares with I's in the two comers of the second row are adjacent and belong
to row A and the two columns of C’, so they produce the term AC’. The
simplified algebraic expression for the function is the OR of the two terms:

F = BC + AC’
The second example simplifies the following Boolean function:
F(A,B,C) = & 0,2,4,5,6)

The five minterms are marked with 1s in the corresponding squares of the
three-variable map shown in Fig, 1-9. The four squares in the first and fourth
columns are adjacent and represent the term C’. The remaining square marked
with a 1 belongs to minterm 5 and can be combined with the square of minterm
4 to produce the term AB’. The simplified function is

F=C+AB’

Figure 1-8 Map for F(A, B.C) = £.(3.4.6,7).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
