Section 19.1.

APHASIA,

ae

How the Brain Works 565

 

 

   
   

Axonal arborization

  

Axon from another cell

 
  
    
  
 

\

Synapse
Dendrite

Synapses

Cell body or Soma

 

 

Figure 19.1 The parts of a nerve cell or neuron. In reality, the length of the axon should be
about 100times the diameter of the cell body.

 

 

 

diameter, extending the full depth of the cortex, which is about 4 mm in humans. A module
contains about 2000 neurons. It is known that certain areas of the brain have specific functions.
In 1861, Pierre Paul Broca was able to demonstrate that the third left frontal convolution of the
cerebral cortex is important for speech and language by his studies of patients with aphasia—an
inability to speak, often brought on by brain damage. This soon led to surgical experiments on
animals that mapped out the connection between areas of the cortex and specific motor controls.
We now have some data on the mapping between areas of the brain and the parts of the body
that they control, or from which they receive sensory input. Such mappings seem to be able to
change radically over the course ofa few weeks, and some animals seem to have multiple maps.
Moreover, we do not fully understand how other areas can take over functions when one area is
damaged. There is almost no theory about how an individual memory is stored.

The truly amazing thing is that a collection of simple cells can lead to thought, action,
and consciousness. Neurobiology is a long way from a complete theory of consciousness, but
even if there are some important electrical or chemical processes that have been overlooked, the
amazing conclusion is the same: brains cause minds (Searle, 1992). The only real alternative
theory is mysticism: that there is some mystical realm in which minds operate that is beyond
physical science.

Comparing brains with digital computers

Brains and digital computers perform quite different tasks, and have different properties. Fig-
ure 19.2shows that there are more neurons in the typical human brain than there are bits in a typical
high-end computer workstation. We can predict that this will not hold true for long, because the
human brain is evolving very slowly, whereas computer memories are growing rapidly. In any

 
