 

706

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION
fentl() performs a variety of functions on open descriptors.
The argument fd is an open descriptor used by cmd as fol-
lows:

F.DUPFD Returns a new descriptor, which has the smal-
lest value greater than or equal to arg. It
refers to the same object as the original
descriptor, and has the same access mode
(read, write or read/write). The new
descriptor shares descriptor status flags
with fd, and if the object was a file, the
same file pointer. It is also associated
with a FD.CLOEXEC (close-on-exes) flag set to
remain open across execve(2V) system calls.

"And since I was not informed—as a matter of fact, since I did not know that there were
excess funds until we, ourselves, in that checkup after the whole thing blew up, and that
was, if you'll remember, that was the incident in which the attomey general came to me and
told me that he had seen a memo that indicated that there were no more funds."

 

 

Figure 23.8 Two examples ofreal-life language: one from the UNIX manual entry for fentl,

 

 

and one from a statement made by Ronald Reagan, printed in the May 4, 1987, Roll Call.

 

Nominal compounds and apposition

Technical text is full of nominal compounds: strings of nouns such as "POSTSCRIPT language
code input file." The first thing we have to do to handle nominal compounds is realize that we
are dealing with nouns, not NPs. It is not the case that "the input" and "the file" combine to form 4
"the input the file." Rather, we have two nouns combining to form a larger unit that still can
combine with an article to form a NP. We will call the larger unit a noun? and thus will need a
tule of the form:

Noun — Noun Noun
For our example compound, the parse that leads to a semantically sensible interpretation is

[Noun Lvoun Lwoun POSTSCRIPT language] code] [nou input file}]

The hardest part about nominal compounds is specifying the semantics. Our example can be
paraphrased as “a file that is used for input and that consists of code written in a language
named POSTSCRIPT." Clearly, there is a wide variety in the meaning associated with a nominal
compound. We will use the generic relation NN to stand for any of the semantic relations that

5 Some grammars introduce intermediate categories between noun and NP.

 
