Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

Geman. But by 1966, it became clear that translation requires an understanding of the meaning
of the message (and hence detailed knowledge about the world), whereas code breaking depends
only on the syntactic properties of the messages.

Although there has been no fundamental breakthrough in machine translation, there has
been real progress, to the point that there are now dozens of machine translation systems in
everyday use that save money over fully manual techniques. One of the most successfill is the
TAUM-METEO system, developed by the University of Montreal, which translates weather reports
from English to French. It works because the language used in these government weather reports
is highly stylized and regular.

In more open domains, the results are less impressive. A representative system is SPANAM
(Vasconcellos and Leén, 1985), which can translate a Spanish passage into English ofthis quality:

The extension ofthe coverage of the health services to the underserved or not served population
of the countries of the region was the central goal of the Ten-Year Plan and probably that of
greater scope and transcendence. Almostall the countries formulated the purpose of extending
the coverage although could be appreciated a diversity of approaches for its attack, which is
understandable in view of the different national policies that had acted in the configuration of
the health systems of each one of the countries.

This is mostly understandable, but not always grammatical and rarely fluent. Standing on its
own, unrestricted machine translation is still inadequate. But when a human translator is given a
text like this as an initial guideline, the human is able to work two to four times faster. Sometimes
a monolingual human can post-edit the output without having to read the original. This saves
money because such editors can be paid less than bilingual translators.

Another possibility is to invest the human effort on pre-editing the original document. If
the original document can be made to conform to a restricted subset of English (or whatever the
original language is), then it can sometimes be translated without the need for post-editing. This
approach is particularly cost-effective when there is a need to translate one document into many
languages, as is the case for legal documents in the European Community, or for companies that
sell the same product internationally. Restricted languages are sometimes called "Caterpillar
English," because Caterpillar was the first firm to try writing their manuals in this form. The
first really successful use of this approach was made by Xerox. They defined a language for
their maintenance manuals that was simple enough that it could be translated by the SYSTRAN
system into all the languages Xerox deals with. As an added benefit, the original English manuals
became clearer as well.

There is a substantial start-up cost to any machine translation effort. To achieve broad
coverage, translation systems have lexicons of 20,000 to 100,000 words and grammars of 100 to
10,000rules, the numbers varying greatly depending on the choice of formalism.

Translation is difficult because, in the general case, it requires in-depth understanding of
the text, and that requires in-depth understanding of the situation that is being communicated.
This is true even for very simple texts—even "texts" of one word. Consider the word "Open"
on the door of a store! It communicates the idea that the store is accepting customers at the
moment. Now consider the same word "Open" on a large banner outside a newly constructed
store. It means that the store is now in daily operation, but readers of this sign would not feel

1 This example is due to Martin Kay.

 
