496

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

 

LEXICOGRAPHIC
PREFERENCE

 

f. Population of San Diego in 1990.

g. Year in which Roger Williams founded Providence, RI.

h. Height of Mt. Kilimanjaro in feet.

i. Length of the Brooklyn Bridge in feet.

j. Number of deaths due to automobile accidents in the U.S. in 1992.

16.2 Tickets to the state lottery cost $1. There are two possible prizes: a $10 payoff with
probability 1/50, and a $1,000,000 payoff with probability 1/2,000,000. What is the expected
monetary value ofa lottery ticket? When (ifever) is it rational to buy a ticket? Be precise—show
an equation involving utilities. You may assume that U($10) = 10 x U($1), but you may not
make any assumptions about U($1,000, 000). Sociological studies show that people with lower
income buy a disproportionate number of lottery tickets. Do you think this is because they are
worse decision makers or because they have a different utility function?

16.3 Assess your own utility for different incremental amounts of money. Do this by running
a series of preference tests between some definite amount M\ and a lottery [p,M>;(1 — p), 0].
Choose different values of M\1 and M), and vary p until you are indifferent between the two
choices. Plot the resulting utility function.

16.4 Write acomputer program to automate the process in Exercise 16.3. Try your program out
on several people of different net worth and political outlook. Comment on the consistency ofyour
results, both across individuals and within the set of choices made by a single individual.

16.5 It has sometimes been suggested that lexicographic preference is a form of rational
behavior that is not captured by utility theory. Lexicographic preferences rank attributes in some
order X,, ..., X,,, and treat each attribute as infinitely more important than attributes later in the
order. In choosing between two prizes, the value of attribute X, only matters if the prizes have
the same values forx;, ..., X;-1. Ina lottery, an infinitesimal probability ofa tiny improvement
in a more important attribute is considered better than a dead certainty of a huge improvement in
a less important attribute. For example, in the airport-siting problem, it might be proposed that
preserving human life is of paramount importance, and therefore if one site is more dangerous
than another, it should be ruled out immediately, without considering the other attributes. Only
if two sites are equally safe should they be compared on other attributes such as cost.

a. Give a precise definition of lexicographic preference between deterministic outcomes.
b. Give a precise definition of lexicographic preference between lotteries.

c. Does lexicographic preference violate any of the axioms of utility theory? Ifso, give an
example. (Hint: consider pair-wise preference comparisons ofthree different possibilities.)

d. Suggest a set of attributes for which you might exhibit lexicographic preferences.
16.6 Show that ifX, and X, are preferentially independent of X;, and X2 and X; are preferentially
independent of X,, then it follows that X; and X, are preferentially independent of X2.

16.7 Encode the airport-siting problem as shown in Figure 16.4,provide reasonable probabilities
and utilities, and solve the problem for the case of choosing among three sites. What happens

 
