  

Section 14.1

Acting under Uncertainty 419

 

DECISION THEORY

It is also interesting that utility theory allows for altruism. It is perfectly consistent for
an agent to assign high utility to a state where the agent itself suffers a concrete loss but others
profit. Here, "concrete loss" must denote a reduction in "personal welfare" of the kind normally
associated with altruism or selfishness—wealth, prestige, comfort, and so on—rather than a loss
ofutilityper se. Therefore, utility theory is necessarily "selfish" only if one equates a preference
for the welfare of others with selfishness; conversely, altruism is only inconsistent with the
principle of utility maximization ifone's goals do not include the welfare of others.

Preferences, as expressed by utilities, are combined with probabilities in the general theory
ofrational decisions called decision theory:

Decision theory = probability theory + utility theory

The fundamental idea of decision theory is that an agent is rational ifand only ifit chooses
the action that yields the highest expected utility, averaged over all the possible outcomes of
the action. This is called the principle of Maximum Expected Utility (MEU). Probabilities
and utilities are therefore combined in the evaluation of an action by weighting the utility of a
particular outcome by the probability that it occurs. We saw this principle in action in Chapter 5,
where we examined optimal decisions in backgammon. We will see that it is in facta completely
general principle.

Design for a decision-theoretic agent

The structure of an agent that uses decision theory to select actions is identical, at an abstract
level, to that of the logical agent described in Chapter 6. Figure 14.1 shows what needs to be
done. In this chapter and the next, we will concentrate on the task of computing probabilities for
current states and for the various possible outcomes of actions. Chapter 16 covers utility theory
in more depth, and Chapter 17 fleshes out the complete agent architecture.

 

function DT-AGENY( percept)returns an action
static: a set probabilistic beliefs about the state of the world

calculate updated probabilities for current state based on

available evidence including current percept and previous action
calculate outcome probabilities for actions,

given action descriptions and probabilities of current states
select action with highest expected utility

given probabilities of outcomes and utility information
return action

 

 

Figure 14.1 A decision-theoretic agent that selects rational actions. The steps will be fleshed
out in the next four chapters.

 

 

 

 
