Section 14.6. Summary 433

theoretical model of the conditions they were diagnosing, they were vulnerable to unrepresentative
data occurring in situations for which only a small sample was available (de Dombal ef al., 1981).
Even more fundamentally, because they lacked a concise formalism (such as the one to be
described in Chapter 15) for representing and using conditional independence information, they
depended on the acquisition, storage, and processing of enormous amounts of probabilistic data.
De Dombal's system, for example, was built by gathering and analyzing enough clinical cases
to provide meaningful data for every entry in a large joint probability table. Because of these
difficulties, probabilistic methods for coping with uncertainty fell out of favor in AI from the
1970s to the mid-1980s. In Chapter 15, we will examine the alternative approaches that were
taken and the reason for the resurgence of probabilistic methods in the late 1980s.

There are many good introductory textbooks on probability theory, including those by
Chung (1979) and Ross (1988). Morris DeGroot (1989) offers a combined introduction to
probability and statistics from a Bayesian standpoint, as well as a more advanced text (1970).
Richard Hamming's (1991) textbook gives a mathematically sophisticated introduction to prob-
ability theory from the standpoint of a propensity interpretation based on physical symmetry.
Hacking (1975) and Hald (1990) cover the early history of the concept of probability.

 

EXERCISES

14.1 Show from first principles that
P(A|BAA)=1

142 Consider the domain of dealing five-card poker hands from a standard deck of 52 cards,
under the assumption that the dealer is fair.

a. How many atomic events are there in the joint probability distribution (ie, how many
five-card hands are there)?

b. What is the probability of each atomic event?

c. What is the probability of being dealt a royal straight flush (the ace, king, queen, jack and
ten of the same suit)?

d. What is the probability of four ofa kind?

143 After your yearly checkup, the doctor has bad news and good news. The bad news is that
you tested positive for a serious disease, and that the test is 99% accurate (i.e., the probability of
testing positive given that you have the disease is 0.99, as is the probability of testing negative
given that you don't have the disease). The good news is that this is a rare disease, striking only
one in 10,000 people. Why is it good news that the disease is rare? What are the chances that
you actually have the disease?

144 Would it be rational for an agent to hold the three beliefs P/4) =0.4, P(B) =0.3, and
P(A V B) =0.5? If so, what range of probabilities would be rational for the agent to hold for
A A B? Make up a table like the one in Figure 14.3 and show how it supports your argument

 
