special symbols

‘SECTION 45 Logic Microoperations 109

It specifies a logic microoperation to be executed on the individual bits of the
registers provided that the control variable P = 1. As a numerical example,
assume that each register has four bits. Let the content of R1 be 1010 and the
content of R2 be 1100. The exclusive-OR microoperation stated above symbol-
izes the following logic computation:

1010 Content of R1
1100 Content of R2
0110 Content of R1 after P = 1

The content of R1, after the execution of the microoperation, is equal to the
bit-by-bit exclusive-OR operation on pairs of bits in R2 and previous values of
R1. The logic microoperations are seldom used in scientific computations, but
they are very useful for bit manipulation of binary data and for making logical
decisions.

Special symbols will be adopted for the logicmicrooperations OR, AND,
and complement, to distinguish them from the corresponding symbols used
to express Boolean functions. The symbol \y will be used to denote an OR
microoperation and the symbol /\ to denote an AND microoperation. The
complement microoperation is the same as the 1’s complement and uses a bar
on top of the symbol that denotes the register name. By using different
symbols, it wil be possible to differentiate between a logic microoperation and
a control (or Boolean) function. Another reason for adopting two sets of
symbols is to be able to distinguish the symbol + , when used to symbolize
anarithmetic plus, from alogicOR operation. Although the + symbol hastwo
meanings, it will be possible to distinguish between them by noting where the
symbol occurs, When the symbol + occurs in a microoperation, it will denote
an arithmetic plus. When it occurs in a control (or Boolean) function, it will
denote an OR operation. We will never use it to symbolize an OR microoper-
ation. For example, in the statement

P+Q R1< R2+R3, RA RS V RO

the + between P and Qis an OR operation between two binary variables of a
control function. The + between R2 and R3 specifies an add microoperation.
The OR microoperation is designated by the symbol \v between registers R5
and R6.

List of Logic Microoperations

There are 16 different logic operations that can be performed with two binary
variables, They can be determined from all possible truth tables obtained with
two binary variables as shown in Table 4-5. In this table, each of the 16 columns
Fothrough F,s represents a truth table of one possible Boolean function for the
