Section 16.3,

Utility Functions

479

 

 

 

 

 

HUMAN JUDGMENT AND FALLIBILITY

Decision theory is a normative theory: it describes how a rational agent should
act. The application of economic theory would be greatly enhanced if it were also a
descriptive theory of actual human decision making. However, there is experimental
evidence indicating that people systematically violate the axioms of utility theory.
An example is given by the psychologists Tversky and Kahneman (1982), based on
an example by the economist Allais (1953). Subjects in this experiment are given a
choice between lotteries A and B, and then between C and D:

A: 80% chance of $4000 C: 20% chance of $4000
B: 100% chance of $3000 D: 25% chance of $3000

The majority of subjects choose B over A and C over D. But if we assign U($0) = 0,
then the first of these choices implies that 0.8U/($4000) < U($3000), whereas the
second choice implies exactly the reverse. In other words, there seems to be no utility
function that is consistent with these choices. One possible conclusion is that humans
are simply irrational by the standards of our utility axioms. An altemative view is that
the analysis does not take into account regret—the feeling that humans know they
would experience if they gave up a certain reward (B) for an 80% chance at a higher
reward, and then lost. In other words, ifA is chosen, there is a 20% chance of getting
no money and feeling like a complete idiot.

Kahneman and Tversky go on to develop a descriptive theory that explains how
people are risk-averse with high-probability events, but are willing to take more risks
with unlikely payoffs. The connection between this finding and AT is that the choices
our agents can make are only as good as the preferences they are based on. If our
human informants insist on contradictory preference judgments, there is nothing our
agent can do to be consistent with them.

Fortunately, preference judgments made by humans are often open to revision
in the light of further consideration. In early work at Harvard Business School on
assessing the utility of money, Keeney and Raiffa (1976, p. 210) found the following:

A great deal of empirical investigation has shown that there is a serious deficiency
in the assessment protocol. Subjects tend to be too risk-averse in the small and
therefore . .. the fitted utility functions exhibit unacceptably large risk premiums
for lotteries with a large spread. .., Most ofthe subjects, however, can reconcile
their inconsistencies and feel that they have leamed an important lesson about how
they want to behave. As a consequence, some subjects cancel their automobile
collision insurance and take out more term insurance on their lives.

 

Even today, human (ir)rationality is the subject ofintensive investigation.

 

 

 
