420

Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

14.2 BASIC PROBABILITY NOTATION

UNCONDITIONAL
PRIOR PROBABILITY

RANDOM VARIABLES

DOMAIN

Now that we have set up the general framework for a rational agent, we will need a formal language
for representing and reasoning with uncertain knowledge. Any notation for describing degrees of
belief must be able to deal with two main issues: the nature of the sentences to which degrees of
belief are assigned, and the dependence of the degree of belief on the agent's state of knowledge.
The version of probability theory we present uses an extension of propositional logic for its
sentences. The dependence on experience is reflected in the syntactic distinction between prior
probability statements, which apply before any evidence is obtained, and conditional probability
statements, which include the evidence explicitly.

Prior probability

We will use the notation P(A) for the unconditional or prior probability that the proposition A
is true. For example, if Cavity denotes the proposition that a particular patient has a cavity,

P(Cavity) = 0.1

means that in the absence ofany other information,the agent will assign a probability of 0.1
(a 10% chance) to the event of the patient's having a cavity. It is important to remember that
P(A) can only be used when there is no other information. As soon as some new information
B is known, we have to reason with the conditional probability of A given B instead of P(A).
Conditional probabilities are covered in the next section. 3
The proposition that is the subject of a probability statement can be represented by a
proposition symbol, as in the P(A) example. Propositions can also include equalities involving
so-called random variables. For example, if we are concerned about the random variable
Weather, we might have 4

 

P(Weather = Cloudy) = 0.08
P(Weather = Snow) = 0.02

Each random variable X has a domain of possible values {x,,... ,x,)that it can take on.5 We will 3
usually deal with discrete sets of values, although continuous random variables will be discussed
briefly in Chapter 15. We can view proposition symbols as random variables as well, if we
assume that they have a domain (rrve, false). Thus, the expression P(Cavity)can be viewed as
shorthand for P(Cavity = true). Similarly, P(>Cavity)is shorthand for P(Cavity = false). Usually,
we will use the letters 4, B, and so on for Boolean random variables, and the letters.X, Y, and so
on for multivalued variables.

Sometimes, we will want to talk about the probabilities of all the possible values of a
random variable. In this case, we will use an expression such as P(Weather), which denotes a

5 In probability, the variables are capitalized, while the values are lowercase. This is unfortunately the reverse of logical
notation, but it is the tradition.

 
