Section 15.1.

Representing Knowledge in an Uncertain Domain 437

 

1. A set ofrandom variables makes up the nodes of the network.
2. A set of directed links or arrows connects pairs of nodes. The intuitive meaning of an

arrow from node X to node Y is that.X has a direct influence on Y.

3. Each node has a conditional probability table that quantifies the effects that the parents
have on the node. The parents ofa node are all those nodes that have arrows pointing to it
4. The graph has no directed cycles (hence is a directed, acyclic graph, or DAG).
It is usually easy for a domain expert to decide what direct conditional dependence relationships
hold in the domain—much easier, in fact, than actually specifying the probabilities themselves.
Once the topology of the belief network is specified, we need only specify conditional probabil-
ities for the nodes that participate in direct dependencies, and use those to compute any other
probability values.

Consider the following situation. You have a new burglar alarm installed at home. It is
fairly reliable at detecting a burglary, but also responds on occasion to minor earthquakes. (This
example is due to Judea Pearl, a resident of Los Angeles; hence the acute interest in earthquakes.)
You also have two neighbors, John and Mary, who have promised to call you at work when they
hear the alarm. John always calls when he hears the alarm, but sometimes confuses the telephone
ringing with the alam and calls then, too. Mary, on the other hand, likes rather loud music and
sometimes misses the alarm altogether. Given the evidence of who has or has not called, we
would like to estimate the probability of a burglary. This simple domain is described by the belief
network in Figure 15.1.

The topology of the network can be thought of as an abstract knowledge base that holds
in a wide variety of different settings, because it represents the general structure of the causal
processes in the domain rather than any details of the population of individuals. In the case of the
burglary network, the topology shows that burglary and earthquakes directly affect the probability
of the alarm going off, but whether or not John and Mary call depends only on the alarm—the
network thus represents our assumption that they do not perceive any burglaries directly, and they
do not feel the minor earthquakes.

Burglary Earthquake

 

Figure 15.1 A typical belief network.

 

 

 

 

 
