Section 21.3. Learning Using Relevance Information 633

 

21.3 LEARNING USING RELEVANCE INFORMATION

Our traveller in Brazil seems to be able to make a confident generalization concerning the
language spoken by other Brazilians. The inference is sanctioned by her background knowledge,
namely, that people in a given country (usually) speak the same language. We can express this in
first-order logic as follows:?

Vx,y,n,/ Nationality(x,n) A Nationality(y,n) A Language(x, l) = Language(y,l) (21.4)

(Literal translation: "Ifx andy have a common nationality n and x speaks language /, then y also
speaks it.”) It is not difficult to show that, given this sentence and the observation

Nationality(Fernando,Brazil) A Language(Fernando, Portuguese)

the conclusion
Vx Nationality(x,Brazil) = Language(x, Portuguese)

follows logically (see Exercise 21.1).
Sentences such as (21.4) express a strict form of relevance: given nationality, language is
fully determined. Put another way: language is a function of nationality. These sentences are
DEPENDENCIES called functional dependencies or determinations. They occur so commonly in certain kinds
DETERMINATIONS of applications (¢.g., defining database designs) that a special syntax is used to write them. We
adopt the notation used by Davies (1985):

Nationality(x,n) > Language(x, 1)

As usual, this is simply a syntactic sugaring, but it makes it clear that the determination is really
a relationship between the predicates: nationality determines language. The relevant properties
determining conductance and density can be expressed similarly:

Material(x,m) A Temperature(x,t) > Conductance(x,p)
Material(x,m) A Temperature(x,t) > Density(x,d)

The corresponding generalizations follow logically from the determinations and observations.

Determining the hypothesis space

Although the determinations sanction general conclusions concerning all Brazilians, or all pieces
of copper at a given temperature, they cannot, of course, yield a general predictive theory for all
nationalities, or for all temperatures and materials, from a single example. Their main effect can
be seen as limiting the space of hypotheses that the learning agent need consider. In predicting
conductance, for example, one has only to consider material and temperature and can ignore
mass, ownership, day of the week, the current president, and so on. Hypotheses can certainly
include terms that are in turn determined by material and temperature, such as molecular structure,

thermal energy, or free-electron density. Determinations specify a sufficient basis vocabulary

 

2 We assume for the sake of simplicity that a person speaks only one language. Clearly, the rule also would have to be
amended for countries such as Switzerland or India
