660

Chapter 22 Agents that Communicate

 

TELEPATHIC
COMMUNICATION

Communicating using Tell and Ask

In this section, we study a form of communication in which agents share the same internal repre-
sentation language and have direct access to each other's knowledge bases through the TELL and
ASK interface. That is, agent 4 can communicate proposition P to agent B with TeLL(KB,,"P"),
just as A would add P to its own knowledge base with TELL(KB,,"P"). Similarly, agent 4 can find
out ifB knows Q with Ask(KB,, “Q”). We will call this telepathic communication. Figure 22.2
shows a schematic diagram in which each agent is modified to have an input/output port to its
knowledge base, in addition to the perception and action ports.

Humans are lacking in telepathy powers, so they cannot make use of this kind of commu-
nication, but it is feasible to program a group of robots with a common internal representation
language and equip them with radio or infrared links to transmit internal representations directly
to each other's knowledge bases. Then if agent 4 wanted to tell agent B that there is a pit in
location [2,3], all.4 would have to do is execute:

TELL(KBp.“Pit(Pai)A At(Pas, [2.3]. Sa9)")

where Syo is the current situation, and P4) is A's symbol for the pit. For this to work, the
agents have to agree notjust on the format of the internal representation language, but also on a
great many symbols. Some of the symbols are static: they have a fixed denotation that can be
easily agreed on ahead of time. Examples are the predicates At and Pit, the constants A and B
representing the agents, and the numbering scheme for locations.

Other symbols are dynamic: they are created after the agents start exploring the world.
Examples include the constant P,; representing a pit, and Sy representing the current situation.
The hard part is synchronizing the use of these dynamic symbols. There are three difficulties:

1. There has to be a naming policy so that A and B do not simultaneously introduce the same
symbol to mean different things. We have adopted the policy that each agent includes its
own name as part of the subscript to each symbol it introduces.

2. There has to be some way of relating symbols introduced by different agents, so that an
agent can tell whether P4; and, say, Ps: denote the same pit or not. In part, this is the same
problem that a single agent faces. An agent that detects a breeze in two different squares

 

Communication with Tell and Ask

Agent B

  
 

—_— —— s es
Percepts Actions Percepts ‘ Actions

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 22.2. Two agents with a shared internal language communicating directly with each
other's knowledge bases through TELL and ASK.

 

 

 
