   
 

390 Chapter 12. Practical Planning

 

about the allocation of limited resources to various plan steps. MOLGEN (Stefik, 1981b:
Stefik, 198 1a) allowed reasoning about objects that are only partially specified (via constraints),
GarI (Descotte and Latombe, 1985) allowed hierarchical reasoning with constraints, in that some
lower-level constraints are given lower priorities and may be violated at some stages during plan
construction. O-PLAN (Bell and Tate, 1985)had a uniform, general representation for constraints
on time and resources. . 4

Classical situation calculus had allowed the full predicate calculus for describing the
preconditions and effects of plan steps. Later formalisms have tried to get much of this expres- 4
siveness back, without sacrificing the efficiency gained by the use of STRIPS operators. The ADL |
planning formalism (Pednault, 1986) allows for multiagent planning and avoids the problems
with the STRIPS formalism that were pointed out by Lifschitz (1986). PEDESTAL (McDer-
mott, 1991) was the first (partial) implementation of ADL. UCPOP (Penberthy and Weld, 1992;
Barrett et al., 1993) is a more complete implementation of ADL that also allows for partial-order
planning. POP-DUNC is based largely on this work. Weld (1994) describes UCPOP and gives a
general introductionto partial-order planning with actions having conditional effects. Kambham-
pati and Nau (1993) analyze the applicability of Chapman's (1987) NP-hardness results to actions ‘
with conditional effects. Wolfgang Bibel (1986) has attempted to revive the use of full predicate -4
calculus for planning, counting on advances in theorem proving to avoid the intractability that
this led to in the early days of planning.

The improvements in the richness of the representations used in modem planners have
helped make them more nearly equal to the challenges of real-world planning tasks than was
STRIPS. Several systems have been used to plan for scientific experimentation and observation.
MOLGEN was used in the design of scientific experiments in molecular genetics. T-SCHED
(Drabble, 1990) was used to schedule mission command sequences for the Uosat-II satellite. |
PLAN-ERS1 (Fuchs ef al., 1990), based on O-PLAN, was used for observation planning at the
European Space Agency; SPIKE (Johnston and Adorf, 1992) was used for observation planning
at NASA for the Hubble space telescope. Manufacturing has been another fertile application
area for advanced planning systems. OptimuM-AIV (Aarup et al., 1994), based on O-PLAN, 4
has been used in spacecraft assembly at the European Space Agency. Isis (Fox et al., 1981; }
Fox, 1990) has been used forjob shop scheduling at Westinghouse. GARI planned the machining
and construction of mechanical parts. FORBIN was used for factory control. NONLIN+ was used
fornaval logistics planning. Sipr has had a number of applications, including planning for aircraft
cartier flight deck operations.

TS

EXERCISES
12.1 Give decompositions for the Hire Builder and Obtain Permit steps in Figure 12.1, and
show how the decomposed subplans connect into the overall plan. 3
12.2 Rework the previous exercise using an approximation hierarchy. That is, assign criticality

levels to each precondition of each step. How did you decide which preconditions get higher
criticality levels?
