 

14 uncertainty

 

 

In which we see what an agent should do when not all is crystal clear.

14.1_ACTING UNDER UNCERTAINTY

UNCERTAINTY

One problem with first-order logic, and thus with the logical-agent approach, is that agents
almost never have access to the whole truth about their environment. Some sentences can
be ascertained directly from the agent's percepts, and others can be inferred from current and
previous percepts together with knowledge about the properties of the environment. In almost
every case, however, even in worlds as simple as the wumpus world in Chapter 6, there will
be important questions to which the agent cannot find a categorical answer. The agent must
therefore act under uncertainty. For example, a wumpus agent often will find itself unable to
discover which of two squares contains a pit. If those squares are en route to the gold, then the
agent might have to take a chance and enter one of the two squares.

Uncertainty can also arise because of incompleteness and incorrectness in the agent's
understanding of the properties of the environment. The qualification problem, mentioned in
Chapter 7, says that many rules about the domain will be incomplete, because there are too
many conditions to be explicitly enumerated, or because some of the conditions are unknown.
Suppose, for example, that the agent wants to drive someone to the airport to catch a flight, and
is considering a plan Aso that involves leaving home 90 minutes before the flight departs and
driving at a reasonable speed. Even though the airport is only about 15 miles away, the agent will
not be able to reach a definite conclusion such as "Plan Ago will get us to the airport in time," but
rather only the weaker conclusion "Plan Aggy will get us to the airport in time, as long as my car
doesn't break down or run out of gas, and I don't get into an accident, and there are no accidents
on the bridge, and the plane doesn't leave early, and there's no earthquake, ... ”' A logical

! Conditional planning can overcome uncertainty to some extent, but only if the agent's sensing actions can obtain the
required information, and if there are not too many different contingencies.

AIS
