Section 23.6.

Discourse Understanding 715

 

METAPHOR

Other metonymies include the author for the works (I read Shakespeare) or more generally the
producer for the product (I drive a Honda) and the part for the whole (The Red Sox need a strong
arm). Other examples ofmetonymy, such as "The ham sandwich on Table 4 wants another beer,"
are somewhat harder to classify.

Metaphor

A metaphor is a figure of speech in which a phrase with one literal meaning is used to suggest
a different meaning by way of an analogy. Most people think of metaphor as a tool used by
poets that does not play a large role in everyday text. However, there are a number of basic
metaphors that are so common that we do not even recognize them as such. One such metaphor
is the idea that more is up. This metaphor allows us to say that prices have risen, climbed, or
skyrocketed, that the temperature has dipped or fallen, that one's confidence has plummeted, or
that a celebrity's popularity has jumped or soared.

There are two ways to approach metaphors like this. One is to compile all knowledge of
the metaphor into the lexicon—to add new senses of the words rise, fall, climb, and so on, that
describe them as dealing with quantities on any scale rather than just altitude. This approach
suffices for many applications, but it does not capture the generative character of the metaphor
that allows humans to use new instances such as "nose-dive" without fear of misunderstanding
The second approach is to include explicit knowledge of common metaphors and use them to
interpret new uses as they are read. For example, suppose the system knows the "more is up"
metaphor. That is, it knows that logical expressions that refer to a point on a vertical scale can be
interpreted as being about corresponding points on a quantity scale. Then the expression "sales
are high" would get a literal interpretation along the lines of Alritude(Sales, High), which could
be interpreted metaphorically as Quantity(Sales, Much).

23.6 _ DISCOURSE UNDERSTANDING

DISCOURSE
TEXT

In the technical sense, a discourse or text is any string of language, usually one that is more than
one sentence long. Novels, weather reports, textbooks, conversations, and almost all nontrivial
uses of language are discourses. So far we have largely ignored the problems of discourse,
preferring to dissect language into individual sentences that can be studied in vitro. In this
section, we study sentences in their native habitat.

To produce discourse, a speaker must go through the standard steps of intention, genera-
tion, and synthesis. Discourse understanding includes perception, analysis (and thus syntactic,
semantic, and pragmatic interpretation), disambiguation, and incorporation. The hearer's state of
knowledge plays a crucial part in arriving at an understanding—two agents with different knowl-
edge may well understand the same text differently. Discourse understanding can be modelled
crudely by the following equation:

KB! = DiscouRSE-UNDERSTANDING (text, KB)

 
