  

Section 15.6.

Other Approaches to Uncertain Reasoning 463

 

FULLY SET THEORY

Wy

FUZZY LOGIC

Representing vagueness: Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic

Fuzzy set theory is a means of specifying how well an object satisfies a vague description. For
example, consider the proposition “Nate is tall." Is this true, given that Nate is 5’ 10"? Most
people would hesitate to answer "true" or "false," preferring to say, "sort of." Note that this is not
a question of uncertainty about the external world — we are sure of Nate's height. Rather it is a
case of vagueness or uncertainty about the meaning of the linguistic term "tall." So most authors

say thatfuzzy set theory is not a methodfor uncertain reasoning at all.

Another way to think of this is as similarity to a prototype — how close is Nate to our
prototype for tall person? We could express this in logical notation by making TallPersona
constant and having a function Similarity that compares things to it:

Similarity(Nate, TallPerson) = SortOf

Fuzzy set theory takes a slightly different approach: it treats Tal/Person as a fuzzy predicate and
says that the truth value of Tal/Person(Natejs a number between 0 and 1, rather than being just
True or False. The name "fuzzy set" derives from the interpretation of the predicate as implicitly
defining a set of its members, a set that does not have sharp boundaries. Consider a kennel
with 60 rottweilers and 40 retrievers. If we pick a dog at random, the probability of it being a
rottweiler is 0.6; this is uncertainty. The uncertainty can be resolved by looking at the dog. But if
a rottweiler and a retriever were to mate, then the puppies would be half rottweiler, half retriever.
There is no uncertainty here, no additional evidence we can gather to determine the breed of the
puppies. Rather, this is a case of fuzziness at the boundary between two breeds.

Fuzzy logic takes a complex sentence such as JallPerson(Nate)V Smart(Nate)and deter-
mines its truth value as a function of the truth values of its components. The rules for evaluating
the fuzzy truth, J of a complex sentence are

TIAA By = min(T(A), T(B))
T(AV B) = max(T(A),T(B))
T(-A) = 1-—T(A)

Fuzzy logic is therefore a truth-functional system, and is thus subject to all the usual problems.
It has the additional problem that it is inconsistent with normal propositional or first-order logic.
We would like any logic to ensure that standard equivalences such as A V =A <= True hold, but
in fuzzy logic, T(A V 7A) #7 (True).

Despite these serious semantic difficulties, fuzzy logic has been very successful in commer-
cial applications, particularly in control systems for products such as automatic transmissions,
trains, video cameras, and electric shavers. Elkan (1993) argues that these applications are suc-
cessful because they have small rule bases, have no chaining of inferences, and have tunable
parameters that can be adjusted to improve the system's performance (often by learning tech-
niques). The fact that they are implemented with fuzzy operators is incidental to their success.
Elkan predicts that when more complex applications are tackled with fuzzy logic, they will run
into the same kinds of problems that plagued knowledge-based systems using certainty factors
and other approaches. As one might expect, the debate continues.
