780

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

MANIPULATORS

 

passive caster

V

independently
controlled wheels

 

 

Figure 253 The wheel arrangement on the Hilare mobile robot, viewed from the bottom.

 

 

 

has a minimum turning radius or can turn on the spot. Ifthe latter is true, then itis always possible
to move from configuration A to B by turning on the spot toward B, moving to B in a straight
line, and rotating on the spot to the orientation of B. Ifthere is a turning-radius constraint, or if
one would like to move without slowing down too much (which generates the same constraint),
a special path planner is needed. It can be shown that the shortest path in such cases consists of
straight-line segments joining segments of circles with the minimum radius.

Sometimes the robot's design makes the control of locomotion very difficult. Reversing a
wheeled vehicle with several trailers is beyond the capability of most humans; hence some large
fire engines are fitted with a second steering wheel for the back wheels to make it easier. Fire
engines have only a single trailer, but two-trailer examples can be seen at any modern airport.
When leaving a gate, most aircraft are driven by a nose-wheel tender. The nose-wheel tender
(the car) drives a long link attached to the nose wheel (first trailer). The aircraft itself forms the
second trailer. This combination must be backed out of the gate each time an aircraft departs,
and the only control is the steering of the tender. Fortunately, the much greater length of the
aircraft makes it insensitive to small motions of the tender and link, and the control problem is
tractable for an experienced driver. Recent advances in control theory have resulted in algorithms
for automatically steering vehicles with any number of trailers of any size

Manipulation

We return now to manipulators, effectors that move objects in the environment. The ancestors of
robot manipulators were teleoperated mechanisms that allowed humans to manipulate hazardous
