Section 13.5.

Summary 411

 

SS
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

REACTIVE PLANNING

Early planners, which lacked conditionals and loops, sometimes resorted to a coercive style in
response to environmental uncertainty. Sacerdoti's NOAH used coercion in its solution to the
"keys and boxes" problem, a planning challenge problem in which the planner knows little about
the initial state. Mason (1993) argued that sensing often can and should be dispensed with in
robotic planning, and describes a sensorless plan that can move a tool into a specific position on
a table by a sequence of tilting actions regardless of the initial position

WARPLAN-C (Warren, 1976), a variant of WARPLAN, was one of the earliest planners to use
conditional actions. Olawski and Gini (1990) lay out the major issues involved in conditional
planning. Recent systems for partial-order conditional planning include UWL (Etzioni et al.,
1992) and CNLP (Peot and Smith, 1992), on which CPOP is based). C-BuRIDAN (Draper ef al.,
1994) handles conditional planning for actions with probabilistic outcomes, thereby connecting
to the work on Markov decision problems described in Chapter 17.

There is a close relation between conditional planning and automated program synthesis,
for which there are a number of references in Chapter 10. The two fields have usually been
pursued separately because of the enormous difference in typical cost between execution of
machine instructions and execution of actions by robot vehicles or manipulators. Linden (1991)
attempts explicit cross-fertilization between the two fields.

The earliest major treatment of execution monitoring was PLANEX (Fikes ef al., 1972),
which worked with the STRIPS planner to control the robot Shakey. PLANEX used triangle tables
to allow recovery from partial execution failure without complete replanning. Shakey’s model of
execution is discussed further in Chapter 25. The NASL planner (McDermott, 1978a) treated a
planning problem simply as a specification for carrying out a complex action, so that execution
and planning were completely unified. It used theorem proving to reason about these complex
actions. IPEM (Integrated Planning, Execution, and Monitoring) (Ambros-Ingerson and Steel,
1988), which was the first system to smoothly integrate partial-order planning and planning
execution, forms the basis for the discussion in this chapter.

A system that contains an explicitly represented agent function, whether implemented as
a table or a set of condition-action rules, need not worry about unexpected developments in the
environment. All it has to do is to execute whatever action its function recommends for the
state in which it finds itself (or in the case of inaccessible environments, the percept sequence to
date). The field of reactive planning aims to take advantage of this fact, thereby avoiding the
complexities ofplanning in dynamic, inaccessible environments. "Universal plans" (Schoppers,
1987) were developed as a scheme for reactive planning, but turned out to be a rediscovery of
the idea of policies in Markov decision processes. Brooks's (1986) subsumption architecture
(also discussed in Chapter 25) uses a layered finite state machine to represent the agent function,
and stresses the use of minimal internal state. Another important manifestation of the reactive
planning paradigm is Pengi (Agre and Chapman, 1987), designed as a response to the criticism
of classical AI planning in Chapman (1987). Ginsberg (1989) made a spirited attack on reactive
planning, including intractability results for some formulations of the reactive planning problem.
For an equally spirited response, see Schoppers (1989).
