802

FINEMOTION
PLATINING

Chapter 25. Robotics

the easiest is to define a linking curve as the roadmap ofa critical slice. Because roadmaps
are defined in terms of linking curves, this is a circular definition. But because the linking
curve is a roadmap ofa slice that has one less dimension, the recursive construction is
well-defined and terminates after a number of steps that equals the dimension of C.

One disadvantage of this definition is that it gives curves on the boundary of free space. This
is undesirable from both efficiency and safety perspectives. A slightly better definition borrows
some ideas from Voronoi diagrams. Instead of using extremals in Y to define the silhouette
curves, it uses extremals of distance from obstacles in slices X - c. This sounds like the same
definition as the Voronoi diagram, but there are slight differences in two dimensions, and major
differences in more than two. The definition of linking curves also changes. They still link
critical points to silhouette curves, but this time, linking curves are computed by moving away
from a critical point along curves that follow the direction of maximum increase of the distance
function. In other words, start from a critical point, and hill-climb in configuration space to a
local maximum of the distance function. That point lies on a silhouette curve under the new
definition. This kind of roadmap is exemplified in Figure 25.18.

av
—

Figure 25.18 A Voronoi-like roadmap ofa polygonal environment.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fine-motion planning

Fine-motion planning (FMP) is about planning small, precise motions for assembly. At the
distance scales appropriate for FMP, the environment is not precisely known. Furthermore, the
robot is unable to measure or control its position accurately. Dealing with these uncertainties is
the principal concern of FMP. Like online algorithms, fine-motion plans are strategies or policies
that make use of sensing or environment shape to determine the robot's path atrun time. However,
whereas online algorithms assume nothing about the environment, partial knowledge is available
to the fine-motion planner. This knowledge includes explicit models of the uncertainties in

 
