Section 23.7.

Summary 721

 

 

EXERCISES

23.1 Read the following text once for understanding and remember as much of it as you can.
There will be a test later.

The procedure is actually quite simple. First you arrange things into different groups. Of
course, one pile may be sufficientdepending on how much there is to do. If you have to go
somewhere else due to lack of facilities that is the next step, otherwise you are pretty well
set. It is important not to overdo things. That is, it is better to do too few things at once
than too many. In the short run this may not seem important but complications can easily
arise. A mistake is expensive as well. At first the whole procedure will seem complicated.
Soon, however, it will becomejust another facet of life. It is difficult to foresee any end to the
necessity for this task in the immediate future, but then one can never tell. After the procedure
is completed one arranges the material into different groups again. Then they can be put into
their appropriate places. Eventually they will be used once more and the whole cycle will
have to be repeated. However, this is part of life.

23.2 Describe how a simple pseudo-natural-language (template-based) explanation facility can
be built for a vanilla, backward-chaining, logical reasoning system. The explanation facility
should be written as a program WHY that generates an explanation after ASK has answered a
question from the user. The explanation should consist of a description of the premises and
inference method used to reach the conclusion; the user should be able to further query the
premises to see how they were derived.

233 Without looking back at Exercise 23.1, answer the following questions:

+ What are the four steps that are mentioned?

* What step is left out?

* What is "the material" that is mentioned in the text?
* What kind of mistake would be expensive?

+ Is it better to do too few or too many?

+ Why?

234 Open any book or magazine to a random page and write down the first 20 nominal
compounds you find. Characterize the semantic relations (e.g., made-of, used-for, etc.).

23.5 Open any book or magazine to a random page and copy down the first 10 sentences. How
many of them are in £3 ? Show the parses of the sentences that are, and explain what went wrong
for the sentences that are not.

23.6 Work out the grammar rules for possessive noun phrases. There are three parts to this. (a)
Write a rule of the form Det —- NP(Case(Possessive)). (b) Make sure this rule combines with
the NP —+ Det Noun rule to produce the right semantics. (c) Write a rule that builds a possessive
