Chapter 24. Perception

 

24.6 A stereo system is being contemplated for terrain mapping. It will consist of two CCD
cameras, each having 512 x 512 pixels on a 10cm x |0cm square sensor. The lenses to be used
have focal length 16cm, and focus is fixed at infinity. For corresponding points (;, v,) in the left
image and (u2, v)in the right image, v, = V2 as the x-axes in the two image planes are parallel
to the epipolar lines. The optical,axes of the two cameras are parallel. The baseline between the
cameras is 1 meter.

a. Ifthe nearest range to be measured is 16meters, what is the largest disparity that will occur
(in pixels}?

b. What is the range resolution, due to the pixel spacing, at 16 meters?

c. What range corresponds to a disparity of one pixel?

24.7 In Figure 24.30, physically measure the cross ratio of the points ABCD as well as of the
points A’B’C’D’, Are they equal?

24.8 We wish to use the alignment algorithm in an industrial situation where flat parts are
moving along a conveyor belt and being photographed by a camera vertically above the conveyor
belt. The pose of the part is specified by three variables, one for the rotation and two for the 2-D
position. This simplifies the problem and the function FIND-TRANSFORM needs only two pairs
of corresponding image and model features to determine the pose. Determine the worst-case
complexity ofthe alignment procedure in this context.

24.9 Read this chapter from the beginning until you find ten examples of homophones. Does
the status of a word as a homophone depend on the accent of the speaker?

24.10 Calculate the most probable path through the HMM in Figure 24.36 for the output
sequence [C1,C2,C3,C4,C4,C6,C7]. Also give its probability.

24.11 Some sports announcers have been known to celebrate a score with the drawn out
pronunciation [g ow ow ow ow ow ow el]. Draw a word HMM for "goal" such that the most
probable path has a sequence of four [ow]s, but any number greater than 1 is possible.

24.12 The Viterbi algorithm finds the most probable sequence of phones corresponding to
the speech signal. Under the assumption that some words can be pronounced with more than
one sequence of phones, explain why the Viterbi algorithm only computes an approximation to
P(words|signal).

 
