Section 17.7.

Summary 519

 

particularly when combined with plan libraries. At present, we do not really know how to
extend these methods into the probabilistic domain. A second, related problem is the basically
propositional nature of our probabilistic language. It is impossible, within the language of
probability theory, to state properly beliefs such as "If any car hits a lamp post going over 30
mph, the occupants of the car will be injured with probability 0.6," because probability theory
has no quantifiers ("any car") and no functions (“occupants of the car"). What this means
in practice is that some of what goes on in DBNs and DDNs is that programs (rather than
pure probabilistic inferences) are responsible for choosing which random variables to instantiate
and for filling in their conditional probability tables. If we had an appropriate combination of
first-order logic with probability, many of these difficulties could be addressed within a well-
understood reasoning system. Work on such a language is one of the most important topics in
knowledge representation research, and some progress has been made recently (Bacchus, 1990;
Bacchus et al., 1992).

Overall, the potential payoff of combining DDN-like techniques with planning methods is
enormous. The technical and mathematical problems involved in getting it right are difficult, but
it is an important area of current research.

17.7__ SUMMARY

This chapter shows how to use knowledge about the world to make decisions even when the
outcomes of an action are uncertain and the payoffs will not be reaped until several (or many)
actions have passed. The main points are as follows:

Sequential decision problems in uncertain environments can be solved by calculating a
policy that associates an optimal decision with every state that the agent might reach.
Value iteration and policy iteration are two methods for calculating optimal policies.
Both are closely related to the general computational technique of dynamic programming.
Slightly more complex methods are needed to handle the case where the length ofthe action
sequence is unbounded. We briefly discussed the use of system gain and discounting.
State-based methods for sequential decision problems do not scale well to large state
spaces. Heuristic techniques using best-first search and a limited horizon seem to mitigate
this to some extent, but suffer from local minima

Decomposing the state into a set of state variables provides a significant advantage. It also
simplifies the handling of inaccessible environments.

We derived a simple updating cycle for a decision-theoretic agent, using a set of Markov
assumptions.

We showed how dynamic belief networks can handle sensing and updating over time, and
provide a direct implementation of the update cycle.

We showed how dynamic decision networks can solve sequential decision problems,
handling many (but not all) of the issues arising for agents in complex, uncertain domains.
