746

Chapter 24. Perception

 

TRIHEDRAL

CRACKS

 

 

 

 

Figure 24.19 An evocative line drawing. (Courtesy of Isha Malik.)

 

 

 

1. “+” and “—" labels represent convex and concave edges, respectively. These are associated
with surface normal discontinuities where both surfaces that meet along the edge are visible.

2. A“—" ora “—" represents an occluding convex edge. When viewed from the camera,
both surface patches that meet along the edge lie on the same side, one occluding the other.
As one moves in the direction of the arrow, these surfaces are to the right.

3. A “——” or a “——" represents a limb. Here the surface curves smoothly around to
occlude itself. As one moves in the direction of the twin arrows, the surface lies to the
right. The line of sight is tangential to the surface for all points on the limb. Limbs move
on the surface of the object as the viewpoint changes.

Of the 6" combinatorially possible label assignments to the 7 lines in a drawing, only a small
number are physically possible. The determination of these label assignments is the line labelling
problem. Note that the problem only makes sense ifthe label is the same all the way alonga line.
This is not always true, because the label can change along a line for images of curved objects.
In this section, we will deal only with polyhedral objects, so this is not a concem.

Huffman (1971) and Clowes (1971) independently attempted the first systematic approach
to polyhedral scene analysis. Huffman and Clowes limited their analysis to scenes with opaque
trihedral solids—objects in which exactly three plane surfaces come together at each vertex.
For scenes with multiple objects, they also ruled out object alignments that would result in a
violation of the trihedral assumption, such as two cubes sharing a common edge. Cracks, that
is, "edges" across which the tangent planes are continuous, were also not permitted. For the
trihedral world, Huffman and Clowes made an exhaustive listing of all the different vertex types
and the different ways in which they could be viewed under general viewpoint. The general
viewpoint condition essentially ensures that if there is a small movement of the eye, none of the
junctions changes character. For example, this condition implies that if three lines intersect in
the image, the corresponding edges in the scene must also intersect.

 
