Chapter 25. Robotics

 

GENERALIZED
CONFIGURATION
‘SPACE

ASSEMBLY
PLANNING.

 

 

 

 

Figure 2511 (a) A workspace with a rotary two-link arm. The goal is to move from configu-
ration c| to configuration C2. (b) The corresponding configuration space, showing the free space
and a path that achieves the goal.

 

 

 

Generalized configuration space

The term generalized configuration space has been applied to systems where the state of
other objects is included as part of the configuration. The other objects may be movable, and
their shapes may vary. Shape variation occurs in objects such as scissors or staplers that have
mechanical joints, and in deformable objects like string and paper. Generalized configuration
spaces are especially useful in understanding tasks such as assembly planning in which the robot
must move a set of objects into some desired arrangement.

Let £ denote the space of all possible configurations of all possible objects in the world,
other than the robot. Ifa given configuration can be defined by a finite set of parameters
Q),...,@m, then £ will be an m-dimensional space. This will not work for objects like string and
paper, whose shapes are not describable with finitely many parameters. These objects represent
aconsiderable challenge for geometric modelling at this stage. But we can use £ as a conceptual
tool even in those cases.

Now consider W = C x £. W is the space of all possible configurations of the world, both
robot and obstacles. In the two-link robot C described earlier, there was no variation in the object
shapes, so £ was a single point and W and C were equivalent

If all of the objects in the environment are robots under central control, then the situation
is really the same as before. In this setting, it is best to cluster all the degrees of freedom of the
robots together to create a single super-robot. The generalized configuration space is the space of
all joint angles for all robots. Ilegal configurations now include those where two robots overlap
