Section 25.4.

Architectures 787

 

‘MACRO-OPERATORS

from fully deliberative to fully reflex. There is no accepted theory of architecture design that
can be used to prove that one design is better than another. Many theoreticians deride the entire
problem as "just a bunch of boxes and arrows." Nonetheless, many superficially different designs
seem to have incorporated the same set of features for dealing with the real world.

Classical architecture

By the late 1960s, primitive but serviceable tools for intelligent robots were available. These
included vision systems that could locate simple polyhedral objects; two-dimensional path-
planning algorithms; and resolution theorem provers that could construct simple, symbolic plans
using situation calculus. From these tools, together with a collection of wheels, motors and
sensors, emerged Shakey, the forerunner of many intelligent robot projects

The first version of Shakey, appearing in 1969, demonstrated the importance of experi-
mental research in bringing to light unsuspected difficulties. The researchers found that general-
purpose resolution theorem-provers were too inefficient to find nontrivial plans, that integrating
geometric and symbolic representations of the world was extremely difficult, and that plans don't
work. This last discovery came about because Shakey was designed to execute plans without
monitoring their success or failure. Because of wheel slippage, measurement errors and so on,
almost all plans of any length failed at some point during execution.

The second version of Shakey incorporated several improvements. First, most of the
detailed work of finding paths and moving objects was moved from the general problem-solving
level down into special-purpose programs called intermediate-level actions (ILAs). These
actions in fact consisted of complex routines of low-level actions (LLAs) for controlling the
physical robot, and included some error detection and recovery capabilities. For example, one
ILA called NavTo could move the robot from one place to another within a room by calling
the A* algorithm to plan a path and then calling LLAs to execute the path, doing some path
corrections along the way. The LLAs were also responsible for updating the internal model of the
world state, which was stored in first-order logic. Motion errors were explicitly modelled, so that
as the robot moved, its uncertainty about its location increased. Once the uncertainty exceeded
a threshold for safe navigation, the LLA would call on the vision subsystem to provide a new
position fix. The key contribution ofthe ILA/LLA system, then, was to provide a relatively clean
and reliable set of actions for the planning system.

The planning system used the STRIPS algorithm, essentially a theorem-prover specially
designed for efficient generation of action sequences. STRIPS also introduced the idea of compiling
the results of planning into generalized macro-operators, so that future problem-solving could
be more efficient (see Section 21.2). The entire system was controlled by PLANEX, which
accepted goals from the user, called STRIPS to generate plans, then executed them by calling the
specified ILAs. The execution mechanism was a simple version of the methods described in
Chapter 12. PLANEX kept track of the current world state, comparing it to the preconditions of
each subsequence in the original plan. After each action completed, PLANEX would execute the
shortest plan subsequence that led to a goal and whose preconditions were satisfied. In this way,
actions that failed would be retried, and fortunate accidents would lead to reduced effort. If no
subsequence was applicable, PLANEX could call STRIPS to make a new plan.

 
