shifter

SECTION 46 Shift Microoperations 115

Cab R2 | —— R | fo

Sign
bit

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4-11 Avthmetieshife right.

when it is multiplied or divided by 2. The leftmost bit in a register holds the
sign bit, and the remaining bits hold the number. The sign bit is 0 for positive
and 1 for negative. Negative numbers are in 2’s complement form Figure 4-11
shows a typical register of m bits. Bit R,-1 in the leftmost position holds the
sign bit. R,2 is the most significant bit of the number and Ry is the least
significant bit. The arithmetic shift-right leaves the sign bit unchanged and
shifts the number (including the sign bit) to the right. Thus R, -, remains the
same, R, 2 receives the bit from R, -1, and so on for the other bits in the
register. The bit in Ro is lost.

The arithmetic shift-left inserts a 0 into Ro, and shifts all otherbits to the
left. The initial bit of R, - is lost and replaced by the bit from R, - >. A sign
reversal occurs if the bit in R, - , changes in value after the shift. This happens
if the multiplication by 2 causes an overflow. An overflow occurs after an
arithmetic shift left ifinitially, before the shift, R, - is not equal to R, ->. AN
overflow flip-flop V, can be used to detect an arithmetic shift-left overflow.

V, = Ry-1®Ry-2

If V, = 0, there is no overflow, but if V, = 1, there is an overflow and a sign
reversal after the shift. V, must be transferred into the overflow flip-flop with
the same clock pulse that shifts the register.

‘Hardware Implementation
A possible choice for a shift unit would be a bidirectional shift register with
parallel load (see Fig. 2-9). Information can be transferred to the register in
parallel and then shifted to the right or left. In this type of configuration, aclock
pulse is needed for loading the data into the register, and another pulse is
needed to initiate the shift. In a processor unit with many registers it is more
efficient to implement the shift operation with a combinational circuit. In this
way the content of a register that has to be shifted is first placed onto a common
bus whose output is corinected to the combinational shifter, and the shifted
numberis then loaded back into the register. This requires only one clock pulse
for loading the shifted value into the register.

‘A combinational circuit shifter can be constructed with multiplexers as.
shown in Fig, 4-12. The 4-bit shifter has four data inputs, Ag through Ay, and
four data outputs, He through H There are two serial inputs, one for shift left
