784

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

FORCE SENSOR

COMPLIANT
MOTIONS

TACTILE SENSING

many other tasks involving contact, such as writing, opening doors, and assembling automobiles,
require accurate control offorces. Force can be regulated to some extent by controlling electric
motor current, but accurate control requires a force sensor. These sensors are usually placed
between the manipulator and end effector and can sense forces and torques in six directions
Using force control, a robot can move along a surface while maintaining contact with a fixed
pressure. Such motions are called compliant motions, and are extremely important in many
robotic applications.

Tactile sensing

Picking up a paper coffee cup or manipulating a tiny screw requires more than proprioception.
The force applied to the cup must be just enough to stop it from slipping, but not enough to crush
it. Manipulating the screw requires information about exactly where it lies against the fingers that
it contacts. In both cases, tactile sensing (or touch sensing) can provide the needed information.
Tactile sensing is the robotic version of the human sense oftouch. A robot's tactile sensor uses an
elastic material and a sensing scheme that measures the distortion of the material under contact.
The sensor may give data at an array of points on the elastic surface, producing the analogue ofa
camera image, but of deformation rather than light intensity. By understanding the physics ofthe
deformation process, it is possible to derive algorithms that are analogous to vision algorithms,
and can compute position information for the objects that the sensor touches. Tactile sensors
can also sense vibration, which helps to detect the impending escape of the coffee cup from the
holder's grasp. Human beings use this scheme with a very fast servo loop® to detect slip and
control the grasping force to near the minimum needed to prevent slip.

Sonar

Sonar is SOund NAvigation and Ranging. Sonar provides useful information about objects very
close to the robot and is often used for fast emergency collision avoidance. It is sometimes used
to map the robot's environment over a larger area. In the latter case, an array ofa dozen or more
sonar sensors is fitted around the perimeter of the robot, each pointing in a different direction.
Each sensor ideally measures the distance to the nearest obstacle in the direction it is pointing.
Sonar works by measuring the time of flight for a sound pulse generated by the sensor to
reach an object and be reflected back. The pulse or "chirp" is typically about 50 kHz. This is
more than twice the upper limit for humans of 20 kHz. Sound at that frequency has a wavelength
of about 7 mm. The speed of sound is about 330 m/second, so the round-trip time delay for an
object 1 m away is about 6 x 10-3 seconds. Sonar has been very effective for obstacle avoidance
and tracking a nearby target, such as another mobile robot. But although it should be possible
to measure the time delay very accurately, sonar has rarely been able to produce reliable and
precise data for mapping. The first problem is beam width. Rather than a narrow beam of sound,
atypical sensor produces a conical beam with 10° or more of spread. The second problem comes
from the relatively long (7 mm) wavelength of the sonar sound. Objects that are very smooth

5 A servomechanismis a device for controlling a large amount of power with a small amount ofpower. A servo loop
uses feedback to regulate the power.

 
