Section 25.2.

Tasks: What Are Robots Good For? 715

 

MOBOTS

include many types of AGV (autonomous guided vehicles, typically golf-cart sized four-wheeled
vehicles that are used to ferry containers around a warehouse). Handling odd-shaped parts is
simplified by placing each part in a cradle or pallet that has a base of fixed shape. Bar codes
on the pallets make it easy to identify and inventory the parts. But these techniques falter when
applied to food packaging and handling, an area likely to see rapid growth in the future. The large
variety of forms, weights, textures, and firmnesses in familiar foods make this task a challenge
for future research.

Robots have recently been making their mark in the construction industry. Large prototype
robots have been built that can move a one-ton object with an accuracy of 2.5 mm in a workspace
of radius 10m. Sheep shearing is another impressive application. Australia boasts a population
of 140 million sheep, and several industrial and academic development groups have deployed
automated sheep shearers. Because sheep come in different sizes, some kind of sensing (vision
or mechanical probing) is needed to get an idea of the right overall shearing pattern. Tactile
feedback is used to follow the contours of the animal without injuring it

Gofer robots

Mobile robots (mobots) are also becoming widely useful. Two primary applications are as
couriers in buildings, especially hospitals, and as security guards. One company has sold over
3000 “mailmobiles.” These robots respond to requests from a computer terminal and carry
documents or supplies to a destination somewhere else in the building. The robot negotiates
hallways and elevators, and avoids collision with other obstacles such as humans and furniture
The robot is appropriate for this task because it has high availability (it can work 24 hours a day),
high reliability so that supplies are not lost or misplaced, and its progress can be monitored to
allow preparation for its arrival, or detection of failure

We have seen (page 586) that autonomous vehicles are already cruising our highways, and
AUVs (autonomous underwater vehicles) are cruising the seas. It is far less expensive to send a
robot to the bottom of the ocean than a manned submarine. Furthermore, a robot can stay down
for months at a time, making scientific observations, reporting on enemy submarine traffic, or
fixing problems in transoceanic cables.

Hazardous environments

Mobile robots are an important technology for reducing risk to human life in hazardous environ-
ments. During the cleanup of the Chernobyl disaster, several Lunokhod lunar explorer robots
were converted to remote-controlled cleaning vehicles. In Japan and France, robots are used
for routine maintenance of nuclear plants. Crisis management is now being taken seriously as
a technological challenge in the United States. Robots can reduce risk to humans in unstable
buildings after earthquakes, near fire or toxic fumes, and in radioactive environments. They can
also be used for routine tasks in dangerous situations including toxic waste cleanup, deep sea
recovery, exploration, mining, and manipulation of biologically hazardous materials. A human
operator is often available to guide the robot, but it also needs autonomy to recognize and respond
to hazards to its own and others’ well-being.
