 

DS ROBOTICS

 

 

ROBOT

‘AUTONOMOUS
ROBOTS

In which agents are endowed with physical effectors with which to do mischief,

INTRODUCTION

The Robot Institute of America defines a robot as a programmable, multifunction manipulator
designed to move material, parts, tools, or specific devices through variableprogrammed motions
Sor the performance ofa variety oftasks. This definition is not very demanding; a conveyer belt
with a two-speed switch would arguably satisfy it

We will define robot simply as an active, artificiaiagent whose environment is the physical
world. The active part rules out rocks, the artificial part rules out animals, and the physical part
tules out pure software agents or softbots, whose environment consists of computer file systems,
databases and networks. We will be concerned primarily with autonomous robots, those that
make decisions on their own, guided by the feedback they get from their physical sensors.

Most of the design of an autonomous robot is the same as the design of any autonomous
agent. To some extent, we could take a generic planning agent (Chapter 11) or decision-making
agent (Chapter 16), equip it with wheels, grippers, and a camera, point it out the door, and wish it
good luck. Unfortunately, unless we pointed it at an exceptionally benign environment, it would
not fare very well. The real world, in general, is very demanding. We can see this by considering
the five properties of environments from page 46:

* The real world is inaccessible. Sensors are imperfect, and in any case can only perceive
stimuli that are near the agent.
* The real world is nondeterministic, at least from the robot's point of view. Wheels slip,

batteries run down, and parts break, so you never know if an action is going to work. That
means a robot needs to deal with uncertainty (Part V).

+ The real world is nonepisodic—the effects of an action change over time. So a robot has
to handle sequential decision problems (Chapter 17) and learning (Part VI)

773
