112 caarrer FOUR Register Transfer and Microoperations

selective-set

selective-complement

selective-clear

by logic microoperations as a function of the bits of another register (designated
by B). Ina typical application, register A is a processor register and the bits of
register B constitute a logic operand extracted from memory and placed in
register B.

The selective-set operation sets to 1 the bits in register A where there are
corresponding 1's in register B. It does not affect bit positions that have 0's in
B, The following numerical example clarifies this operation:

1010 A before
1100 _B (logic operand)
m0 A after

The two leftmost bits of B are 1's, so the corresponding bits of A are set to 1.
One of these two bits was already set and the other has been changed from
Otol. The two bits of A with corresponding 0's in B remain unchanged. The
example above serves as a truth table since it has ll four possible combinations
of two binary variables. From the truth table we note that the bits of A after
the operation are obtained from the logic-OR operation of bits in B and previ-
ous values of A. Therefore, the OR microoperation can be used to selectively
set bits of a register.

The selective-complement operation complements bits in A where there are
corresponding 1's in B. It does not affect bit positions that have 0's in B. For
example:

1010 A before
1100 __B (logic operand)
110A after

Again the two leftmost bits of B are 1's, so the corresponding bits of A are
complemented. This example again can serve asa truth table from which one
can deduce that the selective-complement operation is just an exclusive-OR
microoperation. Therefore, the exclusive-OR microoperation can be used to
selectively complement bits of a register.

The selective-clear operation clears to 0 the bits in A only where there are
corresponding 1’s in B. For example:

1010 A before
1100 __B (logic operand)
010 A after

Again the two leftmost bits of B are 1’s, so the corresponding bits of A are
cleared to 0. One can deduce that the Boolean operation performed on the
individual bits is AB’. The corresponding logic microoperation is

ASCAANB
