774 Chapter 25. Robotics

 

+ The real world is dynamic. Therefore, a robot has to know when it is worth deliberating
and when it is better to act immediately.

* The real world is continuous, in that states and actions are drawn from a continuum of
physical configurations and motions. Because this makes it impossible to enumerate the
set of possible actions, many of the search and planning algorithms described in earlier
chapters will need to be modified.

We could go on about the unique properties of robotics, but instead we will refer you to Ex-
ercise 25.1. It does not require any additional reading, it will give you an instant and visceral
appreciation of the problems of robotics (and their possible solutions), and it can be amusing.

This chapter has three main points. First, we look at the tasks that robots perform (Sec-
tion 25.2) and the special effectors and sensors they use (Section 25.3). Second, we step away
from robots per se and look at agent architectures for inaccessible, nondeterministic, nonepisodic,
dynamic domains (Section 25.4). Third, we look at the specific problem of selecting actions in
a continuous state space (Sections 25.5 and 25.6). The algorithms rely on a level of computa-
tional geometry that is more suited for a specialized advanced text, so we only give qualitative
descriptions of the problems and solutions

25.2 TASKS: WHAT ARE ROBOTS GOOD FOR?

 

While humans do a wide variety of things using more or less the same body, robot designs vary
widely depending on the task for which they are intended. In this section, we survey some of the
tasks, and in the next section, we look at the available parts (effectors and sensors) that make up
a robot's body.

Manufacturing and materials handling

Manufacturing is seen as the traditional domain of the robot. The repetitive tasks on a production
line are natural targets for automation, and so in 1954 George Devol patented the programmable
robot am, based on the same technology—punch cards—that was used in the Jacquard loom 150
years eatlier. By 1985, there were about 180,000 robots in production lines around the world,
with Japan, the United States, and France accounting for 150,000 of them. The automotive and
microelectronics industries are major consumers of robots. However, most robots in use today
are very limited in their abilities to sense and adapt. Autonomous robots are still struggling
for acceptance. The reasons for this are historical, cultural, and technological. Manufacturing
existed and burgeoned long before robots appeared, and many tricks were developed for solving
manufacturing problems without intelligence. And it is still true that simple machines are the
best solution for simple tasks.

Material handlingis another traditional domain for robots. Material handling is the storage,
transport, and delivery of material, which can range in size from silicon chips to diesel trucks. The
robots used for material handling likewise vary from table-top manipulators to gantry cranes, and

  
