Section 17.7. Summary 521

 

Dee SUE ERR EEE el

EXERCISES

17.1 For the stochastic version of the world shown in Figure 17.1, calculate which squares can
be reached by the action sequence [Up, Righr],and with what probabilities.

172 For a specific environment (which you can make up), construct a utility function on
histories that is not separable. Explain how the concept of utility on states fails in this case.

173 Consider the stochastic version of the environment shown in Figure 17.1.

 

a. Implement an environment simulator for this environment, such that the specific geography
of the environment is easily altered.

b. Create a SIMPLE-POLICY-AGENT that uses policy iteration, and measure its performance in
the environment simulator from various starting states.

c. Experiment with increasing the size of the environment. How does the execution time per
action vary with the size of the environment?

d. Analyze the policy iteration algorithm to find its worst-case complexity, assuming that
value determination is done using a standard equation-solving method.

e. Does value iteration terminate if the utility values are required to converge exactly?

174 For the environment shown in Figure 17.1, find all the threshold values for the cost of a
step, such that the optimal policy changes when the threshold is crossed.

 

175 Prove that the calculations in the prediction and estimation phases of the basic decision
cycle (Equations (17.8) and (17.9)) do in fact yield the correct value for Bel(X,), given assump-
tions (17.5), (17.6), and (17.7).

176 In this exercise, we will consider part of the problem of building a robot that plays
Ping-Pong.

One of the things it will have to do is find out where the ball is and estimate its trajectory. Let
us suppose for a moment that we have a vision system that can return an estimated instantaneous
(x,y, z)position for the ball. This position estimate for time 1; will be used as an evidence node
Oi in a belief network that infers the desired information. The idea is that nodes Xj and V; in
the network represent the ball's instantaneous position and velocity. The trajectory of the ball is
followed by having multiple copies of these nodes, one for each time step. In addition to these
nodes, we also have nodes for the instantaneous friction force F; acting on the ball due to air
resistance, which depends only on the current velocity. The times ¢, f2, 3, ... can be assumed to
be separated by some small interval 61,

a. Which ofthe beliefnetworks in Figure 17.17 correctly (but not necessarily efficiently) repre-
sent the preceding information? (You may assume that second-order effects—proportional
to §1°—are ignored.)

b. Which is the best network?

c. Which networks can be solved by local propagation algorithms?
