718

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

We present the theory by Hobbs (1990), which starts with the observation that the speaker
does four things in putting together a discourse:
+ The speaker wants to convey a message.
* The speaker has a motivation or goal in doing this
+ The speaker wants to make it easy for the hearer to understand.
* The speaker must link the new information to what the hearer already knows.

A sentence is a coherent extension of a discourse if it can be interpreted by the hearer as being
in service of one of these four points. Let us look at some examples of each of the four as they
appear in the following discourse:

(1) A funny thing happened yesterday.

(2) John went to a fancy restaurant.

(3) He ordered the duck.

(4) The bill came to $50

(5) John got a shock when the waiter came to collect the bill.
(6) He realized he didn't have a cent on him.

(7) He had left his wallet at home.

(8) The waiter said it was all right to pay later.

(9) He was very embarrassed by his forgetfulness.

Sentence (1) describes what the speaker wants to talk about—afunny thing. Itis a meta~-comment,
an evaluation by the speaker of what the coming message holds. Once the speaker has made it
clear that she has the goal of describing this, it is coherent to add (2), which starts to describe
the funny thing. The coherence relation between (1) and (2) is that uttering (2) is part of the
speaker's plan that was implicitly alluded to by (1). More formally, we can say that two adjacent
discourse segments 5; and 5; stand in the evaluation coherence relation, if from 5; we can infer
that Sjis a step in the speaker's plan for achieving some discourse goal.

Sentences (3) and (4) are coherent because they can be interpreted as steps in John's plan
of eating a meal. Sentences (2) and (3) stand in the enablement coherence relation, and (3)
and (4) are in the causal relation. Both relations arise from the speaker's goal of conveying a
message about the world. Thus, we see that understanding discourse involves two levels of plan
recognition—recognizing the speaker's plans and the characters’ plans.

Sentences (5) and (6) overlap in their content: the shock is the realization, but it is described
ina different way. We say that (5) and (6) stand in the elaboration relation. This is an example
of the speaker making it easier for the hearer by lessening the amount of inference the hearer
has to make. Sentence (6) could well have been left out of the discourse, but then the jump from
(5) to (7) would have been a little harder to make. Note that once we recognize that (6) is an
elaboration of (5), we can infer that "he" in (6) refers to John. Without the coherence relation,
we might be tempted to assume that “he" refers to the waiter, who was mentioned more recently.

The relation between (6) and (7) is one of explanation: the reason John didn't have a cent
on him is because he left his wallet at home. This is one case where a sentence that appears
later in the discourse actually occurs earlier in the real world. This is an example of the speaker
linking a new explanation to the hearer’s existing knowledge.

Sentence (9) stands in a causal relation with the discourse segment comprised of (5) and
(6). Recognizing this allows us to interpret "he" in (9) as John, not the waiter.

 
