Section 15.6. Other Approaches to Uncertain Reasoning 459

 

* One area that we have not addressed so far is the question of ignorance, as opposed to
uncertainty. Consider flipping a coin. If we know the coin to be fair, then a probability
of 0.5 for heads is reasonable. If we know the coin is biased, but we do not know
which way, then 0.5 is the only reasonable probability. Obviously, the two cases are
different, yet probability seems not to distinguish them. The Dempster-Shafer theory
uses interval-valued degrees of belief to represent an agent's knowledge of the probability
ofa proposition. Other methods using second-order probabilities are also discussed.

Probability makes the same ontological commitment as logic: that events are true or false
in the world, even ifthe agent is uncertain as to which is the case. Researchers in fuzzy
logic have proposed an ontology that allows vagueness: that an event can be "sort of" true
Vagueness and uncertainty are in fact orthogonal issues, as we will see.

The following sections treat each of these approaches in slightly more depth. We will not provide
detailed technical material, but we provide references for further study

Default reasoning

Commonsense reasoning is often said to involve "jumping to conclusions." For example, when
one sees a car parked on the street, one would normally be willing to accept that it has four wheels
even though only three are visible. (Ifyou feel that the existence of the fourth wheel is dubious,
consider also the question as to whether the three visible wheels are real or merely cardboard
facsimiles.) Probability theory can certainly provide a conclusion that the fourth wheel exists
with high probability. On the other hand, introspection suggests that the possibility of the car
not having four wheels does not even arise unless some new evidence presents itself. Thus, it
seems that the four-wheel conclusion is reached by default, in the absence of any reason to doubt
it. If new evidence arrives—for example, if one sees the owner carrying a wheel and notices
that the car is jacked up—then the conclusion can be retracted. This kind of reasoning is said to
Nonmonoronicty exhibit nonmonotonicity, because the set of beliefs does not grow monotonically over time as
MONOTONICITY new evidence arrives. First-order logic, on the other hand, exhibits strict monotonicity.
DEFAULT LOGIC Reasoning schemes such as default logic (Reiter, 1980), nonmonotonic logic (McDermott
{guyonorontc and Doyle, 1980) and circumscription (McCarthy, 1980) are designed to handle reasoning with
orcumscretion default rules and retraction of beliefs. Although the technical details of these systems are quite
different, they share a number of problematic issues that arise with default reasoning:

* What is the semantic status of default rules? If "Cars have four wheels" is false, what does
it mean to have it in one's knowledge base? What is a good set of default rules to have?
Without a good answer to these questions, default reasoning systems will be nonmodular,
and it will be hard to develop a good knowledge engineering methodology.

What happens when the evidence matches the premises of two default rules with conflict-
ing conclusions? We saw examples of this in the discussion of multiple inheritance in
Section 10.6. In some schemes, one can express priorities between rules so that one rule
SRE takes precedence. Specificity preference is a commonly used form of priority in which
a special-case rule takes precedence over the general case. For example, "Three-wheeled
cars have three wheels" takes precedence over "Cars have four wheels."
