Chapter 18. Leaming from Observations

 

decision tree,* In setting this up as a learning problem, we first have to decide what properties or
attributes are available to describe examples in the domain.® Suppose we decide on the following
list of attributes:

. Alternate: whether there is a suitable altemative restaurant nearby.

2. Bar. whether the restaurant has a comfortable bar area to wait in.

3. Fri/Sat: true on Fridays and Saturdays.

4. Hungry: whether we are hungry.

5. Patrons: how many people are in the restaurant (values are None, Some, and Full).
6. Price: the restaurant's price range (S, $$, $$$).

7. Raining: whether it is raining outside.

8. Reservation: whether we made a reservation.

9. Type: the kind of restaurant (French, Italian, Thai, or Burger).

0. WaitEstimate: the wait estimated by the host (0-10 minutes, 10-30, 30-60, >60).

The decision tree usually used by the first author for this domain is shown in Figure 18.4. Notice
that the tree does not use the Price and Type attributes, considering these to be irrelevant given the
data it has seen. Logically, the tree can be expressed as a conjunction of individual implications
corresponding to the paths through the tree ending in Yes nodes. For example, the path for a
restaurant full of patrons, with an estimated wait of 10-30 minutes when the agent is not hungry
is expressed by the logical sentence

Vr Patrons(r, Full) \ WaitEstimate(r,0-10)A Hungry(r,N)=> WillWait(r)

Expressiveness of decision trees

If decision trees correspond to sets of implication sentences, a natural question is whether they
can represent any set. The answer is no, because decision trees are implicitly limited to talking
about a single object. That is, the decision tree language is essentially propositional, with each
attribute test being a proposition. We cannot use decision trees to represent tests that refer to two
or more different objects, for example,

Ar Nearby(r2, r) A Price(r,p) A Price(rz,p2) A Cheaper(p2, p)

(is there a cheaper restaurant nearby). Obviously, we could add another Boolean attribute with
the name CheaperRestaurantNearby,but it is intractable to add all such attributes.

Decision trees are fully expressive within the class of propositional languages, that is, any
Boolean function can be written as a decision tree. This can be done trivially by having each row
in the truth table for the function correspond to a path in the tree. This would not necessarily be
a good way to represent the function, because the truth table is exponentially large in the number
ofattributes. Clearly, decision trees can represent many functions with much smaller trees.

5 Meanwhile, the automated taxi is leaming whether to wait for the passengers in case they give up waiting for a table
and want to go on to another restaurant

* One might ask why this isn't the job of the leaming program. In fact, it is, but we will not be able to explain how itis
done until Chapter 21.

 
