684 Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

Acknowledgments are even simpler—they consist of a single word: "yes" or "OK" to positively
acknowledge, and "no" to negatively acknowledge. Here are the rules:

S(Acknowledge(sem)) = Ack(sem)
Ack(True) — yes

Ack(True) + OK .
Ack(False) —- no

It is up to the master (or whoever hears an acknowledgment) to do pragmatic interpretation to
realize that "OK," which gets the interpretation Ack(True), means that the agent has agreed to
follow out a command (usually the most recent command). The agent program for the robot
slave was shown in Figure 22.4 (page 663). But in a sense we do not need a new agent program;
all we need to do is use an existing agent (such as a logical planning agent) and give it the goals
of understanding the input and responding to it properly.

22.10 _ SUMMARY

We have seen why it is useful to communicate, and how language can be interpreted by agents in
a situation. Natural language processing is difficult for three reasons. First, one has to have a lot
of specific knowledge about the words and grammar rules of the language. Second, one must be
able to integrate this knowledge with other knowledge about the world. Third, language involves
an additional complication that we have not dealt with so far: that there are other agents in the
world who have their own beliefs, goals, and plans. This chapter makes the following points in
addressing these difficulties:

Agents send signals to each other to achieve certain purposes: to inform, to warn, to elicit
help, to share knowledge, or to promise something. Sending a signal in this way is called
a speech act. Ultimately, all speech acts are an attempt to get another agent to believe
something or do something.

All animals use some conventional signs to communicate, but humans use language in a
more sophisticated way that enables them to communicate much more

Formal language theory and phrase structure grammars (and in particular, context-free
grammar) are useful tools for dealing with some aspects of natural language.

Communication involves three steps by the speaker: the intention to convey an idea, the
mental generation of words, and their physical synthesis. The hearer then has four steps:
perception, analysis, disambiguation, and incorporation of the meaning.

The encoded message model of communication states that a speaker encodes a represen-
tation of a proposition into language, and the hearer then decodes the message to uncover
the proposition. The situated language model states that the meaning of a message is a
function of both the message and the situation in which it occurs.

It is convenient to augment a grammar to handle such problems as subject/verb agreement,
pronoun case, and semantics. Definite Clause Grammar (DCG) is an extension of BNF
that allows for augmentations.

 
