Section 14.1.

Acting under Uncertainty A417

 

TIGA,
Rhee

DEGREE OF BELIEF

PROBABILITY
THEORY

 

EVIDENCE

© Practical ignorance: Even if we know all the rules, we may be uncertain about a particular
patient because all the necessary tests have not or cannot be run.

The connection between toothaches and cavities is just not a logical consequence in either
direction. This is typical of the medical domain, as well as most other judgmental domains: law,
business, design, automobile repair, gardening, dating, and so on. The agent's knowledge can at
best provide only a degree of belief in the relevant sentences. Our main tool for dealing with
degrees of belief will be probability theory, which assigns a numerical degree of beliefbetween
0 and 1 to sentences.”

Probability provides a way ofsummarizing the uncertainty that comes from our laziness
and ignorance. We may not know for sure what afflicts a particular patient, but we believe that
there is, say, an 80% chance—that is, a probability of 0.8—that the patient has a cavity ifhe or she
has a toothache. This probability could be derived from statistical data—80% of the toothache
patients seen so far have had cavities—or from some general rules, or from a combination of
evidence sources. The 80% summarizes those cases in which all the factors needed for a cavity to
cause a toothache are present, as well as other cases in which the patient has both toothache and
cavity but the two are unconnected. The missing 20% summarizes all the other possible causes
of toothache that we are too lazy or ignorant to confirm or deny.

A probability of 0 for a given sentence corresponds to an unequivocal belief that the
sentence is false, while a probability of 1 corresponds to an unequivocal belief that the sentence is
true. Probabilities between 0 and 1 correspond to intermediate degrees of beliefin the truth of the
sentence. The sentence itselfis infact either true or false. It is important to note that a degree of
beliefis different from a degree of truth. A probability of 0.8 does not mean "80% true" but rather
an 80% degree of belicf—thatis, a fairly strong expectation. Ifan agent assigns a probability of
0.8 to a sentence, then the agent expects that in 80% of cases that are indistinguishable from the
current situation as far as the agent's knowledge goes, the sentence will turn out to be actually
true. Thus, probability theory makes the same ontological commitment as logic, namely, that
facts either do or do not hold in the world. Degree of truth, as opposed to degree of belief, is the
subject of fuzzy logic, which is covered in Section 15.6

Before we plunge into the details of probability, let us pause to consider the status of prob-
ability statements such as "The probability that the patient has a cavity is 0.8." In propositional
and first-order logic, a sentence is true or false depending on the interpretation and the world; it
is truejust when the fact it refers to is the case. Probability statements do not have quite the same
kind of semantics.* This is because the probability that an agent assigns to a proposition depends
on the percepts that it has received to date. In discussing uncertain reasoning, we call this the
evidence. For example, suppose that the agent has drawn a card from a shuffled pack. Before
looking at the card, the agent might assign a probability of 1/52 to its being the ace of spades.
After looking at the card, an appropriate probability for the same proposition would be 0 or 1.
Thus, an assignment of probability to a proposition is analogous to saying whether or not a given
logical sentence (or its negation) is entailed by the knowledge base, rather than whether or not it

2 Until recently, it was thought that probability theory was too unwieldy for general use in AI, and many approximations
and alternatives to probability theory were proposed. Some of these will be covered in Section 15.6

3. The objectivist view of probability, however, claims that probability statements are true or false in the same way as
logical sentences. In Section 14.5, we discuss this claim further
