Section 24.8.

Summary 769

 

Wertheimer. With the slogan "The whole is greater than the sum of the parts," they laid primary
emphasis on grouping processes, both of contours and regions. Constructing computational
models of these processes remains a difficult problem to this day.

The period after World War 2 was marked by renewed activity. Most significant was
the work of J. J. Gibson (1950; 1979), who pointed out the importance of optical flow as
well as texture gradients in the estimation of environmental variables such as surface slant and
tilt. He reemphasized the importance of the stimulus and how rich it was. Gibson, Olum,
and Rosenblatt (1955) pointed out that the optical flow field contained enough information to
determine the egomotion of the observer relative to the environment. In the computational vision
community, work in this area and the (mathematically equivalent) area of structure from motion
developed mainly in the 1980s, following the seminal works of Koenderink and van Doom (1975),
Ullman (1979), and Longuet-Higgins (1981). Faugeras (1993) presents a comprehensive account
of our understanding in this area. In the 1990s, with the increase in computer speed and storage,
the importance of motion sequence analysis from digital video is growing rapidly.

In computational vision, major early works in shape from texture are due to Bajscy and
Liebermann (1976) and Stevens (1981). Whereas this work was for planar surfaces, a compre-
hensive analysis for curved surfaces is due to Garding (1992) and Malik and Rosenholtz (1994)

In the computational vision community, shape from shading was first studied by Berthold
Horn (1970). Horn and Brooks (1989) present an extensive survey of the main papers in the
area. This framework made a number of simplifying assumptions, the most critical of which
was ignoring the effect of mutual illumination. The importance of mutual illumination has been
well-appreciated in the computer graphics community, where ray tracing and radiosity have been
developed precisely to take mutual illumination into account. A theoretical and empirical critique
may be found in Forsyth and Zisserman (1991).

In the area of shape from contour, after the key initial contributions of Huffman (1971) and
Clowes (1971), Mackworth (1973) and Sugihara (1984) completed the analysis for polyhedral
objects. Malik (1987) developed a labeling scheme for piecewise smooth curved objects. Un-
derstanding the visual events in the projection of smooth curved objects requires an interplay of
differential geometry and singularity theory. The best study is Koenderink's (1990) Solid Shape.

In the area of three-dimensional object recognition, the seminal work was Roberts's (1963)
thesis at MIT. It is often considered to be the first PhD thesis in computer vision and introduced.
several key ideas including edge detection and model-based matching. The idea of alignment,
first introduced by Roberts, resurfaced in the 1980s in the work of Lowe (1987) and Huttenlocher
and Ullman (1990). Generalized cylinders were introduced by Binford in 1971, and were used
extensively by Brooks in the ACRONYM system (Brooks, 1981). Geometrical invariants were
studied extensively in the late nineteenth century by English and German mathematicians. Their
use in object recognition is surveyed by Mundy and Zisserman (1992), Excellent results have
been achieved even in cluttered scenes (Rothwell et al., 1993).

A word about the research methodology used in computer vision. The early development
of the subject, like that of rest of AI, was mostly through Ph.D. theses that consisted largely of
descriptions of implemented systems. The work lacked significant contact with the literature
on human vision and photogrammetry. in which many of the same problems had been studied.
David Marr played a major role in connecting computer vision to the traditional areas of biological
vision—psychophysics and neurobiology. His main work, Vision (Marr, 1982), was published
