Section 24.2.

 

Image Formation 729

 

LAMBERTIAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a)

 

 

 

Figure 244 (a) Magnified view of a 12 x 12 block of pixels from Figure 24.3. (b) The
associated image brightness values.

 

 

 

Photometry of image formation

The brightness ofa pixel p in the image is proportional to the amount of light directed toward the
camera by the surface patch S,, that projects to pixel p. This in turn depends on the reflectance
properties of S,, the position and distribution of the light sources. There is also a dependence
on the reflectance properties of the rest of the scene because other scene surfaces can serve as
indirect light sources by reflecting light received by them onto Sp.

The light reflected from an object is characterized as being either diffusely or specularly
reflected. Diffusely reflected light is light that has penetrated below the surface ofan object, been
absorbed, and then re-emitted. The surface appears equally bright to an observer in any direction.
Lambert's cosine law is used to describe the reflection of light from a perfectly diffusing or

Lambertian surface. The intensity £ of light reflected from a perfect diffuser is given by

E = pEy cos9

where Fp is the intensity of the light source; p is the albedo, which varies from 0 (for perfectly
black surfaces) to 1 (for pure white surfaces); and 0 is the angle between the light direction and
the surface normal.

Specularly reflected light is reflected from the outer surface ofthe object. Here the energy
of reflected light is concentrated primarily in a particular direction—the one where the reflected
ray is in the same plane as the incident ray and satisfies the condition that the angle of reflection
is equal to the angle of incidence. This is the behavior of a perfect mirror.

Tn real life, surfaces exhibit a combination of diffuse and specular properties. Modelling
this on the computer is the bread and butter of computer graphics. Rendering realistic images
is usually done by ray tracing, which aims to simulate the physical process of light originating
