778

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

STATICALLY STABLE

DYNAMICALLY
STABLE

NONHOLONOMIC

HOLONOMIC

Locomotion

The vast majority of land animals use legs for locomotion. Legged locomotion turns out to be
very difficult forrobots, and is used only in special circumstances. The most obvious application
is motion in rough terrain with large obstacles. The Ambler robot (Simmons et al., 1992), for
example, is a six-legged robot, about 30 feet tall, capable of negotiating obstacles more than 6
feet in diameter. The Ambler, unlike most animals, is a statically stable walker. That is, it can
pause at any stage during its gait without tumbling over. Statically stable walking is very slow
and energy-inefficient, and the quest for faster, more efficient legged machines has led to a series
of dynamically stable hopping robots (Raibert, 1986), which would crash if forced to pause, but
do well as long as they keep moving. These robots use rhythmic motion of four, two, or even a
single leg to to control the locomotion ofthe body in three dimensions. They do not have enough
legs in contact with the ground to be stable statically, and will fall if their hopping motion stops.
They are dynamically stable because corrections to leg motion keep the body upright when it is
bumped or when the ground is uneven. The control of legged machines is too complex a subject
to discuss here, except to remark on its difficulty and to marvel at recent successes—for example,
the one-legged robot shown in Figure 25.1 can "run" in any direction, hop over small obstacles,
and even somersault

Despite the anthropomorphic attractions of legged locomotion, wheel or tread locomotion
is still the most practical for most environments. Wheels and treads are simpler to build, are
more efficient than legs, and provide static support. They are also easier to control, although they
are not without subtle problems of their own. Consider the car-like robot of Figure 25.2. We
know from experience that without obstructions, we can drive a car to any position, and leave
it pointing in any direction that we choose. Thus, the car has three degrees of freedom, two for
its x-y position, and one for its direction. But there are only two actuators, namely, driving and
steering. And for small motions, the car seems to have only two degrees of freedom, because we
can move it in the direction it points, or rotate it slightly, but we cannot move it sideways.

Itis important here to draw the distinction between what the actuators actually do, namely,
tuming or steering the wheels, and what these motions do to the environment. In this case, the
side effect of the wheel motion is to move the car to any point in a three-dimensional space.
Because the number of controllable degrees of freedom is only two, which is less than the total
degrees of freedom (three), this is a nonholonomic robot. In general, a nonholonomic robot has
fewer controllable degrees of freedom than total degrees of freedom. As a rule, the larger the gap
between controllable and total degrees of freedom, the harder it is to control the robot. A car with
a trailer has four total degrees of freedom but only two controllable ones, and takes considerable
skill to drive in reverse. If the number of total and controllable degrees freedom of the system is
the same, the robot is holonomic.

It is possible to build truly holonomic mobile robots, but at the cost of high mechanical
complexity. It is necessary to design the wheels or treads so that motion in the driving direction is
controlled, but sideways motion is free. Holonomic drives usually replace the tire or tread with a
series of rollers lined up with the drive direction. Although these designs make life easier for the
control architect, the common designs of nonholonomic mobile robots (Figures 25.2 and 25.3)
are not that difficult to control, and their mechanical simplicity makes them the best choice in
most situations. The main distinction to be made between different designs is whether the robot

 

 

 

 

Etienne.
