Section 22.1.

Communication as Action

 

 

 

THE EVOLUTION OF LANGUAGE

In 1866, the Société de Linguistique de Paris passed a by-law banning all debate
on the origin of language. Outside the halls of that body, the debate goes on. One
proposal (Chomsky, 1980; Fodor, 1983) is that there is a language module that exists
only in the brain of humans. There is now considerable evidence (Dingwell, 1988)
that language use is made possible by a large repertoire of different skills that did not
develop in isolation of general cognitive capabilities, and that many of the precursors
of human language use can be seen in the other primates and in the fossil record.

At least seven researchers claim to have taught primates over 100 words. Koko
the gorilla is the vocabulary queen with over a thousand. Although some argue that
the researchers become too attached to the animals and attribute abilities to them that
are not really there, it seems safe to say that primates can leam words spontaneously
(from human trainers or from each other) and can use them to inform others of what
they know and what they want. They can produce and understand sentences involving
abstract concepts in a limited way, such as referring to objects that are not present. For
example, chimpanzees can correctly respond to "get the ball that is outside" or "bring
the red ball over to the blue ball." They can even tell lies: a vervet who is losing a fight
may give the leopard alarm, causing the fight to be called off while everyone heads
for the trees. Some have claimed that such behavior is evidence that animals form
models ofthe world, including models ofhow other agents act. Unfortunately, present
psychological methodologies do not allow us to distinguish between behaviors that
are mediated by internal models and those that are merely stimulus-response patterns.
Also, althoughprimates clearly learn some rules for ordering words, there appear to be
limitations in the way they use syntax to produce unbounded sequences. Despite some
impressive accomplishments, no primate has duplicated the explosion oflanguage use
that all normal human children accomplish by age four.

Language and thoughtreinforce each other, but it is not known ifhumans evolved
to use language well because they are smart, or if they are smart because they use
language well. One theory (Jerison, 1991) is that human language stems primarily
from a need for better cognitive maps of the territory. Canines and other social
carnivores rely heavily on scent marking and their olfactory system to decide both
where they are and what other animals have been there—just as the wumpus world
agents use the presence ofa smell or breeze to help map out that world. But the early
hominids (monkeys and apes of 30 million years ago) did not have a well enough
developed olfactory system to map out the world this way, so they substituted vocal
sounds for scent marking. Thus, the rest of this chapter, in Jerison's view, is devoted
to the way we humans compensate for our inadequate noses.

 

 
