Section 3.3

Example Problems 0

 

TRAVELLING.
SALESPERSON
PROBLEM

mileage awards, and so on. Furthermore, the actions in the problem do not have completely
known outcomes: flights can be late or overbooked, connections can be missed, and fog or
emergency maintenance can cause delays.

Touring and travelling salesperson problems

Consider the problem, "Visit every city in Figure 3.3 at least once, starting and ending in
Bucharest." This seems very similar to route finding, because the operators still comespond to
trips between adjacent cities. But for this problem, the state space must record more information.
In addition to the agent's location, each state must keep track of the set of cities the agent has
visited. So the initial state would be "In Bucharest; visited {Bucharest},” a typical intermediate
state would be "In Vaslui; visited {Bucharest,Urziceni,Vaslui}.” and the goal test would check if
the agent is in Bucharest and that all 20 cities have been visited.

The travelling salesperson problem (TSP) is a famous touring problem in which each city
must be visited exactly once. The aim is to find the shortest tour. The problem is NP-hard (Karp,
1972), but an enormous amount of effort has been expended to improve the capabilities of TSP
algorithms. In addition to planning trips for travelling salespersons, these algorithms have been
used for tasks such as planning movements of automatic circuit board drills.

VLSI layout

The design of silicon chips is one of the most complex engineering design tasks currently
undertaken, and we can give only a brief sketch here. A typical VLSI chip can have as many as
a million gates, and the positioning and connections of every gate are crucial to the successful
operation of the chip. Computer-aided design tools are used in every phase of the process.
Two of the most difficult tasks are cell layout and channel routing. These come after the
components and connections of the circuit have been fixed; the purpose is to lay out the circuit
on the chip so as to minimize area and connection lengths, thereby maximizing speed. In cell
layout, the primitive components of the circuit are grouped into cells, each of which performs
some recognized function. Each cell has a fixed footprint (size and shape) and requires a certain
number of connections to each of the other cells. The aim is to place the cells on the chip so
that they do not overlap and so that there is room for the connecting wires to be placed between
the cells. Channel routing finds a specific route for each wire using the gaps between the cells.
These search problems are extremely complex, but definitely worth solving. In Chapter 4, we
will see some algorithms capable of solving them.

Robot navigation

Robot navigation is a generalization of the route-finding problem described earlier. Rather than
a discrete set of routes, a robot can move ina continuous space with (in principle) an infinite set
of possible actions and states. For a simple, circular robot moving on a flat surface, the space

6 Strictly speaking, this is the travelling salesperson optimization problem; the TSP itself asks ifa tour exists with cost
less than some constant
