810

Chapter 25. Robotics

 

HAND-EYE
MACHINES:

robots, which were grown chemically rather than constructed mechanically, end up resenting
their masters and decide to take over. It appears (Glance, 1978) that it was actually Capek's
brother, Josef, who first combined the Czech words “robota” (obligatory work) and “robotnik”
(serf) to yield "robot" in his 1917 short story Opilec.

Reichardt (1978) surveys the history and future of robots, grouping them into four cat-
egories: (1) strictly mythological, fictional, or fraudulent; (2) working, but nonelectronic; (3)
controlled by very special-purpose electronic or electromechanical hardware; (4) controlled
by general-purpose computers. Brief accounts of early robots of all four kinds are given by
Raphael(1976), McCorduck (1979), and Heppenheimer (1985); more detailed treatments are
given by Cohen (1966) and Chapuis and Droz (1958). The most famous classical instances of the
first type are Talos (supposedly designed and built by Hephaistos, the Greek god of metallurgy)
and the Golem of Prague. Perhaps the first impressive example of the second type was Jacques
‘Vaucanson’s mechanical duck, unveiled in 1738. An early instance of the third type is Torres
y Quevedo's electromechanical automaton for playing the chess endgame of king and rook vs.
king, described in Chapter 5. In the 1890s, Nikola Tesla built some experimental vehicles that
were teleoperated (or remote controlled) via radio. Grey Walter's "turtle," built in 1948, could
be considered the first modern type three robot.

Inthe late 1950s,George Engelberger and George Devol developed the first useful industrial
robots, starting with type three, and moving on to type four. Engelberger founded Unimation to
market them, and eamed the title "father of robotics." His Robotics in Practice (1980) is a good
survey of the early days of industrial robots. In the mid-1980s, there was a surge of interest in
the field, largely funded by automotive companies. Reality did not live up to expectations, and
there was a major shakeout in the robotics industry in the late 1980s. Perhaps in reaction to this
shakeout, Engelberger's Robotics in Service (1989) is much more sanguine about the imminent
practicality of type four robots in industrial settings.

Type four robots can be further divided into mobile robots (or mobots) and static manip-
ulators, originally called hand-eye machines. The first modem mobile robot was the “Hopkins
Beast," built in the early 1960s at Johns Hopkins University. Ithad pattern-recognition hardware
and could recognize the cover plate ofa standard AC power outlet. It was capable of searching for
outlets, plugging itselfin, and then recharging its batteries! Still, the Beast had a limited reper-
toire of skills. The first general-purpose mobot was “Shakey.” developed at SRI International
from 1966 through 1972 (Nilsson, 1984).

The first major effort at creating a hand-eye machine was Heinrich Ernst's MH-1, described
in his MIT PhD. thesis (Emst, 1961) and in a retrospective by Taylor (1989). The Machine
Intelligence project at Edinburgh (Michie, 1972) also demonstrated an impressive early system
for vision-based assembly called FREDDY.

Robotics engages virtually every component and subfield of AI. Some areas of AI were
originally driven primarily by the demands of robotics, although they have since become separate
areas of study. The main two are computer vision (and other forms of perception) and planning.
The Shakey robot project at SRL, in particular, was seminal in the development of the techniques
of planning. There are also several problem areas that are unique to robotics. Planning in
continuous state spaces is usually restricted to robotics. Sensor and motion errors are taken
much more seriously in robotics, although they are also studied for military applications. Also,
quite apart from perception and planning, it is far from trivial simply to describe the motions

 
