 

Using Vision for Manipulation and Navigation 749

 

Waltz (1975) proposed an algorithm for this problem (actually for an augmented version with
shadows, cracks, and separably concave edges) that was one of the first applications of constraint
satisfaction in AI (see Chapter 3). In the terminology of CSPs, the variables are the junctions,
the values are labellings for the junctions, and the constraints are that each line has a single
label. Although Kirousis and Papadimitriou (1988) have shown that the line-labelling problem
for trihedral scenes is NP-complete, standard CSP algorithms perform well in practice.

Although the Huffman—Clowes—Waltz labeling scheme was limited to trihedral objects,
subsequent work by Mackworth(1973) and Sugihara (1984) resulted in a generalization for
arbitrary polyhedra and work by Malik (1987) for piecewise smooth curved objects.

24.5 USING VISION FOR MANIPULATION AND NAVIGATION

One of the principal uses of vision is to provide information for manipulating objects—picking
them up, grasping, twirling, and so on—as well as navigating in a scene while avoiding obstacles.

The capability to use vision for these purposes is present in the most primitive of animal
visual systems. Perhaps the evolutionary origin of the vision sense can be traced back to the
presence of a photosensitive spot on one end of an organism that enabled it to orient itself toward
(or away from) the light. Flies use vision based on optic flow to control their landing responses.

Mobile robots moving around in an environment need to know where the obstacles are,
where free space corridors are available, and so on. More on this in Chapter 25.

Let us study the use of vision in driving in detail. Consider the tasks for the driver of the
car in the bottom left corner of Figure 24.24.

1. Keep moving at a reasonable speed vo.

2. Lateral control—ensure that the vehicle remains securely within its lane, that is, keep
d = d,.

3. Longitudinal control—ensure that there is a safe distance d) between it and the vehicle in
front of it.

4. Monitor vehicles in neighboring lanes (at distances d; and d;)and be prepared for appro-
priate maneuvers if one of them decides to change lanes.

The problem for the driver is to generate appropriate steering, actuation or braking actions to
best accomplish these tasks. Focusing specifically on lateral and longitudinal control, what
information is needed for these tasks?

For lateral control, one needs to maintain a representation of the position and orientation
of the car relative to the lane. The view of the road from a camera mounted on a car is shown in
Figure 24.25. We detect edges corresponding to the lane marker segments and then fit smooth
curves to these. The parameters of these curves carry information about the lateral position of the
car, the direction it is pointing relative to the lane, and the curvature ofthe lane. This information,
along with the dynamics of the car, is all that is needed by the steering control system. Note
also that because from every frame to the next frame there is only a small change in the position
