480 Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

es deaths). Although nobody feels comfortable with putting a value on human life, it is afact that
I trade-offs are made all the time. Aircraft are given a complete overhaul at intervals determined
by trips and miles flown, rather than after every trip. Car bodies are made with relatively thin
sheet metal to reduce costs, despite the decrease in accident survival rates. Leaded fuel is still
widely used even though it has known health hazards. Paradoxically, a refusal to "put a monetary
value on life" means that life is’ often undervalued. Ross Shachter relates an experience with a
government agency that commissioned a study on removing asbestos from schools. The study
assumed a particular dollar value for the life of a school-age child, and argued that the rational
choice under that assumption was to remove the asbestos. The government agency, morally
outraged, rejected the report out of hand. It then decided against asbestos removal.

Some attempts have been made to find out the value that people place on their own lives.
MICRONORT Two common “currencies” used in medical and safety analysis are the micromort (a one in a
ALY million chance of death) and the QALY, or quality-adjusted life year (equivalent to a year in good
health with no infirmities). A number of studies across a wide range of individuals have shown
that a micromort is worth about $20 (1980 dollars). We have already seen that utility functions
need not be linear, so this does not imply that a decision maker would kill himself for $20 million.
Again, the local linearity of any utility curve means that micromort and QALY values are useful
for small incremental risks and rewards, but not necessarily for large risks.

ay

164 _MULTIATTRIBUTE UTILITY FUNCTIONS

Decision making in the field of public policy involves both millions of dollars and life and death.
For example, in deciding what levels of a carcinogenic substance to allow into the environment,
policy makers must weigh the prevention of deaths against the economic hardship that might
result from the elimination of certain products and processes. Siting a new airport requires
consideration of the disruption caused by construction; the cost of land; the distance from centers
of population; the noise of flight operations; safety issues arising from local topography and
weather conditions; and so on. Problems like these, in which outcomes are characterized by two
MULTATTRIBUTE or more attributes, are handled by multiattribute utility theory, or MAUT.

We will call the attributes X,, X, and so on; their values will be x, 2. and so on; anda
complete vector of attribute values will be x = (x),x2,...). Each attribute is generally assumed
to have discrete or continuous scalar values. For simplicity, we will assume that each attribute is
defined in such a way that, all other things being equal, higher values of the attribute correspond to
higher utilities. For example, ifwe choose as an attribute in the airport problem AbsenceOfNoise,
then the greater its value, the better the solution. In some cases, it may be necessary to subdivide
the range of values so that utility varies monotonically within each range.

The basic approach adopted in multiattribute utility theory is to identify regularities in the

oon preference behavior we would expect to see, and to use what are called representation theorems

We use quotation marks because these measures are definitely not currencies in the standard sense of being exchange-
able for goods at constant rates regardless of the current "wealth" of the agent making the exchange

 
