138

Chapter 5. Game Playing

 

computer world champion in 1985, and was the first program to defeat a human grandmaster,
Arnold Denker, in 1987. At the time it ranked among the top 800 human players in the world.

The best current system is Deep Thought 2. It is sponsored by IBM, which hired part of the
team that built the Deep Thought system at Carnegie Mellon University. Although Deep Thought
2 uses a simple evaluation function, it examines about half billion positions per move, allowing
it to reach depth 10 or 11, with a special provision to follow lines of forced moves still further
(it once found a 37-move checkmate). In February 1993, Deep Thought 2 competed against the
Danish Olympic team and won, 3-1, beating one grandmaster and drawing against another. Its
FIDE rating is around 2600, placing it among the top 100 human players.

The next version ofthe system, Deep Blue, will use a parallel array of 1024 custom VLSI
chips. This will enable it to search the equivalent of one billion positions per second (100-200
billion per move) and to reach depth 14. A !0-processorversion is due to play the Israeli national
team (one of the strongest in the world) in May 1995, and the full-scale system will challenge
the world champion shortly thereafter.

Checkers or Draughts

Beginning in 1952, Arthur Samuel of IBM, working in his spare time, developed a checkers
program that learned its own evaluation function by playing itself thousands of times. We
describe this idea in more detail in Chapter 20. Samuel's program began as a novice, but after
only a few days' self-play was able to compete on equal terms in some very strong human
tournaments. When one considers that Samuel's computing equipment (an IBM 704) had 10,000
words of main memory, magnetic tape for long-term storage, and a cycle time of almost a
millisecond, this remains one of the great feats of AI.

Few other people attempted to do better until Jonathan Schaeffer and colleagues developed
Chinook, which runs on ordinary computers using alpha-beta search, but uses several techniques,
including perfect solution databases for all six-piece positions, that make its endgame play
devastating. Chinook won the 1992 U.S. Open, and became the first program to officially
challenge for a real world championship. It then ran up against a problem, in the form of Marion
Tinsley. Dr. Tinsley had been world champion for over 40 years, losing only three games in all that
time. In the first match against Chinook, Tinsley suffered his fourth and fifth losses, but won the
match 21.5-18.5, More recently, the world championship match in August 1994between Tinsley
and Chinook ended prematurely when Tinsley had to withdraw for health reasons. Chinook
became the official world champion.

Othello

Othello, also called Reversi, is probably more popular as a computer game than as a board game.
Ithas a smaller search space than chess, usually 5 to 15 legal moves, but evaluation expertise
had to be developed from scratch. Even so, Othello programs on normal computers are far better
than humans, who generally refuse direct challenges in tournaments.
