Section 24.6.

INDEX FUNCTIONS

Object Representation and Recognition 755

 

  

(a) (b)

 

 

Figure 24.29 (a) Comers found in the stapler image. (b) Hypothesized reconstruction overlaid
on the original image. (Courtesy of Clark Olson.)

 

 

 

in Figure 24.30. Under perspective projection, the ratios of distances are not preserved—think
of the spacing of sleepers on an image of a receding railway track. The spacing is constant in the
world, but decreases with distance from the camera in an image. However, the ratio of ratio of
distances on a line is preserved, that is, it is the same measured on the object or in the image.

Invariants are significant in vision because they can be used as index functions, so that a
value measured in an image directly indexes a model in the library. To take a simple example,
suppose there are three models {A,B,C} in the library, each with a corresponding and distinct
invariant value {/(A), /(B),1(C)}. Recognition proceeds as follows: After edge detection and
grouping, invariants are measured from image curves. Ifa value / = (2) is measured, then there
is evidence that object B is present. It is not necessary to consider objects 4 and C any further. It
may be that for a large model base, all invariants are not distinct (i.e., several models may share
invariant values). Consequently, when an invariant measured in the image corresponds to a value
in the library, a recognition hypothesis is generated. Recognition hypotheses corresponding to
the same object are merged if compatible. The hypotheses are verified by back projecting the
outline as in the alignment method. An example of object recognition using invariants is given
in Figure 21,31,

Another advantage of invariant shape representation is that models can be acquired directly
from images. It is not necessary to make measurements on the actual object, because the shape
descriptors have the same value when measured in any image. This simplifies and facilitates
automation of model acquisition. It is particularly useful in applications such as recognition from
satellite images.

Although the two approaches to object recognition that we have described are useful in
practice, it should be noted that we are far away from human competence. The generation
of sufficiently rich and descriptive representations from images, segmentation and grouping to
identify those features that belong together, and the matching of these to object models are
difficult research problems under active investigation.
