Section 3.8.

Summary 87

 

Warmuth (1986) showed that finding the shortest solution in the generalized n x n version belongs
to the class of NP-complete problems.

"Uninformed" search algorithms for finding shortest paths that rely on current path cost
alone, rather than an estimate of the distance to the goal, are a central topic of classical computer
science, applied mathematics, and a related field known as operations research. Uniform-cost
search as a way of finding shortest paths was invented by Dijkstra (1959). A survey of early
work in uninformed search methods for shortest paths can be found in Dreyfus (1969); Deo
and Pang (1982) give a more recent survey. For the variant of the uninformed shortest-paths
problem that asks for shortest paths between all pairs of nodes in a graph, the techniques of
dynamic programming and memoization can be used. For a problem to be solved by these
techniques, it must be capable of being divided repeatedly into subproblems in such a way
that identical subproblems arise again and again. Then dynamic programming or memoization
involves systematically recording the solutions to subproblems in a table so that they can be
looked up when needed and do not have to be recomputed repeatedly during the process of
solving the problem. An efficient dynamic programming algorithm for the all-pairs shortest-paths
problem was found by Bob Floyd (1962a; 1962b), and improved upon by Karger et al. (1993).
Bidirectional search was introduced by Pohl (1969; 1971); itis often used with heuristic guidance
techniques of the kind discussed in Chapter 4. Iterative deepening was first used by Slate and
Atkin (1977) in the CHESS 4.5 game-playing program.

The textbooks by Nilsson (1971; 1980) are good general sources of information about
classical search algorithms, although they are now somewhat dated. A comprehensive, and much
more up-to-date, survey can be found in (Korf, 1988).

 

EXERCISES

3.1. Explain why problem formulation must follow goal formulation.

3.2 Consider the accessible, two-location vacuum world under Murphy's Law. Show that for
each initial state, there is a sequence of actions that is guaranteed to reach a goal state.

33 Give the initial state, goal test, operators, and path cost function for each of the following.
There are several possible formulations for each problem, with varying levels of detail. The
main thing is that your formulations should be precise and "hang together" so that they could be
implemented.

a. You want to find the telephone number of Mr. Jimwill Zollicoffer, who lives in Alameda,
given a stack of directories alphabetically ordered by city.

b. As for part (a), but you have forgotten Jimwill's last name.

°

. You are lost in the Amazon jungle, and have to reach the sea. There is a stream nearby.

d. You have to color a complex planar map using only four colors, with no two adjacent
regions to have the same color.

 
