672 Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

 

VP(I))
NP. VP([NP])
VP([NP,NP]) NP NP
IN

Pronoun Verb([NP.NP])} Pronoun Article Noun

You give me the gold

 

 

Figure 22.12 Parse tree for "You give me the gold” showing subcategorization of the verb and
verb phrase.

 

 

 

beyond context-free. For example, the context-sensitive language a"b"c” can be represented with
the following augmented grammar (where e represents the empty string):

S(n) — A(n) Bin) Cin)

A(0) +e A(n+ 1) >a A(n)
BO)—e Bin+ 1) — b Bin)
c(0) -e C(n+ tl) —e¢ Cin)

22.7__ SEMANTIC INTERPRETATION

Throughout Part III, we gained experience in translating between English and first-order logic.
There it was done informally, to get a feeling for what statements of first-order logic mean. Here
we will do the same thing in a more carefully controlled way, to define what statements of £1
mean. Later on we will investigate the meaning of other types of speech acts besides sentences.

Before moving on to natural languages, we will consider the semantics of formal languages.
Itis easy to deal with meanings of expressions like “X+Y” in arithmetic orXA Y in logic because

SOMPOSITIONAL they have a compositional semantics. This means that the semantics of any phrase is a function
of the semantics of its subphrases; it does not depend on any other phrase before, after, or
encompassing the given phrase. So if we know the meaning of X and Y (and +), then we know
the meaning of the whole phrase.

Things get more complicated when we go beyond the simple language of arithmetic. For
example, the programming language expression "10+10" might have the semantic interpretation
4 when it appears in the larger string “BASE(2); X -- 10+10.” However, we can still salvage a
compositional semantics out of this if we say that the semantic function associated with “x+y"is
to add and y in the current base. The great advantage of compositional semantics is the same as
the advantage of context-free grammars: it lets us handle an infinite grammar with a finite (and
often small) set of rules.

 
