 

 

l 5 PROBABILISTIC
REASONING SYSTEMS

 

 

 

In which we explain how to build reasoning systems that use network models to
reason with uncertainty according to the laws of probability theory.

Chapter 14 gave the syntax and semantics of probability theory. This chapter introduces an
inference mechanism, thus giving us everything we need to build an uncertain-reasoning system.

The main advantage of probabilistic reasoning over logical reasoning is in allowing the
agent to reach rational decisions even when there is not enough information to prove that any
given action will work. We begin by showing how to capture uncertain knowledge in a natural
and efficient way. We then show how probabilistic inference, although exponentially hard in the
worst case, can be done efficiently in many practical situations. We conclude the chapter with a
discussion of knowledge engineering techniques for building probabilistic reasoning systems, a
case study of one successful system, and a survey of alternate approaches.

15.1 _ REPRESENTING KNOWLEDGE IN AN UNCERTAIN DOMAIN

BELIEF NETWORK

In Chapter 14, we saw that the joint probability distribution can answer any question about
the domain, but can become intractably large as the number of variables grows. Furthermore,
specifying probabilities for atomic events is rather unnatural and may be very difficult unless a
large amount of data is available from which to gather statistical estimates

Wealso saw that, in the context ofusing Bayes' rule, conditional independence relationships
among variables can simplify the computation of query results and greatly reduce the number
of conditional probabilities that need to be specified. We use a data structure called a belief
network! to represent the dependence between variables and to give a concise specification of
the joint probability distribution. A belief network is a graph in which the following holds:

1 This is the most common name, but there are many others, including Bayesian network, probabilistic network,
causal network, and knowledge map. An extension ofbeliefnetworks called a decision network orinfluence diagram
will be covered in Chapter 16.

436
