Section 22.9, A Communicating Agent 683

 

sm The simplest way to provide a probability distribution is to use a probabilistic context-free
CR REREF AEE grammar or PCFG.'° In the PCFG language model, each rewrite rule has a probability associated
OFA with it, such that the sum for all rules with the same left-hand side is 1—forexample,

S—NPVP (0.9)
S —S ConjunctionS  *(0.1)

In the PCFG model, the probability of a string, P(words), is just the sum of the probabilities of
its parse trees—one such tree for an unambiguous string, no trees for an ungrammatical string,
and several trees for an ambiguous string. The probability of a given tree is the product of the
probabilities of all the rules that make up the nodes of the tree.

The problem with PCFGs is that they are context-free. That means that the difference
between P(“I ate a banana") and P(‘“I ate a bandana") depends only on P(“banana”) versus
P(“bandana”), and not on the relation between "ate" and the respective nouns. To get at that
kind of relationship, we will need some kind of context-sensitive model. Other probabilistic
language models that include context sensitivity have been proposed (see the Historical Notes
section). The problem of combining the four models into one is taken up when we discuss speech
recognition in Section 24.7.

22.9 __A COMMUNICATING AGENT

We have now seen how to go all the way from strings to meanings using syntactic and semantic
analysis and disambiguation. The final step is to show how this fits in to an agent that can
communicate. We start with the simple wumpus world robot slave described on page 662.

The first step in building the communicating agent is to extend the grammar to accept
commands such as "Go east." So far, the language €2 has only one type of speech act: the
statement. We will extend it with commands and acknowledgments to yield the language £3.

The new words and grammar rules are not complicated. A command can be formed from
a VP, where the subject is implicitly the hearer. For example, "Go to 2 2" is a command, and
it already is a VP according to the £2 grammar. The semantics of the command is derived by
applying the semantics ofthe VP to the object Hearer. Now that we have several kinds of speech
acts, we will identify the kind (i.e, command or statement) as part of the quasi-logical form. Here
are the rules for commands and statements:

S(Command(rel(Hearer))— VP(rel)

S(Statement(rel(ohj)y—+ NP(ohj) VP(rel)
So the quasi-logical form for "Go to 2 2" is;!!

Command(3e e € Go(Hearer,[2, 2}))

10 PCFGs are also known as stochastic context-free grammars or SCFGs.

11 Note that the quasi-logical form for a command does not include the time of the event (e.g., During(Now,e)). That
is because commands are tenseless. We can't tell that by looking at commands with "go," but consider that the correct
form ofa command is “[you] be good,” (using the untensed form "be") not “[you] are good.”
