Section 14.6 Summary 431

 

14.6 SUMMARY

 

This chapter shows that probability is the right way to reason about uncertainty.

Uncertainty arises because of both laziness and ignorance. It is inescapable in complex,
dynamic, or inaccessible worlds

Uncertainty means that many of the simplifications that are possible with deductive infer-
ence are no longer valid.

Probabilities express the agent's inability to reach a definite decision regarding the truth of
a sentence, and summarize the agent's beliefs.

Basic probability statements include prior probabilities and conditional probabilities
over simple and complex propositions.

The axioms of probability specify constraints on reasonable assignments of probabili-
ties to propositions. An agent that violates the axioms will behave irrationally in some
circumstances

The joint probability distribution specifies the probability of each complete assignment
of values to random variables. It is usually far too large to create or use.

Bayes' rule allows unknown probabilities to be computed from known, stable ones.
In the general case, combining many pieces of evidence may require assessing a large
number of conditional probabilities.

Conditional independence brought about by direct causal relationships in the domain
allows Bayesian updating to work effectively even with multiple pieces of evidence.

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Although games of chance date back at least to around 300 B.C., the mathematical analysis of
odds and probability appears to be much later. Some work done by Mahaviracarya in India
is dated to roughly the ninth century A.D. In Europe, the first attempts date only to the Italian
Renaissance, beginning around 1500A.D. The first significant systematic analyses were produced
by Girolamo Cardano around 1565, but they remained unpublished until 1663. By that time, the
discovery by Blaise Pascal (in cowespondence with Pierre Fermat in 1654) of a systematic way
of calculating probabilities had for the first time established probability as a widely and fruitfully
studied mathematical discipline. The first published textbook on probability was De Ratiociniis
in LudoAleae (Huygens, 1657). Pascal also introduced conditional probability, which is covered
in Huygens's textbook. The Rev. Thomas Bayes (1702-1761) introduced the rule for reasoning
about conditional probabilities that was named after him. It was published posthumously (Bayes,
1763). Kolmogorov (1950, first published in German in 1933) presented probability theory
in a rigorously axiomatic framework for the first time. Rényi (1970) later gave an axiomatic
presentation that took conditional probability, rather than absolute probability, as primitive.
