Section 23.7.

Summary 719

 

ATTENTION

There have been several catalogs of coherence relations. Mann and Thompson (1983)
give a more elaborate one that includes solutionhood, evidence, justification, motivation, reason,
sequence, enablement, elaboration, restatement, condition, circumstance, cause, concession,
background, and thesis-antithesis.

The theory of Grosz and Sidner (1986) also accounts for where the speaker and hearer's
attention is focused during the discourse. Their theory includes a pushdown stack of focus
spaces. Certain utterances cause the focus to shift by pushing or popping elements off the stack.
For example, in Discourse (A), the sentence "I visited Paris" causes a new focus to be pushed
on the stack. Within that focus, the speaker can use definite descriptions to refer to, say, "the
museums" or "the cafes.” The sentence "Then I flew home" would cause the focus on Paris to be
popped from the stack; from that point on, the speaker would need to use an indefinite description
such as "the cafe I went to in Paris" rather than a simple definite description. There is also a more
specific notion of local focus that affects the interpretation of pronouns.

23.7 SUMMARY

In this chapter, we have seen what can be done with state-of-the-art natural language processing,
and what is involved in getting there. The main points were as follows:

Natural language processing techniques make it practical to develop programs that make
queries to a database, extract information from texts, retrieve relevant documents from a
collection, translate from one language to another, or recognize spoken words. In all these
areas, there exist programs that are useful, but there are no programs that do a thorough
job in an open-ended domain.

It is possible to parse sentences efficiently using an algorithm that is careful to save its
work, avoid unnecessary work, and pack the results into a forest rather than an exhaustive
list of trees

In recent years, there has been a shift of emphasis from the grammar to the lexicon.
Building a lexicon is a difficult task.

Natural languages have a huge variety of syntactic forms. Nobody has yet captured them
all, but we can extend the simple grammar of the last chapter to give more complete
coverage of English sentences.

Choosing the right interpretation of a sentence in the situation in which it was uttered
requires evidence from many sources, including syntactic, lexical, and semantic.

Most of the interesting language comes in connected discourse rather than in isolated
sentences. Coherence relations constrain how a discourse is put together, and thus constrain
the possible interpretations it has.
