Section 25.5.

Configuration Spaces: A Framework for Analysis 795

 

RECOGNIZABLE SET
ABSTRACT SENSOR

3. Restrict object motions. Here one chooses a parameterized family of basic motions,
and searches for a sequence of such motions that will solve the planning problem. The
best-known example of this is the “LMT” approach® (Lozano-Pérez et al., 1984). One
must be careful about the choice of motions, because the problem will be intractable if
they are too general, but unsolvable if they are too restrictive. LMT suggests the use of
compliant motions, which produce straight-line motions in free space, but which follow the
boundaries of configuration space when needed. LMT also explicitly models uncertainty
in control and sensing. So the result of an LMT basic motion is not a single trajectory, but
an envelope of possible trajectories that grows with time. LMT is described more fully in
Section 25.6.

Recognizable Sets

Configuration space is a useful tool for understanding constraints induced by object shape. We
have so far tacitly assumed that robot planning problems are all of the form "How do I get from
here to there in W?" But the reality is that most robots have poor knowledge of where they are
in W. The robot has reasonably good knowledge of its own state (although often not accurately
enough for precision work), but its knowledge of other objects comes second hand from sensors
like sonar, laser range finders, and computer vision. Some objects simply may not be visible
from the robot's current vantage point, so their uncertainty is enormous. Rather than a point in
configuration space, our planner must start with a probability cloud, or an envelope of possible
configurations. We call such an envelope a recognizable set.’

It will be useful to formalize this notion. An abstract sensor a is a function from the true
world state W to the space of possible sensor values. A recognizable set is a set o—!(s) of all
world states in which the robot would receive the sensor reading s.'°

Ifthe sensor is perfect, that is, if it always produces the same sensor values in the same
world state, the sets o~'(s) form a partition of W’. Distinct recognizable sets do not overlap,
and their union is all of W. Unfortunately, because of noise, and because the chosen W often
does not incorporate all of the factors that can affect sensor readings, the value returned by the
sensor may not be a unique function of the state. To allow for this, we can treat a as a relation
rather than a function. The relation is true of a state and a sensor reading if the sensor reading
could possibly be returned in that world state. It still makes sense to define recognizable sets as
o~'(s), where we now take this to mean the set of states in which the sensor could return the
value s. Now it no longer holds that distinct recognizable sets are disjoint, although their union
is still all of W.

Recognizable sets simplify the problem of planning with uncertainty. A robot will always
be in a recognizable set, because it will always have sensor readings available. The robot
may also use memories of earlier sensor readings, but this is equivalent to a virtual sensor that
provides both current and past readings. The (virtual) sensor readings determine uniquely which

& LMT is named after the three authors.
® Recognizable sets are to continuous domains what multiple state sets are to discrete problems (see Chapter 3).

10 Notice the close analogy with the idea of possible worlds introduced in the context of modal logic in Chapter 8. A
recognizable set is essentially the set of possible worlds given what the robot knows about the world

 
