Section 14.3.

The Axioms of Probability 425

 

PROBABILITY
IBUTION

ATOMIC EVENT

The joint probability distribution

 

In this section, we define the joint probability distribution (or "joint" for short), which com-
pletely specifies an agent's probability assignments to all propositions in the domain (both simple
and complex).

A probabilistic model of a’domain consists of a set of random variables that can take on
particular values with certain probabilities. Let the variables be X\ ...X,,. An atomic event is an
assignment of particular values to all the variables—in other words, a complete specification of
the state of the domain.

The joint probability distribution P(X, ...,X,) assigns probabilities to all possible atomic
events. Recall that P(X;) is a one-dimensional vector of probabilities for the possible values of
the variable X;. Then the joint is an n-dimensional table with a value in every cell giving the
probability of that specific state occurring. Here is a joint probability distribution for the trivial
medical domain consisting of the two Boolean variables Toothache and Cavity:

 

Toothache | =Toothache
Cavity 0.04 0.06
=Cavity| 0.01 0.89

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Because the atomic events are mutually exclusive, any conjunction of atomic events is necessarily
false. Because they are collectively exhaustive, their disjunction is necessarily true. Hence, from
the second and third axioms of probability, the entries in the table sum to |. In the same way,
the joint probability distribution can be used to compute any probabilistic statement we care to
know about the domain, by expressing the statement as a disjunction of atomic events and adding
up their probabilities. Adding across a row or column gives the unconditional probability of a
variable, for example, P(Cavity) = 0.06 + 0.04 = 0.10. As another example:

P(CavityV Toothache) = 0.04 + 0.01 + 0.06 = 0.11

Recall that we can make inferences about the probabilities of an unknown proposition
A, given evidence B, by calculating P(A\B). A query to a probabilistic reasoning system will
therefore ask for the value ofa particular conditional probability. Conditional probabilities can
be found from the joint using Equation (14.1):

P(Cavity A Toothache) _ 0.04
P(Toothachey (0.04 + 0.01

Ofcourse, in a realistic problem, there might be hundreds or thousands ofrandom variables
to consider, not just two. In general it is not practical to define all the 2" entries for the joint
probability distribution over « Boolean variables, but it is important to remember that if we could
define all the numbers, then we could read off any probability we were interested in.

Modem probabilistic reasoning systems sidestep the joint and work directly with condi-
tional probabilities, which are after all the values that we are interested in. In the next section,
we introduce a basic tool for this task.

P(Cavity|Toothache) = =0.80

 
