Section 22.6.

Augmenting a Grammar 671

 

ADJUNCTS:

RULE SCHEMA

To integrate verb subcategorization into the grammar, we do three things. The first step is
to augment the category VP to take a subcategorization argument that indicates the complements
that are needed to form a complete VP. For example, "give" can be made into a complete VP by
adding /NP,PP], "give the zold” can be made complete by adding /PP/, and "give the gold to
me" is already complete; its subcategorization list is []. That gives us these rules:

VP(subcat) —  VP(\NP|subcat\NP(Objective)
| VP([Adjective|subcat]) Adjective
| VP(LPP|subcar}) PP
| Verb(subcat)

The first line can be read as "A VP with a given subcat list, swbcat, can be formed by a VP
followed by a NP in the objective case, as long as that VP has a subcat list that starts with the
symbol NP and is followed by the elements of the list subcat.”

The second step is to change the rule for S to say that it requires a verb phrase that has all
its complements, and thus has a subcat list of []. This means that "He died" is a legal sentence,
but "You give" is not. The new rule,

5 — NP(Subjective) VP([])

can be read as "A sentence can be composed of a NP in the subjective case, followed by a VP
which has a null subcat list." Figure 22.12 shows a parse tree using this grammar.

The third step is to remember that in addition to complements, verb phrases (and other
phrases) can also take adjuncts, which are phrases that are not licensed by the individual verb but
rather may appear in any verb phrase. Phrases representing time and place are adjuncts, because
almost any action or event can have a time or place. For example, the adverb "now" in "I smell
a wumpus now" and the PP "on Tuesday" in "give me the gold on Tuesday" are adjuncts. Here
are two rules to allow adjuncts:

VP(subcat) — VP(subcat) PP
| VP(subcat)Adverb

Notice that we now have two rules with VP PP on the right-hand side, one as an adjunct and
one as a complement. This can lead to ambiguities. For example, "I walked Sunday" is usually
interpreted as an intransitive VP followed by a time adjunct meaning "I moved myself with my
feet on Sunday." But if Sunday is the name ofa dog, then Sunday is an NP complement, and the
meaning is that I took the dog for a walk at some unspecified time.

Generative Capacity of Augmented Grammars

The generative capacity of augmented grammars depends on the number of values for the
augmentations. If there is a finite number, then the augmented grammar is equivalent to a
context-free grammar. To see this, consider each augmented rule as a rule schema, which stands
for a set ofrules, one for each possible combination of values for the augmented constituents. If we
replace each rule schema with the complete set of rules, we end up with a finite (although perhaps
exponentially large) set of context-free rules. But in the general case, augmented grammars go
