 

UMITED.
RATIONALITY

1.2

Chapter 1, Introduction

development than approaches based on human behavior or human thought, because the standard
of rationality is clearly defined and completely general. Human behavior, on the other hand,
is well-adapted for one specific environment and is the product, in part, of a complicated and
largely unknown evolutionary process that still may be far from achieving perfection. This
book will therefore concentrate on general principles ofrational agents, and on components for
constructing them. We will see that despite the apparent simplicity with which the problem can
be stated, an enormous variety of issues come up when we try to solve it. Chapter 2 outlines
some of these issues in more detail.

One important point to keep in mind: we will see before too long that achieving perfect
rationality—always doing the right thing—is not possible in complicated environments. The
computational demands are just too high. However, for most of the book, we will adopt the
working hypothesis that understanding perfect decision making is a good place to start. It
simplifies the problem and provides the appropriate setting for most of the foundational material
in the field. Chapters 5 and 17 deal explicitly with the issue of limited rationality—acting
appropriately when there is not enough time to do all the computations one might like.

 

TH

 

 

E FOUNDATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

 

In this section and the next, we provide a brief history of AT. Although Al itself is a young field,
it has inherited many ideas, viewpoints, and techniques from other disciplines. From over 2000
years of tradition in philosophy, theories of reasoning and learning have emerged, along with the
viewpoint that the mind is constituted by the operation of a physical system. From over 400 years
ofmathematics, we have formal theories of logic, probability, decision making, and computation.
From psychology, we have the tools with which to investigate the human mind, and a scientific
language within which to express the resulting theories. From linguistics, we have theories of
the structure and meaning of language. Finally, from computer science, we have the tools with
which to make AI a reality.

Like any history, this one is forced to concentrate on a small number of people and events,
and ignore others that were also important. We choose to arrange events to tell the story ofhow
the various intellectual components ofmodern AI came into being. We certainly would not wish
to give the impression, however, that the disciplines from which the components came have all
been working toward AI as their ultimate fruition.

Philosophy (428 B.C.-present)

The safest characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that it consists ofa series
of footnotes to Plato.
—Alfred North Whitehead

We begin with the birth of Plato in 428 B.C. His writings range across politics, mathematics,
physics, astronomy, and several branches of philosophy. Together, Plato, his teacher Socrates,
