Section 25.3.

Parts: What Are Robots Made Of? 781

 

KINEMATICS

ROTARY
PRISMATIC

materials, and that mimicked the geometry ofa human arm. Early robots as a rule followed this
precedent, and have anthropomorphic kinematics. Broadly defined, kinematics is the study of
the correspondence between the actuator motions in a mechanism, and the resulting motion of
its various parts.

Most manipulators allow for either rotary motion (rotation around a fixed hub) or prismatic
motion (linear movement, as with a piston inside a cylinder). Figure 25.4 shows the Stanford
Manipulator, used in several early experiments in robotics. A nearly anthropomorphic design is
the Unimation PUMA shown in Figure 25.5. This design has six rotary joints arranged sequentially.
The shorthand description of its kinematic configuration is “RRRRRR,” (“6R” for short) listing
joint types from base to tip. A free body in space has six degrees of freedom (three for x-y->
position, three for orientation), so six is the minimum number ofjoints a robot requires in order
to be able to get the last link into an arbitrary position and orientation.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 25.4 — The Stanford Manipulator, an early robot arm with five rotary (R) and one prismatic
(P) joints, for a total of six degrees of freedom.

 

 

 

Incase this total of six degrees of freedom for a free body is not intuitively obvious, imagine
the body is a tennis ball. The center of the ball can be described with three position coordinates
Now suppose that the ball is resting on a table with its center fixed. You can still rotate the ball
without moving its center. Paint a dot anywhere on the surface of the ball, you can rotate the ball
so that the dot touches the table-top. This takes two degrees of freedom, because the dot can be
specified with latitude and longitude. With the center fixed and the dot touching the table-top,
you can still rotate the ball about a vertical axis. This is the third and last degree of rotational
freedom. (In an airplane or boat, the three types of rotation are called pitch, yaw, and roll.)

At the end of the manipulator is the robot's end effector, which interacts directly with
objects in the world. It may be a screwdriver or other tool, a welding gun, paint sprayer, or
a gripper. Grippers vary enormously in complexity. Two- and three-fingered grippers perform
most tasks in manufacturing. The mechanical simplicity of these grippers makes them reliable
and easy to control, both important attributes for manufacturing.

At the other end of the complexity spectrum are anthropomorphic hands. The Utah-MIT
hand shown in Figure 25.6 faithfully replicates most of the kinematics of a human hand, less one
finger. A human hand has a very large number of degrees of freedom (see Exercise 25.4).

 

|
