 

MAKING SIMPLE

DECISIONS

 

 

 

In which we see how an agent should make decisions so that it gets what it wants—on
average, at least.

In this chapter, we return to the idea of utility theory that was introduced in Chapter 14 and show
how it is combined with probability theory to yield a decision-theoretic agent—one that can make
rational decisions based on what it believes and what it wants. Such an agent can make decisions
in contexts where uncertainty and conflicting goals leave a logical agent with no way to decide.

Section 16.1 introduces the basic principle ofdecision theory: the maximization ofexpected
utility. Section 16.2 shows that the behavior of any rational agent can be captured by supposing a
utility function that is being maximized. Section 16.3 discusses the nature of utility functions in
more detail, and in particular their relation to individual quantities such as money. Section 16.4
shows how to handle utility functions that depend on several quantities. In Section 16.5, we
describe the implementation of decision-making systems. In particular, we introduce a formalism
called decision networks (also known as influence diagrams) that extends belief networks by
incorporating actions and utilities. The remainder of the chapter discusses issues that arise in
applications of decision theory to expert systems.

 

161__ COMBINING BELIEFS AND DESIRES UNDER UNCERTAINTY

 

 

 

In the Port-Royal Logic, written in 1662, the French philosopher Arnauld stated that

 

To judge what one must do to obtain a good or avoid an evil, it is necessary to consider not
only the good and the evil in itself, but also the probability that it happens or does not happen;

and to view geometrically the proportion that all these things have together.

These days, it is more common in scientific texts to talk of utility rather than good and evil, but
the principle is exactly the same. An agent's preferences between world states are captured by a
utility function, which assigns a single number to express the desirability of a state. Utilities are
combined with the outcome probabilities for actions to give an expected utility for each action.

471
