602

Chapter 22. Elementary Graph Algorithms

22.2-3
Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by arguing that the
BFS procedure would produce the same result if lines 5 and 14 were removed.

22.24
What is the running time of BFS if we represent its input graph by an adjacency
matrix and modify the algorithm to handle this form of input?

22.2-5

Argue that in a breadth-first search, the value u.d assigned to a vertex u is inde-
pendent of the order in which the vertices appear in each adjacency list. Using
Figure 22.3 as an example, show that the breadth-first tree computed by BFS can
depend on the ordering within adjacency lists.

22.2-6

Give an example of a directed graph G = (V, E), a source vertex s € V, anda
set of tree edges E, © E such that for each vertex v € V, the unique simple path
in the graph (V, E,,) from s to v is a shortest path in G, yet the set of edges Ex
cannot be produced by running BFS on G, no matter how the vertices are ordered
in each adjacency list.

22.2-7

There are two types of professional wrestlers: “babyfaces” (“good guys”) and
“heels” (“bad guys”). Between any pair of professional wrestlers, there may or
may not be a rivalry. Suppose we have n professional wrestlers and we have a list
of r pairs of wrestlers for which there are rivalries. Give an O(n + r)-time algo-
rithm that determines whether it is possible to designate some of the wrestlers as
babyfaces and the remainder as heels such that each rivalry is between a babyface
and a heel. If it is possible to perform such a designation, your algorithm should
produce it.

222-8 *

The diameter of a tree T = (V,E) is defined as max, yey 6(u, v), that is, the
largest of all shortest-path distances in the tree. Give an efficient algorithm to
compute the diameter of a tree, and analyze the running time of your algorithm.

22.29

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph. Give an O(V + E)-time algo-
rithm to compute a path in G that traverses each edge in E exactly once in each
direction. Describe how you can find your way out of a maze if you are given a
large supply of pennies.
