484

umury
INDEPENDENCE
MUTUALLY UTILITY-

INDEPENDENT

MULTIPLICATIVE
UTILITY FUNCTION

165 _ DECISION NETWORKS

INFLUENCE DIAGRAM
DECISION NETWORK

(CHANCE NODES

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

Preferences with uncertainty

When uncertainty is present in the domain, we will also need to consider the structure of
preferences between lotteries and to understand the resulting properties of utility functions,
rather thanjust value functions. The mathematics of this problem can become quite complicated,
so we will give just one ofthe main results to give a flavor of what can be done. The reader is
referred to Keeney and Raiffa (1976) for a thorough survey of the field.

The basic notion of utility independence extends preference independence to cover lot-
teries: a set of attributes X is utility-independent of a set of attributes Y ifpreferences between
lotteries on the attributes in X are independent ofthe particular values of the attributes in Y. A set
of attributes is mutually utility-independent (MUI) if each subset is utility-independent of the
remaining attributes. Again, it seems reasonable to propose that the airport attributes are MUL

MUI implies that the agent's behavior can be described using a multiplicative utility
function (Keeney, 1974). The general form of a multiplicative utility function is best seen by
looking at the case for three attributes. For simplicity, we will use U; to mean U;(X;(s)):

U =k Uy + kg U2 + kg U st ky kU) Uz + ko kg UU + kk U3U, + ky kak3 UU2U3

Although this does not look very simple, it contains three single-attribute utility functions and
just three constants. In general, an n-attribute problem exhibiting MUI can be modelled using
n single-attribute utilities and n con:tants. Each of the single-attribute utility functions can
be developed independently of the other attributes, and this combination will be guaranteed to
generate the correct overall preferences. Additional assumptions are required to obtain a purely
additive utility function.

Tn this section, we will look at a general mechanism for making rational decisions. The notation
is often called a influence diagram (Howard and Matheson, 1984), but we will use the more
descriptive term decision network. Decision networks combine belief networks with additional
node types for actions and utilities. We will use the airport siting problem as an example.

Representing a decision problem using decision networks

In its most general form, a decision network represents information about the agent's current
state, its possible actions, the state that will result from the agent's action, and the utility of that
state. It therefore provides a substrate for implementing utility-based agents of the type first
introduced in Section 2.3. Figure 164 shows a decision network for the airport siting problem.
It illustrates the three types ofnodes used:

0 Chance nodes (ovals) represent random variables, just as they do in beliefnets. The agent ยง
may be uncertain about the construction cost, the level of air traffic and the potential for
litigation, as well as the Deaths, Noise, and total Cost variables, each of which also depends 3

 
