 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

482 Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions
12 1 ~
1 i 08 /
08
20.6 = sl —
s 7 SL £0.4 3
®o4 Sz. Oe
02 02
0 mS 0
6 55 3 45 4 35 3 25 2 6 -S.5 5 -4.5 4 -3.5 3-25 2
Negative cost Negative cost
@) ()
Figure 163 Stochastic dominance. (a) S; stochastically dominates $2 on cost. (b) Cumulative
distributions for the negative cost of S; and S2.

 

that utility decreases with cost, we can say that S; stochastically dominates S$; — that is, Sy can be
discarded. It is important to note that this does not follow from comparing the expected costs.
For example, if we knew the cost of S| to be exactly $3.7 billion, then we would be unable to
make a decision without additional information on the utility of money.’

The exact relationship between the attribute distributions needed to establish stochastic
dominance is best seen by examining the cumulative distributions, shown in Figure 16.3(b). The
cumulative distribution measures the probability that the cost is less than or equal to any given
amount — that is, it integrates the original distribution. If the cumulative distribution for S\ is
always to the right ofthe cumulative distribution for 5, then stochastically speaking S, is cheaper
than S>. Formally, if two actions A; and A2 lead to probability distributions p)(x) and p2(x) on
attribute X, then 4; stochastically dominates A2 on X if

x x
‘

Vx [ mcrae > prox’) dx
we =e

Ifan action is stochastically dominated by another action on all attributes, then it can be discarded.
The stochastic dominance condition might seem rather technical, and perhaps not so easy
to determine without extensive probability calculations. In fact, it can be decided very easily 10
many cases. Suppose, for example, that the construction cost depends on the distance to centers
of population. The cost itself is uncertain, but the greater the distance, the greater the cost. If
5S, is less remote than $5, then §, will dominate S) on cost. Although we will not present them
here, there exist algorithms for propagating this kind of qualitative information among uncertain
variables in qualitative probabilistic networks, enabling a system to make rational decisions
based on stochastic dominance without ever needing to use numerical probabilities or utilities.

    

7 It might seem odd that more information on the cost of $, could make the agent less able to decide. The paradox i$
resolved by noting that the decision reached in the absence of exact cost information is less likely to be correct.

  
 
