 

13. PLANNING AND ACTING

 

 

 

 

In which planning systems mustface up to the awful prospect ofactually having to
take their own advice.

The assumptions required for flawless planning and execution, given the algorithms in the previous
chapters, are that the world be accessible, static, and deterministic—justas for our simple search §
methods. Furthermore, the action descriptions must be correct and complete, describing all
the consequences exactly. We described a planning agent in this ideal case in Chapter 11; the
resemblance to the simple problem-solving agent of Chapter 3 was no coincidence.

In real-world domains, agents have to deal with both incomplete and incorrect information.
Incompleteness arises because the world is inaccessible; for example, in the shopping world, the
agent may not know where the milk is kept unless it asks. Incorrectness arises because the world
does not necessarily match the agent's model of it; for example, the price of milk may have
doubled overnight, and the agent's wallet may have been pickpocketed.

There are two different ways to deal with the problems arising from incomplete and *
incorrect information:

CONDITIONAL Conditional planning: Also known as contingency planning, conditional planning deals
with incomplete information by constructing a conditional plan that accounts for each
CONTINGENCY possible situation or contingency that could arise. The agent finds out which part of

   
  
   

SENSING ACTIONS the plan to execute by including sensing actions in the plan to test for the appropriate :
conditions. For example, the shopping agent might want to include a sensing action in its +3
shopping plan to check the price of some object in case it is too expensive. Conditional 4
planning is discussed in Section 13.1.

EXECUTION. 4 Execution monitoring: The simple planning agent described in Chapter 11 executes its
plan "with its eyes closed”—once it has a plan to execute, it does not use its percepts to Jj
select actions. Obviously this is a very fragile strategy when there is a possibility that the.
agent is using incorrect information about the world. By monitoring what is happening
while it executes the plan, the agent can tell when things go wrong. It can then 9° 4

REPLANNING replanning to find a way to achieve its goals from the new situation. For example, if the
agent discovers that it does not have enough money to pay for all the items it has picked
up, it can return some and replace them with cheaper versions. In Section 13.2 we look

392
