is]

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

NP using the 's ending. You will first have to decide if 's attaches to a noun or NP. To help you
do this, consider at least the following examples:

the Queen of England's speech

the attorney general's decision

the man I saw yesterday’s name

the man and woman's house

Russell and Norvig's text

23.7 Collect some examples of time expressions, such as "two o'clock," "midnight," and
"12:46." Also think up some examples that are ungrammatical, such as "thirteen o'clock" or
“half past two fifteen." Write a grammar for the time language.

238 In this exercise, you will write rules for noun phrases consisting of a noun with no
determiner. Consider these examples:

a. Dogs like bones.

b. Late rice.

c. Gold is valuable.

d. I saw some gold in 2,2.
e. I saw gold in 2,2.

Write down the semantics for each ofthese sentences. Then use that to write down lexical entries
for "gold" and "rice," and to write a rule (or rules) of the form NP — Noun.

239 We said that 3 e,x e € Sleep(John,Past) A Name(x) = John was a plausible interpretation
for "John slept." But it is not quite right, because it blurs the distinction between "John slept"
and "Some person named John slept." The point is that the former sentence presupposes that
speaker and hearer agree on which John is being talked about. Write grammar and lexical rules
that will distinguish the two examples.

23.10 Write grammar rules for the category Adjp, or adjective phrase, using reified categories
Show how to derive 3g (g £ Fake(Guns) as the semantics of "a fake gun." An adjective phrase
can be either a lone adjective (big), a conjunction (big and dumb), or an adjective phrase modified
by an adjective or adverb (light green or very dumb).

23.11 One way to define the task of spelling correction is this: given a misspelled word and a
dictionary of correctly spelled words, find the word(s) in the dictionary that can be transformed
into the misspelled word in one insertion, deletion, substitution, or transposition. Given a
dictionary of w words and a misspelled word that is k letters long, give the average case time
complexity of spelling correction for a dictionary implemented as (a) a hash table, (b) a b-tree,
and (c) a trie.

23.12 We forgot to mention that the title of the text in Exercise 23.1 is "Washing Clothes." Go
back and reread the text, and answer the questions in Exercise 23.3. Did you do better this time?
Bransford and Johnson (1973) used this text in a better-controlled experiment and found that the
title helped significantly. What does this tell you about discourse comprehension?

 
