438

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

CONDITIONAL
PROBABILITY TABLE

CONDITIONING CASE

 

 

15.2_TH

r

 

 

Notice that the network does not have nodes corresponding to Mary currently listening to
loud music, or to the telephone ringing and confusing John. These factors are summarized in
the uncertainty associated with the links from Alarm to JohnCalls and MaryCalls. This shows
both laziness and ignorance in operation: it would be a lot of work to determine any reason why
those factors would be more or less likely in any particular case, and we have no reasonable way
to obtain the relevant information anyway. The probabilities actually summarize a potentially
infinite set of possible circumstances in which the alarm might fail to go off (high humidity,
power failure, dead battery, cut wires, dead mouse stuck inside bell, ...) or John or Mary might
fail to call and report it (out to lunch, on vacation, temporarily deaf, passing helicopter, ...). In
this way, a small agent can cope with a very large world, at least approximately. The degree of
approximation can be improved if we introduce additional relevant information

Once we have specified the topology, we need to specify the conditional probability table
or CPT for each node. Each row in the table contains the conditional probability of each node
value for a conditioning case. A conditioning case is just a possible combination of values for
the parent nodes (a miniature atomic event, if you like). For example, the conditional probability
table for the random variable Alarm might look like this:

 

 

P(Alarm|Burglary, Earthquake)
Burglary Earthquake True False
True True 0.950 0.050
True False 0.950 0.050
False True 0.290 0.710
False False 0.001 0.999

 

 

 

 

 

Each row in a conditional probability table must sum to 1, because the entries represent an
exhaustive set of cases for the variable. Hence only one of the two numbers in each row shown
above is independently specifiable. In general, a table for a Boolean variable with n Boolean
parents contains 2" independently specifiable probabilities. A node with no parents has only one
row, representing the prior probabilities of each possible value of the variable.

The complete network for the burglary example is shown in Figure 15.2, where we show
just the conditional probability for the True case of each variable.

 

SEMANTICS OF BEEIEF NETWORKS

 

 

 

The previous section described what a network is, but not what it means. There are two ways
in which one can understand the semantics of belief networks. The first is to see the network as
a representation of the joint probability distribution. The second is to view it as an encoding of
a collection of conditional independence statements. The two views are equivalent, but the first
turns out to be helpful in understanding how to construct networks, whereas the second is helpful
in designing inference procedures

 
