Section 25.6.

Navigation and Motion Planning 805

 

LANDMARKS

be added as degrees of freedom to the configuration space. In the last example, if the depth
and width of the hole were uncertain, we could add them as two degrees of freedom to the
configuration space. It is impossible to move the robot in these directions in C or to sense its
position directly. But both those restrictions can be incorporated when describing this problem
as an FMP problem by appropriately specifying control and sensor uncertainties. This gives a
complex, four-dimensional planning problem, but exactly the same planning techniques can be
applied. Notice that unlike the decision-theoretic methods in Chapter 17, this kind of approach
results in plans designed for the worst case outcome, rather than maximizing the expected quality
of the plan. Worst-case plans are only optimal in the decision-theoretic sense if failure during
execution is much worse than any of the other costs involved in execution.

Unfortunately, the complexity of fine-motion planning is extremely high. It grows expo-
nentially not only with the dimension of configuration space, but also with the number of steps
in the plan. FMP as described earlier also involves some tenuous assumptions about control and
sensor uncertainty, uncertainty in environment shape, and capabilities of the run-time system.
On the other hand, the FMP methodology can be applied to mobile robot navigation, and its
assumptions seem more reasonable there. We will see some examples of this in the next section.

Landmark-based navigation

In the last two sections, we saw motion planning extended to include run-time decisions based
on sensing. The sensors were assumed to be simple position or contact sensors, and to provide
uniform accuracy across the environment. More complex sensors, such as vision and sonar, have
very different attributes. It is much more difficult to model these sensors in a reasonable way, but
we will present a couple ofrecent approaches.

In the first, called the landmark model of sensing, we assume that the environment contains
easily recognizable, unique landmarks. A landmark is modeled as a point with a surrounding
circular field of influence. Within the field of influence, the robot is able to know its position
exactly. If the robot is outside all the fields of influence, it has no direct position information.
This model might seem unrealistic at first, but it is good model for landmarks such as bar codes.
Bar codes, like the ones on supermarket items, are sometimes used as landmarks for mobile
robots in indoor environments. They are placed in strategic locations on walls, a few feet above
the floor. They have unique codes enabling each to be distinguished. As long as the robot is
close enough to recognize a bar code, it can get a good estimate of distance from that landmark.
Getting good angular data is harder, but some estimate can be computed. Beyond the range of
recognition of the code, the robot cannot get any information from it

The robot's control is assumed to be imperfect. When it is commanded to move in a
direction v, we assume the actual motion lies in a cone of paths centered on v. This is the same
uncertainty model that we used in the last section. It is a very reasonable one for mobile robots.
If the robot has a gyroscope or magnetic compass, the e1rors in its motion will be offsets in
direction from the commanded motion. This is exactly what the uncertainty cone models.

An environment with landmarks is shown in Figure 25.22. This environment is known at
planning time, but not the robot's position. We assume though that the robot lies somewhere inside
a region (rectangular in the figure) that we do know. We plan a strategy for the robot by working
