632

Chapter 21. Knowledge in Learning

 

OPERATIONALITY

 

step Simplify(+ z, w), yielding the rule

Simplify z,w) => Simplify(x (y+ 2),w)
In general, a rule can be extracted from any partial subtree of the generalized proof tree. Now
we have a problem: which of these rules do we choose?

The choice of which rule'to generate comes down to the question of efficiency. There are
three factors involved in the analysis of efficiency gains from EBL:

1, Adding large numbers of rules to a knowledge base can slow down the reasoning process,
because the inference mechanism must still check those rules even in cases where they do
not yield a solution. In other words, it increases the branching factor in the search space.

2. To compensate for this, the derived rules must offer significant increases in speed for the
cases that they do cover. This mainly comes about because the derived mules avoid dead
ends that would otherwise be taken, as well as shortening the proof itself.

3. Derived rules should also be as general as possible, so that they apply to the largest possible
set of cases.

A common approach to ensuring that derived rules are efficient is to insist on the operationality
of each subgoal in the rule. A subgoal is operational, roughly speaking, ifit is "easy" to solve.
For example, the subgoal Primitive(z) is easy to solve, requiring at most two steps, whereas
the subgoal Simplify(+ z, w) could lead to an arbitrary amount of inference, depending on the
values ofy and =. Ifa test for operationality is carried out at each step in the construction of the
generalized proof, then we can prune the rest ofa branch as soon as an operational subgoal is
found, keeping just the operational subgoal as a conjunct of the new rule

Unfortunately, there is usually a trade-off between operationality and generality. More
specific subgoals are usually easier to solve but cover fewer cases. Also, operationality is a
matter of degree; one or two steps is definitely operational, but what about 10, or 100? Finally,
the cost of solving a given subgoal depends on what other rules are available in the knowledge
base. It can go up or down as more rules are added. Thus, EBL systems really face a very
complex optimization problem in trying to maximize the efficiency ofa given initial knowledge
base. It is sometimes possible to derive a mathematical model of the effect on overall efficiency
of adding a given rule, and to use this model to select the best rule to add. The analysis can
become very complicated, however, especially when recursive rules are involved. One promising
approach is to address the problem of efficiency empirically, simply by adding several rales and
seeing which ones are useful and actually speed things up.

The idea of empirical analysis of efficiency is actually at the heart of EBL. What we have
been calling loosely the "efficiency of a given knowledge base" is actually the average-case
complexity on a population of problems that the agent will have to solve. By generalizingfrom
past example problems, EBL makes the knowledge base more efficient for the kind ofproblems
that it is reasonable to expect. This works as long as the distribution of past examples is roughly
the same as for future examples—the same assumption used for PAC-learning in Section 18.6.
If the EBL system is carefully engineered, it is possible to obtain very significant improvements
on future problems. In a very large Prolog-based natural language system designed for real-
time speech-to-speech translation between Swedish and English, Samuelsson and Rayner (1991)
report that EBL made the system more than 1200 times faster.

 
