30.1 Representing polynomials 903

{0 Yo). (M1. Ya)eee es (Xn-1Yn-1)} »
and for B,
{Qo Yo) Or. Vydee ee nats Vp) }

(note that A and B are evaluated at the same n points), then a point-value repre-
sentation for C is

£0. Yo + Yo) V1 + Vee nate Yn + Yn}

Thus, the time to add two polynomials of degree-bound 7 in point-value form
is O(n).

Similarly, the point-value representation is convenient for multiplying polyno-
mials. If C(x) = A(x) B(x), then C(x;,) = A(x;)B(xx) for any point xz, and
we can pointwise multiply a point-value representation for A by a point-value rep-
resentation for B to obtain a point-value representation for C. We must face the
problem, however, that degree(C) = degree(A) + degree(B); if A and B are of
degree-bound n, then C is of degree-bound 2n. A standard point-value represen-
tation for A and B consists of n point-value pairs for each polynomial. When we
multiply these together, we get  point-value pairs, but we need 27 pairs to interpo-
late a unique polynomial C of degree-bound 2n. (See Exercise 30.1-4.) We must
therefore begin with “extended” point-value representations for A and for B con-
sisting of 2n point-value pairs each. Given an extended point-value representation
for A,

{(X0, Yo). 1. Vee (X2n—1, Yon-1)} +

and a corresponding extended point-value representation for B,
£0. Vo): rs Vee ants Von} +

then a point-value representation for C is

{(X0, YoY): 1 PY) pete (X2n=15 Yon-1V5y—1)} .

Given two input polynomials in extended point-value form, we see that the time to
multiply them to obtain the point-value form of the result is @(7), much less than
the time required to multiply polynomials in coefficient form.

Finally, we consider how to evaluate a polynomial given in point-value form at a
new point. For this problem, we know of no simpler approach than converting the
polynomial to coefficient form first, and then evaluating it at the new point.

Fast multiplication of polynomials in coefficient form

Can we use the linear-time multiplication method for polynomials in point-value
form to expedite polynomial multiplication in coefficient form? The answer hinges
