Section 24.2.

MANIPULATION

NAVIGATION

OBJECT
RECOGNITION

Image Formation 725

Unfortunately, f does not have a proper inverse. For one thing, we cannot see around comers,
so We cannot recover all aspects of the current world state from the stimulus. Moreover, even
the part we can see is enormously ambiguous. A key aspect of the study of perception is to
understand what additional information can be brought to bear to resolve ambiguity.

A second, and perhaps more important, drawback of the straightforward approach is that
it is trying to solve too difficult a problem. In many cases, the agent does not need to know
everything about the world. Sometimes, just one or two predicates are needed—such as "Is there
any obstacle in front of me?" or "Is that an electrical outlet over there?"

In order to understand what sorts of processing we will need to do, let us look at some of
the possible uses for vision:

< Manipulation: grasping, insertion, and so on, need local shape information and feedback
("getting closer, too far to the right, ...) for motor control.

< Navigation: finding clear paths, avoiding obstacles, and calculating one's current velocity
and orientation.

0 Object recognition: a useful skill for distinguishing between tasty mice and dangerous
carnivores; edible and inedible objects; close relations and strangers; ordinary vehicles,
Volvos. and police cars.

None of these applications requires the extraction of complete descriptions of the environment.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 24.2, we study the process of image
formation. We cover both the geometry of the process, which dictates where a given point
will be imaged, and the photometry of the process, which dictates how bright the point will
appear. Section 24.3 treats the basic image-processing operations commonly used in early
vision. They set the stage for later analysis that extracts the information needed for tasks such as
manipulation, navigation, and recognition. In Section 24.4, we study various cues in the image
that can be hamessed to this end, including motion, stereopsis, texture, shading, and contour.
Section 24.5 discusses the information needed for visually guided manipulation and navigation,
and Section 24.6 covers various approaches to object recognition. Finally, Section 24.7 addresses
the problem of perception in the context of speech recognition, thereby helping to pinpoint the
issues that arise in perception in general.

24.2 __ IMAGE FORMATION

‘SCENE
MAGE

PINHOLE CAMERA

Vision works by gathering light scattered from objects in the scene and creating a 2-D image. In
order to use this image to obtain information about the scene, we have to understand the geometry
of the process.

Pinhole camera

The simplest way to form an image is to use a pinhole camera (Figure 24.1). Let P be a point
in the scene, with coordinates (X, Y, Z), and P’ be its image on the image plane, with coordinates
