470

  

Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

 

 
  
   
  
   
 
 
   
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

are just toys to amuse sadistic instructors, bear in mind that a 1 % improvement in risk assessment
is worth well over a billion dollars a year.)

In order to design a belief network, you need output variables and evidence variables.
The output variables are those for which the insurance company is trying to get a probability
distribution for their possible values. The evidence variables are those variables for which you
can obtain information, on the basis of which it is legal to make decisions, and that are relevant
to the decision.

Output variables represent the costs of various catastrophic events that the insurance com-
pany might have to reimburse. (We do not consider the ways in which the company tries to
avoid payment.) In the automobile insurance domain, the major output variables are medical cost
(MedCost),property cost (PropCost),and intangible liability cost (/LiCost). Medical and prop-
erty costs are those incurred by ail individuals involved in an accident; auto theft or vandalism ยง
might also incur property costs. Intangible liability costs are legal penalties for things like "pain
and suffering," punitive damages, and so forth, that a driver might incur in an accident in which
he or she is at fault. :

Evidence variables for this domain include the driver's age and record; whether or not he
or she owns another car; how far he or she drives per year; the vehicle's make, model and year;
whether it has safety equipment such as an airbag and antilock brakes; where it is garaged and |
whether it has an antitheft device. 4

Build a network for this problem. You will need to decide on suitable domains for the
variables, bearing in mind the need to discretize (unless you plan to use a stochastic simulation al-
gorithm). You will also need to add intermediate nodes such as DrivingSkill and AutoRuggedness.
Write commentary to describe your reasoning in choosing your domains, variables, links, and }
inference algorithm. If you find that a node has too many predecessors (so that the conditional 4
probability table becomes too big), that is a good hint that you need some intermediate variables.
Generate a few reasonable-looking test cases to get a feeling for what your network does with
them. How would you convince the insurance company to adopt your product?

15.6 Is probabilistic reasoning monotonic or nonmonotonic? Do these concepts even apply to
probabilities?
