88

Chapter 3. Solving Problems by Searching

 

 

e. Amonkey is in aroom witha crate, with bananas suspended just out ofreach on the ceiling.
He would like to get the bananas.

f You are lost in a small country town, and must find a drug store before your hay fever
becomes intolerable. There are no maps, and the natives are all locked indoors.

34 Implement the missionaries and cannibals problem and use breadth-first search to find the
shortest solution. Is it a good idea to check for repeated states? Draw a diagram of the complete
state space to help you decide.

35 On page 76, we said that we would not consider problems with negative path costs. In this
exercise, we explore this in more depth.

a. Suppose that a negative lower bound c is placed on the cost of any given step—that is,
negative costs are allowed, but the cost of a step cannot be less than c. Does this allow
uniform-cost search to avoid searching the whole tree?

b. Suppose that there is a set of operators that form a loop, so that executing the set in some
order results in no net change to the state. If all of these operators have negative cost, what
does this imply about the optimal behavior for an agent in such an environment?

c. One can easily imagine operators with high negative cost, even in domains such as route-
finding. For example, some stretches of road might have such beautiful scenery as to far
outweigh the normal costs in terms of time and fuel. Explain, in precise terms, why humans
do not drive round scenic loops indefinitely, and explain how to define the state space and
operators for route-finding so that artificial agents can also avoid looping.

d. Can you think ofa real domain in which step costs are such as to cause looping?

36 The GENERAL-SEARCH algorithm consists of three steps: goal test, generate, and ordering
function, in that order. It seems a shame to generate a node that is in fact a solution, but to fail to
recognize it because the ordering function fails to place it first

a. Write a version of GENERAL-SEARCH that tests each node as soon as it is generated and’
stops immediately ifit has found a goal.

b. Show how the GENERAL-SEARCH algorithm can be used unchanged to do this by giving it
the proper ordering function.

37 The formulation of problem, solution, and search algorithm given in this chapter explicitly.
mentions the path to a goal state. This is because the path is important in many problems. For
other problems, the path is irrelevant, and only the goal state matters. Consider the problem
"Find the square root of 123454321." A search through the space of numbers may pass through]
many states, but the only one that matters is the goal state, the number 11111. Of course, froma
theoretical point of view, it is easy to run the general search algorithm and then ignore all of the
path except the goal state. But as a programmer, you may realize an efficiency gain by coding a
version of the search algorithm that does not keep track of paths. Consider a version of problem
solving where there are no paths and only the states matter. Write definitions of problem and
solution, and the general search algorithm. Which of the problems in Section 3.3 would best use
this algorithm, and which should use the version that keeps track of paths?
