86 Chapter 3 Solving Problems by Searching

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Most of the state-space search problems analyzed in this chapter have a long history in the
literature, and are far less trivial than they may seem. The missionaries and cannibals problem
was analyzed in detail from an artificial intelligence perspective by Amarel (1968), although
Amarel's treatment was by no means the first; it had been considered earlier in AI by Simon
and Newell (1961), and elsewhere in computer science and operations research by Bellman and
Dreyfus (1962). Studies such as these led to the establishment of search algorithms as perhaps the
primary tools in the armory of early AI researchers, and the establishment of problem solving as
the canonical AI task. (Of course, one might well claim that the latter resulted from the former.)

Amarel's treatment of the missionaries and cannibals problem is particularly noteworthy
because it is a classic example of formal analysis of a problem stated informally in natural
language. Amarel gives careful attention to abstracting from the informal problem statement
precisely those features that are necessary or useful in solving the problem, and selecting a formal
problem representation that represents only those features. A more recent treatment of problem
representation and abstraction, including AI programs that themselves perform these tasks (in
part), is to be found in Knoblock (1990).

The 8-queens problem was first published anonymously in the German chess magazine
Schach in 1848; it was later attributed to one Max Bezzel. It was republished in 1850, and at that
time drew the attention of the eminent mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, who attempted to
enumerate all possible solutions. Even Gauss was able to find only 72 of the 92 possible solutions
offhand, which gives some indication of the difficulty of this apparently simple problem. (Nauck,
who had republished the puzzle, published all 92 solutions later in 1850.) Netto( 1901 )generalized
the problem to “-queens” (on ann x n chessboard).

The 8-puzzle initially appeared as the more complex 4 x 4 version, called the 15-puzzle. It
was invented by the famous American game designer Sam Loyd (1959)in the 1870s and quickly
achieved immense popularity in the United States, comparable to the more recent sensation caused |
by the introduction of Rubik's Cube. It also quickly attracted the attention of mathematicians
(Johnson and Story, 1879; Tait, 1880). The popular reception of the puzzle was so enthusiastic
that the Johnson and Story article was accompanied by a note in which the editors of the American
Journal of Mathematics felt it necessary to state that "The ‘15° puzzle for the last few weeks
has been prominently before the American public, and may safely be said to have engaged the
attention of nine out of ten persons of both sexes and all ages and conditions of the community.
But this would not have weighed with the editors to induce them to insert articles upon such a
subject in the American Journal of Mathematics, but for the fact that...” (there follows a brief
summary of the reasons for the mathematical interest of the 15-puzzle). The 8-puzzle has often
been used in AI research in place of the 15-puzzle because the search space is smaller and thus
more easily subjected to exhaustive analysis or experimentation. An exhaustive analysis was
carried out with computer aid by P. D. A. Schofield (1967). Although very time-consuming,
this analysis allowed other, faster search methods to be compared against theoretical perfection
for the quality of the solutions found. An in-depth analysis of the 8-puzzle, using heuristic
search methods of the kind described in Chapter 4, was carried out by Doran and Michie (1966).
The 15-puzzle, like the 8-queens problem, has been generalized to the n x n case. Ratner and
