‘CONFRONTATION

Chapter 12. Practical Planning

Now we have to incorporate this new syntax into the planner. Two changes are required. First, |
in SELECT-SUB-GOAL, we have to decide ifa precondition c in a conditional effect of the form
e when c should be considered as a candidate for selection. The answer is that if the effecte ,
supplies a condition that is protected by a causal link, then we should consider selecting c, but
not until the causal link is there. Thisis because the causal link means that the plan will not
work unless c is also true. Considering the operator just shown, the planner would usually have
no need to establish y#7able because ~Clear(y)is not usually needed as a precondition of some
other step in the plan. Thus, the planner can usually use the table if it needs somewhere to put a
block that does not need to be anywhere special. y
Second, we have another possibility for RESOLVE-THREAT. Any step that has the effect
(=c' when p) is a possible threat to the causal link S, _°. 5; whenever c and c unify. We can 3
resolve the threat by making sure that p does not hold. We call this technique confrontation. In. §
the blocks world, ifwe need a given block to be clear in order to carry out some step, then it is
possible for the Move(b,x, y) operator to threaten this condition ify is uninstantiated. However,
the threat only occurs if y#Zableconfrontation removes the threat by setting y = Table. A version
of RESOLVE-THREATS that incorporates confrontation appears in Figure 12.7. %

 

procedure RESOLVE-THREATS(plan)

for each S, “ S; in Links(plan) do
for each Stivea in STEPS( plan) do
for each ¢ in EFFECT Singur) 40
if SUBST(BINDINGS( plan), c) = SUBST(BINDINGS( plan), +c’) then
choose either
Promotion: Add Srireq < S; to ORDERINGS( plan)
Demotion: Add S) < Stirear to ORDERINGS( plan)
Confrontation: if-c! is really of the form (c’ when p) then
CHOOSE-OPERATOR( plan, operators, Shiveus 7 P)
RESOLVE-THREATS( plan)
if not CONSISTENT( plan) then fail
end
end
end

 

 

Figure 127 A version of RESOLVE-THREATS with the confrontation technique for resolving
conditional effects.

 

 

 

Negated and disjunctive goals

The confrontation technique calls CHOOSE-OPERATOR with the goal sp. This is something new:
so far we have insisted that all goals (preconditions) be positive literals. Dealing with negated
literals as goals does not add much complexity: we still just have to check for effects that match

 
