section 3.3.

Example Problems 65

 

0 States: arrangements of 0 to 8 queens with none attacked.

0 Operators: place a queen in the left-most empty column such that it is not attacked by any
other queen.

It is easy to see that the actions given can generate only states with no attacks; but sometimes
no actions will be possible. For example, after making the first seven choices (left-to-right) in
Figure 3.5, there is no action available in this formulation. The search process must try another
choice. A quick calculation shows that there are only 2057 possible sequences to investigate. The
rightformulation makes a big difference to the size ofthe search space. Similar considerations
apply for a complete-state formulation. For example, we could set the problem up as follows:

0 States: arrangements of 8 queens, one in each column.
Operators: move any attacked queen to another square in the same column.

This formulation would allow the algorithm to find a solution eventually, but it would be better
to move to an unattacked square ifpossible.

Cryptarithmetic

In cryptarithmetic problems, letters stand for digits and the aim is to find a substitution of digits
for letters such that the resulting sum is arithmetically correct. Usually, each letter must stand
for a different digit. The following is a well-known example:

 

FORTY Solution: 29786 F=2, 0=9, etc
+ TEN 850
+ TEN 850

SIXTY 31486

The following formulation is probably the simplest:

States: a cryptarithmetic puzzle with some letters replaced by digits

0 Operators: replace all occurrences of a letter with a digit not already appearing in the
puzzle.

~ Goal test: puzzle contains only digits, and represents a correct sum.

~ Path cost: zero. All solutions equally valid.

A moment's thought shows that replacing E by 6 then F by 7 is the same thing as replacing F by
7 then E by 6—order does not matter to correctness, so we want to avoid trying permutations of
the same substitutions. One way to do this is to adopt a fixed order, e.g., alphabetical order. A
better choice is to do whichever is the most constrained substitution, that is, the letter that has
the fewest legal possibilities given the constraints of the puzzle.

The vacuum world

Here we will define the simplified vacuum world from Figure 3.2, rather than the full version
from Chapter 2. The latter is dealt with in Exercise 3.17.
