Section 22.7. Semantic Interpretation 677

 

certain semantic type, then we know that everything in the category is of the same type.
Otherwise, the compositionality would not work out right. See the middle of Figure 22.17
for types and examples of all the lexical categories.

4. Now consider phrase-at-a-time modifications to your example sentences (e.g., substituting
“every stinking wumpus” for "I"). You should be able to determine examples and types for
constituent phrases, as in the bottom of Figure 22.17. In Figure 22.18, we see the complete
parse tree for a sentence.

5. Once you know the type ofeach category, it is not too hard to attach semantic interpretation
augmentations to the grammar rules. Some of the rules have only one right-hand side
constituent and only need to copy up the semantics of that constituent:

NP(sem) — Pronoun(sem)

6. Other times, the right-hand side of a rule will contain a semantic interpretation that is a
predicate (or function), and one or more that are objects. To get the semantics ofthe whole
phrase, just apply the relation (or function) to the object(s):

S(rel(obj)) —* NP(obj) VP(rel)

7. Sometimes the semantics is built up by concatenating the semantics of the constituents,
possibly with some connectors wrapped around them:

NP([sem),semz]) > Digit(sem\) Digit(sem2)

8. Finally, sometimes you need to take apart one of the constituents before putting the
semantics of the whole phrase back together. Here is a complex example:

VP(Xx rel,(x)A_rely(EVENT-VAR(rel;))) — VP(rel, )Adverb(rel2)

The intent here is that the function EveNT-VAR picks out the event variable from the
intermediate form expression re/\. The end result is that a verb phrase such as "saw me
yesterday" gets the interpretation:

\x 3e e€ Sees(x, Speaker) A After(Now.) A During(e, Yesterday)

By following these steps, we arrive at the grammar in Figure 22.19. To actually use this grammar,
we would augment it further with the case and subcategorization information that we worked out
previously. There is no difficulty in combining such things with semantics, but the grammar is
easier to understand when we look at one type of augmentation at a time.

Converting quasi-logical form to logical form

The final step of semantic interpretation is to convert the quasi-logical form into real first-order
logic. For our quasi-logical form, that means turning quantified terms into real terms. This is
done by a simple rule: For each quantified term /gx P(x)] within a quasi-logical form QLF,
replace the quantified term with x, and replace OLF with gx P(x) op OLF, where op is =>
when q is V, and is A when gq is 3 or 3!, For example, the sentence "Every dog has a day" has the
quasi-logical form:

Be e€Has([Vd Dog(d)], {A a Day(a)},Now)
