 

812

 

Chapter 25. Robotics

We have given only the most basic protocol. As the task unfolds, you may find that more complex
protocols are needed in order to make any progress. What you learn about robotics will depend
very much on the task chosen and on how closely you stick to the protocols.
25.2 Design and sketch a mobile robot for an office environment. Your robot should be able
to perform typical office tasks like retrieving files, books, journals, and mail, and photocopying.
What types of arm/hand did you choose? Consider carefully the trade-off between flexibility and
custom design for those tasks. What kinds of sensing did you choose?
25.3 Consider the problem of designing a robot that will keep an office building tidy by
periodically collecting and emptying bins and picking up empty cans and paper cups.
a. Describe an appropriate physical design for the robot.
Define a suitable performance evaluation measure
c. Propose an overall architecture for the robot agent. Mitchell (1990) and Brooks (1989)
describe two different approaches to the problem.

254 Calculate the number of degrees of freedom of your hand, with the forearm fixed.
25.5 Consider the arm of a record player as a two-link robot. Let @, measure the elevation of
the arm, and 6; measure its horizontal rotation. Sketch the configuration space of this robot with
4, and #2 axes. Include the configuration space obstacles for the platter and spindle
25.6 Draw the cylindrical cell decomposition for the environment in Figure 25.25. Withn boards
in such an arrangement, how many regions would there be in the cell decomposition?
25.7 Ifyou have not done them already, do Exercises 4.13 to 4.15. Also answer the following:
a. Prove rigorously that shortest paths in two dimensions with convex polygonal obstacles lie
on the visibility graph.
b. Does this result hold in three dimensions? If so, prove it. Ifnot, provide a counterexample.

c. Can you suggest (and prove) a result for the shortest paths in two dimensions with curved
obstacles?

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2525 Row ofboards environment.

 

 
