Section 16.4.

Multiattribute utility functions 481

 

STRICT DOMINANCE

‘STOCHASTIC
DOMINANCE

to show that an agent with a certain kind of preference structure has a utility function
UG, --- Xn) = SLAG), «fn nd]

where f is, we hope, a simple function such as addition. Notice the similarity to the use of belief
networks to decompose the joint probability of several random variables.

Dominance

Suppose that airport site 5, costs less, generates less noise pollution, and is safer than site S,. One
would not hesitate to reject 52. We say that there is strict dominance of S, over S2. In general,
if an option is of lower value on all attributes than some other option, it need not be considered
further. Strict dominance is often very useful in narrowing down the field of choices to the real
contenders, although it seldom yields a unique choice. Figure 16.2(a)shows a schematic diagram
for the two-attribute case.

 

X

This region
dominates A

  

 

 

Figure 16.2 Strict dominance. (a) Deterministic: Option A is strictly dominated by B but not
by C oD. (b) Uncertain: A is strictly dominated by B but not by C.

 

 

 

That is fine for the deterministic case, in which the attribute values are known for sure.
What about the general case, where the action outcomes are uncertain? A direct analogue of strict
dominance can be constructed, where, despite the uncertainty, all possible concrete outcomes for
51 strictly dominate all possible outcomes for $2. (See Figure 16.2(b) fora schematic depiction.)
Ofcourse, this will probably occur even less often than in the deterministic case.

Fortunately, there is a more useful generalization called stochastic dominance, which
occurs very frequently in real problems. Stochastic dominance is easiest to understand in the
context of a single attribute. Suppose that we believe the cost of siting the airport at S; to be
normally distributed around $3.7 billion, with standard deviation $0.4 billion; and the cost at S2 to
be normally distributed around $4.0 billion, with standard deviation $0.35 billion. Figure 16.3(a)
shows these distributions, with cost plotted as a negative value. Then, given only the information
