Section 15.2.

The Semantics of Belief Networks 443

 

CANONICAL
DISTRIBUTIONS

DETERMINISTIC
NODES

NoIsKOR,

LEAK NODE

tenuous relationships that require difficult and unnatural probability judgments, such as assessing
the probability of Earthquake given Burglary and Alarm. This phenomenon is quite general.

If we try to build a diagnostic model with links from symptoms to causes (as from MaryCalls
to Alarm, or Alarm to Burglary), we end up having to specify additional dependencies between
otherwise independent causes, and often between separately occurring symptoms as well. sAve
stick to a causal model, we end up having to specify fewer numbers, and the numbers will often
be easier to come up with. In the domain of medicine, for example, it has been shown by Tversky
and Kahneman (1982) that expert physicians prefer to give probability judgments for causal rules
rather than for diagnostic ones.

The right-hand side of Figure 15.3 shows a really bad ordering of nodes: MaryCalls,
JohnCalls, Earthquake, Burglary, Alarm. This network requires 31 distinct probabilities to be
specified—exactly the same as the full joint distribution. It is important to realize, however, that
any of the three networks can represent exactly the samejoint distribution. The last two versions
simply fail to represent all the conditional independence relationships, and end up specifying a
lot of unnecessary numbers instead.

Representation of conditional probability tables

Even with a fairly small number of parents, a node's conditional probability table still requires
a lot of numbers. Filling in the table would appear to require a good deal of time and also a
lot of experience with all the possible conditioning cases. In fact, this is a worst-case scenario,
where the relationship between the parents and the child is completely arbitrary. Usually, such
relationships fall into one of several categories that have canonical distributions—that is, they
fit some standard pattern. In such cases, the complete table can be specified by naming the pattern
and perhaps supplying a few parameters.

The simplest example is provided by deterministic nodes. A deterministic node has its
value specified exactly by the values of its parents, with no uncertainty. The relationship can
be a logical one—for example, the relationship between parent nodes Canadian, US, Mexican
and the child node NorthAmerican is simply that the child is the disjunction of the parents. The
relationship can also be numerical—for example, ifthe parent nodes are the prices of a particular
model of car at several dealers, and the child node is the price that a bargain hunter ends up
paying, then the child node is the minimum of the parent values; or if the parent nodes are the
inflows (rivers, runoff, precipitation) into a lake and the outflows (rivers, evaporation, seepage)
from the lake and the child is the change in lake level, then the child is the difference between
the the inflow parents and the outflow parents.

Uncertain relationships can often be characterized by so-called "noisy" logical relation-
ships. The standard example is the so-called noisy-OR relation, which is a generalization of
the logical OR. In propositional logic, we might say Fever is true if and only if Cold, Flu, or
Malaria is true. The noisy-OR model adds some uncertainty to this strict logical approach. The
model makes three assumptions. First, it assumes that each cause has an independent chance
of causing the effect. Second, it assumes that all the possible causes are listed. (This is not as
strict as it seems, because we can always add a so-called leak node that covers "miscellaneous
causes") Third, it assumes that whatever inhibits, say, Co/d from causing a fever is independent
of whatever inhibits F/u from causing a fever. These inhibitors are not represented as nodes but
