Section 26.2.

Foundations of Reasoning and Perception 819

26.2__ FOUNDATIONS OF REASONING AND PERCEPTION

PHYSICALISM

MATERIALISM

BIOLOGICAL
NATURALISM.

FUNCTIONALISM

HOMUNCULL

INFINITE REGRESS

Almost all parties to the AI debate share a certain amount of common ground regarding the relation
of brain and mind. The common ground goes under various names—physicalism, materialism,
and biological naturalism among others —but it can be reduced to the characteristically pithy
remark by John Searle: “Brains cause minds" Intelligence and mental phenomena are products
of the operation of the physical system ofneurons and their associated cells and support structures.

This doctrine has a number of corollaries. Perhaps the most important is that mental
states—such as being in pain, knowing that one is riding a horse, or believing that Vienna is the
capital of Austria—are brain states. This does not commit one to very much, other than to avoid
speculation about nonphysical processes beyond the ken of science. The next step is to abstract
away from specific brain states. One must allow that different brain states can correspond to the
same mental state, provided they are of the same type. Various authors have various positions
on what one means by fype in this case. Almost everyone believes that if one takes a brain
and replaces some of the carbon atoms by a new set of carbon atoms,” the mental state will
not be affected. This is a good thing because real brains are continually replacing their atoms
through metabolic processes, and yet this in itself does not seem to cause major mental upheavals.
Functionalism, on the other hand, proposes a much looser definition of "same type," based on
identity of the functional properties of the components of the brain—that is, their input/output
specifications. In the neural version of functionalism,’ what matters is the input/output properties
of the neurons, not their physical properties. Because the same input/output properties can be
realized by many different physical devices, including silicon devices, functionalism naturally
leads to the belief that AI systems with the appropriate structure might have real mental states.

Now we begin to explain how it is that brains cause minds. Some of the earliest forms of
explanation involved what are now called homunculi—a Latin term meaning "miniature men."
For example, when it was found that a small image of the world was formed on the retina by the
lens, some early philosophers proposed that vision was achieved by a subsystem of the brain—a
homunculus—that looked at this image and reported what it saw.* Unfortunately, one then has
to explain how it is that the homunculus can see. An infinite regress begins when one proposes
that the homunculus sees by means ofa smaller homunculus inside his head.

Modern proponents of rule-based models of human behavior have been accused of falling
into the same infinite regress trap. The objection goes as follows: every use of a logical rule
(such as "all men are mortal") must itselfbe governed by a rule (such as Modus Ponens). The
application of a rule such as Modus Ponens must in turn be govemed by another rule, and so on
ad infinitum, Therefore, intelligent behavior cannot be produced by following rules. Now this
argument has a certain superficial plausibility, particularly if we note that the forward-chaining
application of inference rales such as Modus Ponens indeed can be viewed as itself'an application

2 Perhaps even atoms ofa different isotope of carbon, as is sometimes done in brain-scanning experiments,

3. There are other versions of functionalism that make the decomposition at different points. In general, there is a wide
range of choices in what counts as a component

4 Proponents ofthis theory were excitedby the discovery of the pineal gland, which in many mammals looks superficially
like an eye. Closer examination of course revealed that it has no powers of vision.
