Section 23.5.

Ambiguity 713

 

 

start by looking at several sources of evidence. It is important to distinguish between sources of
evidence and sources ofambiguity. It is quite possible that a syntactic ambiguity is resolved by
semantic evidence. For example, in "I ate spaghetti and meatballs and salad," there is a syntactic
ambiguity (is it [yp spaghetti and meatballs] or [yp meatballs and salad]?) that is resolved by
nonsyntactic evidence: that spaghetti and meatballs is a common dish, whereas meatballs and
salad is not.

Syntactic evidence

Modifiers such as adverbs and prepositional phrases cause a lot of ambiguity, because they can
attach to several different heads. For example, in

Lee asked Kim to tell Toby to leave on Saturday.

the adverb "Saturday" can modify the asking, the telling, or the leaving. Psychological studies
show that in the absence of other evidence, there is a preference to attach such modifiers to the
most recent constituent (in this case, the leaving). So this is a syntactic ambiguity that can be
resolved by syntactic evidence.

Lexical evidence

Many words are ambiguous, but not all senses of a word are equally likely. When asked what
the word "pen" means, most people will say first that it is a writing instrument. However, it has
two other fairly common senses meaning an enclosure for animals and a penitentiary. The senses
meaning a female swan and the intemal shell of a squid are more obscure, known mostly to
specialists in biology (or specialists in ambiguity). As another example, consider the following:

Lee positioned the dress on the rack.
Kim wanted the dress on the rack.

Here "on the rack" is best interpreted as modifying the verb in the first sentence and the dress in
the second. That is, Lee is putting the dress on the rack (not moving a dress that is on the rack),
and Kim wants to have a dress that is on the rack (and does not want the dress to be on the rack).
In both cases, either interpretation is semantically plausible. So this is a syntactic ambiguity that
is resolved by lexical evidence—by the preference of the verb for one subcategorization.

Semantic evidence

The a priori probability ofa word sense is usually less important than the conditional probability
in a given context. Consider the following:

ball, diamond, bat, base

Even without any syntactic structure to speak of, it is easy to pick out the baseball senses of
each of these words as being the intended interpretation. This is true even though the a priori
probability for "diamond" favors the jewel interpretation. So this is a case of lexical ambiguity
resolved by semantic evidence.
