Section 22.2

Types of Communicating Agents 659

 

ENCODED MESSAGE

SITUATED LANGUAGE

predator at a safe distance, it will stot, or leap high into the air. This not only communicates to
other antelopes that danger is near, but also communicates to the predator "I see you, and I am
healthy enough to run away, so don't even bother chasing me." So even though the two animals
are enemies with no common goal, the communication saves both of them from wasting time and
energy on a fruitless chase.

Two models of communication

Our study of communication centers on the way that an agent's beliefs are turned into words and
back into beliefs in another agent's knowledge base (or head). There are two ways of looking at
the process. The encoded message model says that the speaker has a definite proposition P in
mind, and encodes the proposition into the words (or signs) W. The hearer then tries to decode
the message W to retrieve the original proposition P (cf. Morse code). Under this model, the
meaning in the speaker's head, the message that gets transmitted, and the interpretation that the
hearer arrives at all ideally carry the same content. When they differ, it is because of noise in the
communication channel or an error in encoding or decoding.

Limitations of the encoded message model led to the situated language model, which says
that the meaning of a message depends on both the words and the situation in which the words
are uttered. In this model, just as in situation calculus, the encoding and decoding functions take
an extra argument representing the current situation. This accounts for the fact that the same
words can have very different meanings in different situations. "I am here now" represents one
fact when spoken by Peter in Boston on Monday, and quite another fact when spoken by Stuart in
Berkeley on Tuesday. More subtly, "You must read this book" is a suggestion when written by a
critic in the newspaper, and an assignment when spoken by an instructor to the class. "Diamond"
means one thing when the subject is jewelry, and another when the subject is baseball.

The situated language model points out a possible source of communication failure: if the
speaker and hearer have different ideas of what the current situation is, then the message may
not get through as intended. For example, suppose agents Y, Y, and Z are exploring the wumpus
world together. XY and Y secretly meet and agree that when they smell the wumpus they will both
shoot it, and if they see the gold, they will grab it and run, and try to keep Z from sharing it. Now
suppose X smells the wumpus, while Y in the adjacent square smells nothing, but sees the gold.
X yells “Now!,” intending it to mean that now is the time to shoot the wumpus, but Y interprets
it as meaning now is the time to grab the gold and run.

22.2__ TYPES OF COMMUNICATING AGENTS

In this chapter, we consider agents that communicate in two different ways. First are agents who
share a common internal representation language; they can communicate without any external
language at all. Then come agents that make no assumptions about each other's internal language,
but share a communication language that is a subset of English.
