846

UP TIMALIIY

Chapter 27. AI: Present and Future

ofbounded optimality is feasible in principle, but no one said it was easy! One obvious difficulty
is that the designer may not have a probability distribution over the kinds of environments in
which the agent is expected to operate, and so may not be able to ascertain the bounded optimality
ofa given design. In such cases, however, a suitably designed learning agent should be able
to adapt to the initially unknown environment; analytical results on the bounded optimality of
leaming agents can be obtained using computational learning theory (Chapter 18). One crucial
open question is to what extent bounded optimal systems can be composed from bounded optimal
subsystems, thereby providing a hierarchical design methodology.

Although bounded optimality is a very general specification, it is no more general than the
definition of calculative rationality on which much of past AI work has been based. The important
thing is that by including resource constraints from the beginning, questions of efficiency and
decision quality can be handled within the theory rather than by ad hoc system design. The
two approaches only coincide if BO agents look something like calculatively rational agents
with various efficiency improvements added on. Real environments are far more complex than
anything that can be handled by a pure calculatively rational agent, however, so this would quite
aradical assumption.

As yet, little is known about bounded optimality. It is possible to construct bounded optimal
programs for very simple machines and for somewhat restricted kinds of environments (Etzioni,
1989; Russell and Subramanian, 1993), but as yet we have no idea what BO programs are like
for large, general-purpose computers in complex environments. If there is to be a constructive
theory of bounded optimality, we have to hope that the design of bounded optimal programs
does not depend too strongly on the details of the computer being used. It would make scientific
research very difficult if adding a few kilobytes of memory to a machine with 100 megabytes
made a significant difference to the design of the BO program and to its performance in the
environment. One way to make sure this cannot happen is to be slightly more relaxed about
the criteria for bounded optimality. By analogy with asymptotic complexity (Appendix A), we
can define asymptotic bounded optimality (ABO) as follows (Russell and Subramanian, 1993).
Suppose a program P is bounded optimal for a machine M in a class of environments E (the
complexity of environments in E is unbounded). Then program P’ is ABO for M in E if it
can outperform P by running on a machine XM that is k times faster (or larger). Unless k were
enormous, we would be happy with a program that was ABO for a nontrivial environment on a
nontrivial architecture. There would be little point in putting enormous effort into finding BO
rather than ABO programs, because the size and speed of available machines tends to increase
by a constant factor in a fixed amount of time anyway.

We can hazard a guess that BO or ABO programs for powerful computers in complex
environments will not necessarily have a simple, elegant structure. We have already seen that
general-purpose intelligence requires some reflex capability and some deliberative capability,
a variety of forms of knowledge and decision making, learning and compilation mechanisms
for all of those forms, methods for controlling reasoning, and a large store of domain-specific
knowledge. A bounded optimal agent must adapt to the environment in which it finds itself, so
that eventually its intemal organization may reflect optimizations that are specific to the particular
environment. This is only to be expected, and is similar to the way in which racing cars restricted
by weight and horsepower have evolved into extremely complex designs. We suspect that a
science of artificial intelligence based on bounded optimality will involve a good deal of study of

 

 

 

 
