Section 3.2 Formulating Problems 57

EXECUTION found, the actions it recommends can be carried out. This is called the execution phase. Thus,
we have a simple "formulate, search, execute" design for the agent, as shown in Figure 3.1. After
formulating a goal and a problem to solve, the agent calls a search procedure to solve it. It then
uses the solution to guide its actions, doing whatever the solution recommends as the next thing
to do, and then removing that step from the sequence. Once the solution has been executed, the
agent will find a new goal. .

 

function SIMPLE-PROBLEM-SOLVING-AGENT( p} returns an action
inputs: p, a percept
static: s, an action sequence, initially empty
state, some description of the current world state
g, a goal, initially null
problem, a problem formulation

state — UPDATE-STATE(state, p)

ifs is empty then
g — FORMULATE-GOAL(state)
problem — FORMULATE-PROBLEM(state, g)
s — SEARCH(problem)

action — RECOMMENDALIONG, state)

5 — REMAINDER(s, State)

return action

 

 

Figure 3.1 A simple problem-solving agent.

 

 

 

We will not discuss the UPDATE-STATE and ForMULATE-GOAL functions further in this
chapter. The next two sections describe the process of problem formulation, and then the
remainder of the chapter is devoted to various versions of the SEARCH function. The execution
phase is usually straightforward for a simple problem-solving agent: RECOMMENDATION just
takes the first action in the sequence, and REMAINDER returns the rest

3.2 FORMULATING PROBLEMS

In this section, we will consider the problem formulation process in more detail. First, we will
look at the different amounts of knowledge that an agent can have concerning its actions and the
state that it is in. This depends on how the agent is connected to its environment through its
percepts and actions. We find that there are four essentially different types of problems—single-
state problems, multiple-state problems, contingency problems, and exploration problems. We
will define these types precisely, in preparation for later sections that address the solution process.
