Section 15.7.

Summary 469

 

 

 

 

© gRe Rar
o

@) @)

@ (i) (ii)

 

 

 

Figure 15.12 Three possible networks for the telescope problem.

 

 

15.4

You are an Al consultant for a credit card company, and your task is to construct a belief

net that will allow the company to determine whether or not to grant a person a card.

a.

°

2

15.5

What are the evidence variables? These are the variables for which you can obtain
information, on the basis of which it is legal to make decisions, and that are relevant to
the decision. Thus, 4ge might be one of your variables, but VoringRecordand HairColor
would not

What is the output variable (ie., what proposition is the company going to examine the
probabilities of in order to determine whether to grant a card)? This should not be Decision
with values ves and no because the company has control over the value of this variable

. Construct your network by incrementally adding variables in causal order, as described in

the chapter. You may wish to add intermediate nodes such as Reliability and Futurelncome.
(Remember that the company cares about what will happen in the future, not about the past
per se.) Set the conditional probabilities for each node. Write commentary to describe
your reasoning in choosing your variables and links. If you find that a node has too many
predecessors (so that the conditional probability table becomes too big), that is a good hint
that you need some intermediate variables.

Build a file of test data corresponding to your evidence variables. As far as possible these
should be real people! Do some interviewing to get real data if you can: try to get a wide
variety of cases, from deadbeats to trust-fund babies. Run the data through your network
to see ifthe net's results correspond to your own judgements. Examine not only the output
variable, but the value of other intermediate variables. You may need to go through several
iterations of steps (c) and (d).

Write a report showing various test cases and explaining the advantages of your approach.
Your report should be enough to convince the company to adopt your product.

You are an AI consultant for an auto insurance company. Your task is construct a belief

network that will allow the company to decide how much financial risk they run from various
policy holders, given certain data about the policy holders. (In case you think all class projects
