Section 22.10.

Summary 689

 

 

22.3 Determine what semantic interpretation would be given to the following sentences by the
grammar in this chapter:

a. It is a wumpus.

b. The wumpus is dead.

c. The wumpus is in 2,2.

Would it be a good idea to have the semantic interpretation for "It is a wumpus" be simply
x Wumpus(x)?Consider altemative sentences such as "It was a wumpus."

224 Augment the grammar from this chapter so that it handles the following:

a. Pronoun case.
b. Subject/verb agreement.

c. Article/noun agreement: "agents" is an NP but "agent" is not. In general, only plural nouns
can appear without an article.

NR
Ss
in

This exercise concerns grammars for very simple languages.

>

Write a context-free grammar for the language a"b".

b. Write a context-free grammar for the palindrome language: the set of all strings whose
second half is the reverse of the first half.

c. Write a context-sensitive grammar for the language a"b"c".

d. Write a context-sensitive grammar for the duplicate language: the set of all strings whose
second halfis the same as the first half.

22.6 This exercise continues the example of Section 22.9 by making the slave more intelligent.
On each turn, the slave describes its percepts as before, but it also says where itis (e.g, "I am in
1,1") and reports any relevant facts it has deduced about the neighboring squares (e.g., "There is
a pit in 12" or "2,1 is safe"). You need not do any fancy language generation, but you do have
to address the intention problem: deciding which facts are worth mentioning. In addition, you
should give your slave a sense of self-preservation. If it is commanded to enter a deadly square,
it should politely refuse. If commanded to enter an unsafe square, it can ask for confirmation,
but ifcommanded again, it should obey. Run this slave in the wumpus environment a few times.
How mush easier is it to work with this slave than the simple one from Section 22.9?

22.7 Consider the sentence "Someone walked slowly to the supermarket" and the following set
of context-free rewrite rules which give the grammatical categories of the words ofthe sentence:
Pronoun someone V—walked
Adv —slowly Prep —to
Det —the Noun —supermarket
Which of the following three sets of rewrite rules, when added to the preceding rules, yield
context-free grammars that can generate the above sentence?
