Section 19.7.

Summary 593

 

the agent) can provide prior knowledge to the APN learning process in the form of the network
structure and/or conditional probability values. Since this reduces the hypothesis space, it should
allow the APN to learn from fewer examples. Also, the ability of belief networks to represent
propositions locally may mean that they converge faster to a correct representation of a domain
that has local structure—that isin which each proposition is directly affected by only a small
number of other propositions.

  

197_ SUMMARY

Learning in complex network representations is currently one of the hottest topics in science. It
promises to have broad applications in computer science, neurobiology, psychology, and physics.
This chapter has presented some of the basic ideas and techniques, and given a flavor of the
mathematical underpinnings. The basic points are as follows:

A neural network is a computational model that shares some of the properties of brains: it
consists of many simple units working in parallel with no central control. The connections
between units have numeric weights that can be modified by the learning element

The behavior of a neural network is determined by the connection topology and the nature
of the individual units. Feed-forward networks, in which the connections form an acyclic
graph, are the simplest to analyze. Feed-forward networks implement state-free functions

A perceptron is a feed-forward network with a single layer ofunits, and can only represent
linearly separable functions. If the data are linearly separable, the perceptron learning
Tule can be used to modify the network's weights to fit the data exactly.

Multilayer feed-forward networks can represent any function, given enough units

The back-propagation learning algorithm works on multilayer feed-forward networks,
using gradient descent in weight space to minimize the output error. It converges to a
locally optimal solution, and has been used with some success in a variety of applications.
As with all hill-climbing techniques, however, there is no guarantee that it will find a global
solution. Furthermore, its convergence is often very slow.

Bayesian learning methods can be used to leam representations of probabilistic functions,
particularly belief networks. Bayesian learning methods must trade off the prior belief in
a hypothesis against its degree of agreement with the observed data.

There are a variety of learning problems associated with belief networks, depending on
whether the structure is fixed or unknown, and whether variables are hidden or observable.

With a fixed structure and hidden variables, belief network learning has a remarkable
similarity to neural network learning. Gradient descent methods can be used, but belief
networks also have the advantage of a well-understood semantics for individual nodes.
This allows the provision of prior knowledge in order to speed up the learning process.
