 

KNOWLEDGE IN

LEARNING

 

 

 

 

In which we examine the problem oflearning when you already know something.

In all of the approaches to learning described in the previous three chapters, the idea is to construct
a program that has the input/output behavior observed in the data. We have seen how this general
problem can be solved for simple logical representations, for neural networks, and for belief
networks. In each case, the learning methods can be understood as searching a hypothesis space
to find a suitable program. The learning methods also made few assumptions, if any, concerning
the nature of the correct program. In this chapter, we go beyond these approaches to study

PRIORKNOWLEDGE © learning methods that can take advantage of prior knowledge about the environment. We also
examine learning algorithms that can learn general first-order logical theories. These are essential
steps toward a truly autonomous intelligent agent.

21.1 KNOWLEDGE IN LEARNING

We begin by examining the ways in which prior knowledge can get into the act. In order to
do this, it will help to have a general Jogical formulation of the learning problem, as opposed
to thefunction-learning characterization of pure inductive inference given in Section 18.2. The
reason that a logical characterization is helpful is that it provides a very natural way to specify
partial information about the function to be learned. This is analogous to the distinction between
problem solving (which uses a "black-box" functional view of states and goals) and planning
(which opens up the black boxes and uses logical descriptions of states and actions).

Recall from Section 18.5 that examples are composed of descriptions and classifications.
The object of inductive learning in the logical setting is to find a hypothesis that explains the
classifications of the examples, given their descriptions. We can make this logically precise as
follows. If we use Descriptions to denote the conjunction of all the example descriptions, and
Classifications to denote the conjunction of all the example classifications, then the Hypothesis
must satisfy the following property:

Hypothesis A Descriptions |: Classifications 21.1)

625
