674

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

Exp(5)

   
 

Exp(2)

 

Exp(3)

Exp(4) Exp(2)

Number(3)

Digit(3) Operator(+) | Digit(4) Operator(+) — Digit(2)

3 + ( 4 + 2 )

Number(4) Number(2)

 

 

 

Figure 22.14 Parse tree with semantic interpretations for the string "3 + (4 +2)”.

 

 

 

deciding how the parts fit together, particularly for intermediate phrases such as the VP "loves
Mary." Note that the semantic interpretation of this phrase is neither a logical term nor a
complete logical sentence. Intuitively, "loves Mary" is a description that may or may not apply to
a particular person (in this case, it applies to John). This means that "loves Mary" is a predicate
that, when combined with a term that represents a person (the person doing the loving), yields a
complete logical sentence. Using the A-notation (see page 195), we can represent "loves Mary"
as the predicate

Ax Loves(x, Mary)

The NP "Mary" can be represented by the logical constant Mary. That sets us up to define a rule
that says "an NP with semantics objfollowed by a VP with semantics rel yields a sentence whose
semantics is the result of applying the relation re/ to the object obj:”

S(rel(obj))— NP(obj) VP(rel)
The rule tells us that the semantic interpretation of "John loves Mary" is
(x Loves(x, Mary))(John)

which is equivalent to Loves(John, Mary).

The rest of the semantics follows in a straightforward way from the choices we have made
so far. Because VPs are represented as predicates, it is a good idea to be consistent and represent
verbs as predicates as well. The verb "loves" is represented as \y \x Loves(x, y), the predicate
that, when given an argument such as Mary, returns the predicate |x Loves(x, Mary).

The VP — Verb NP rule applies the predicate that is the semantic interpretation of the
verb to the object that is the semantic interpretation of the NP to get the semantic interpretation
of the whole VP. We end up with the grammar shown in Figure 22.15 and the parse tree shown
in Figure 22.16.
