62

Chapter 3. Solving Problems by Searching

 

ABSTRACTION

 

Arad [7]

   
   

Fagaras,

[] Hirsova

    
 
 

[] Mehadia Urziceni

Dobreta [J

 
  

OO craiova Eforie

HI Giurgiu

 

 

Figure 3.3 A simplified road map of Romania.

 

 

 

rest stop, the condition of the road, the weather, and so on. All these considerations are left out
of state descriptions because they are irrelevant to the problem of finding a route to Bucharest.
The process of removing detail from a representation is called abstraction.

As well as abstracting the state description, we must abstract the actions themselves. An
action—let us say a car trip from Arad to Zerind—has many effects. Besides changing the
location of the vehicle and its occupants, it takes up time, consumes fuel, generates pollution, and
changes the agent (as they say, travel is broadening). In our formulation, we take into account
only the change in location. Also, there are many actions that we will omit altogether: turning j
on the radio, looking out of the window, slowing down for law enforcement officers, and so on.

Can we be more precise about defining the appropriate level of abstraction? Think of the
states and actions we have chosen as corresponding to sets of detailed world states and sets of j
detailed action sequences. Now consider a solution to the abstract problem: for example, the
path Arad to Sibiu to Rimnicu Vilcea to Pitesti to Bucharest. This solution corresponds to a large
number of more detailed paths. For example, we could drive with the radio on between Sibiu
and Rimnicu Vilcea, and then switch it off for the rest of the trip. Each of these more detailed
paths is still a solution to the goal, so the abstraction is valid. The abstraction is also useful,
because carrying out each of the actions in the solution, such as driving from Pitesti to Bucharest,
is somewhat easier than the original problem. The choice ofa good abstraction thus involves
removing as much detail as possible while retaining validity and ensuring that the abstract actions
are easy to carry out. Were it not for the ability to construct useful abstractions, intelligent agents
would be completely swamped by the real world.
