494

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

The St. Petersburg paradox was first presented by Bernoulli (1738). Jeffrey (1983) presents
a resolution of the paradox based not on logarithmic utility functions, but on denying that playing
the game is a real possibility (because no one could have a bank from which rewards of arbitrarily
high utility could be paid out).

The micromort utility measure is discussed by Howard (1989). QALYs are much more
widely used in medical and social policy decision-making than are micromorts; see (Russell,
1990) for a typical example ofan argument for a major change in public health policy on grounds
of increased expected utility measured in QALYs.

The book Decisions with Multiple Objectives: Preferences and Value Trade-Off(Keeney
and Raiffa, 1976) gives a thorough introduction to multiattribute utility theory. It describes early
computer implementations of methods for eliciting the necessary parameters for a multiattribute
utility function, and includes extensive accounts of real applications of the theory. In AI, the
principal reference for MAUT is Wellman's (1985) paper, which includes a system called URP .
(Utility Reasoning Package) that can use a collection of statements about preference indepen-
dence and conditional independence to analyze the structure of decision problems. The use of 4
stochastic dominance together with qualitative probability models was investigated extensively
by Wellman (1988; 1990). Wellman and Doyle (1992) provide a preliminary sketch of how a
complex set of utility-independence relationships might be used to provide a structured model of
autility function, in much the same way that belief networks provide a structured model ofjoint
probability distributions.

Decision theory has been a standard tool in economics, finance, and management science
since the 1950s. Until the 1980s, decision trees were the main tool used for representing simple
decision problems. Decision networks or influence diagrams were introduced by Howard and
Matheson (1984), although the underlying concepts were developed much earlier by a group
(including Howard and Matheson) at SRI (Miller et al., 1976). Howard and Matheson's method
involved the derivation of a decision tree from a decision network, but in general the tree is of
exponential size. Shachter (1986) developed a method for making decisions based directly on a
decision network, without the creation of an intermediate decision tree. The collection by Oliver
and Smith (1990) has a number of useful articles on decision networks, as does the 1990 special
issue of the journal Networks. Papers on decision networks and utility modelling also appear
regularly in the journal Management Science.

Information value theory was first analyzed by Ron Howard (1966). His paper ends with
the following remark:

If information value theory and associated decision theoretic structures do not in the future
occupy a large part of the education of engineers, then the engineering profession will find
that its traditional role of managing scientific and economic resources for the benefit of man
has been forfeited to another profession.

To date, the implied revolution in managerial methods has not occurred, although as the use of
information value theory in systems such as Pathfinder becomes more widespread, it may yet
become part of every decision-maker's armory.

Surprisingly few AI researchers adopted decision-theoretic tools after the early applications
in medical decision making described in Chapter 14. One of the few exceptions was Jerry
Feldman, who applied decision theory to problems in vision (Feldman and Yakimovsky, 1974) and

 
