Section 13.3.

Fully Integrated Planning and Execution 403

 

are just the goal conditions because the remaining plan p is now empty, and the agent will detect
that the chair is not all the same color as the table. Looking at the original plan g, the current
state is identical to the precondition before the chair-painting step, so the agent will now try to
paint over the bare spots. This behavior will cycle until the chair is completely painted.

Suppose instead that the agent runs out of paint during the painting process. This is not
envisaged by the action description for Paint, but it will be detected because the chair will again
not be completely painted. At this point, the current state matches the precondition of the plan
beginning with GerPaint, so the agent will go off and get a new can of paint before continuing.

Consider again the agent's behavior in the first case, as it paints and repaints the chair.
Notice that the behavior is identical to that ofa conditional planning agent running the looping
plan shown earlier. The difference lies in the time at which the computation is done and the
information is available to the computation process. The conditional planning agent reasons
explicitly about the possibility of uneven paint, and prepares for it even though it may not occur.
The looping behavior results from a looping plan. The replanning agent assumes at planning
time that painting succeeds, but during execution checks on the results and plans just for those
contingencies that actually arise. The looping behavior results not from a looping plan but from
the interaction between action failures and a persistent replanner.

We should mention the question of learning in response to failed expectations about the
results of actions. Consider a plan for the painting agent that includes an action to open a door
(perhaps to the paint store). Ifthe door sticks a little, the replanning agent will try again until the
door opens. But if the door is locked, the agent has a problem. Of course, if the agent already
knows about locked doors, then Unlocked will be a precondition of opening the door, and the
agent will have inserted a CheckI{Locked action that observes the state of the door, and perhaps
a conditional branch to fetch the key. But ifthe agent does not know about locked doors, it will
continue pulling on the door indefinitely. What we would like to happen is for the agent to leam
that its action description is wrong; in this case, there is a missing precondition. We will see how
this kind of learning can take place in Chapter 21.

13.3 FULLYINTEGRATEDPLANNINGANDEXECUTION

SITUATED PLANNING
AGENT

In this section, we describe a more comprehensive approach to plan execution, in which the
planning and execution processes are fully integrated. Rather than thinking of the planner and
execution monitor as separate processes, one of which passes its results to the other, we can
think of them as a single process in a situated planning agent.* The agent is thought of as
always being part of the way through executing a plan—the grand plan of living its life. Its
activities include executing some steps of the plan that are ready to be executed; refining the plan
to resolve any of the standard deficiencies (open conditions, potential clobbering, and so on);
refining the plan in the light of additional information obtained during execution; and fixing the

+ The word "situated," which became popular in Al in the late 1980s, is intended to emphasize that the process of
deliberation takes place in an agent that is directly connected to an environment. In this book all the agents are "situated,"
but the situated planning agent integrates deliberation and action to a greater extent than some of the other designs
