422 Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

which denotes a set of equations relating the corresponding individual entries in the tables (nota
matrix multiplication of the tables). Thus, one of the equations might be

P(X =x AY =y2) = P(X =x) |¥=y2)PY =y2)

In general, if we are interested in the probability of a proposition 4, and we have accu-
mulated evidence B, then the quantity we must calculate is P(4\B). Sometimes we will not
have this conditional probability available directly in the knowledge base, and we must resort to
probabilistic inference, which we describe in later sections.

As we have already said, probabilistic inference does not work like logical inference. It
is tempting to interpret the statement P/A\B) - 0.8 to mean "whenever B is true, conclude that
P(A) is 08." This is wrong on two counts: first, P(A) always denotes the prior probability of
A, not the posterior given some evidence; second, the statement P(A\B) = 0.8 is only applicable
when B is the only available evidence. When additional information C is available, we must
calculate P(A\B A C), which may bear little relation to P(A|B). In the extreme case, C might
tell us directly whether A is true or false. If we examine a patient who complains of toothache,
and discover a cavity, then we have additional evidence Cavity, and we conclude (trivially) that
P(Cavity|ToothacheA Cavity) = 1.0.

 

14.3 THE AXIOMS OF PROBABILITY

 

In order to define properly the semantics of statements in probability theory, we will need to
describe how probabilities and logical connectives interact. We take as given the properties of
the connectives themselves, as defined in Chapter 6. As for probabilities, it is normal to use a
small set of axioms that constrain the probability assignments that an agent can make to a set of
propositions. The following axioms are in fact sufficient:

1. All probabilities are between 0 and 1.
0<P(A)< 1
2. Necessarily true (i.e., valid) propositions have probability 1, and necessarily false (ie.,
unsatisfiable) propositions have probability 0
P(True)= 1 P(False)= 0
3. The probability of a disjunction is given by
P(A V 5) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A AB)

The first two axioms serve to define the probability scale. The third is best remembered by
reference to the Venn diagram shown in Figure 14.2. The figure depicts each proposition as a
set, which can be thought of as the set of all possible worlds in which the proposition is true. The
total probability ofA V B is seen to be the sum of the probabilities assigned to 4 and B, but with
P(AA B) subtracted out so that those cases are not counted twice.

From these three axioms, we can derive all other properties of probabilities. For example,
ifwe let B be =A in the last axiom, we obtain an expression for the probability of the negation of

 
