Section 24.4.

Extracting 3-D Information Using Vision 739

 

FATE

BASELINE

Perceived object

      
 

Left image Right image

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 24.12 The idea of stereopsis: different camera positions result in slightly different 2-D
views of the same 3-D scene.

 

 

parallel. The relationship of the right camera to the left camera is then just translation along the
x-axis by an amount b, the baseline. We can use the optical flow equations from the previous
section to compute the horizontal and vertical disparity as H = v, At. V = v, At, given that
T, = b/At and T, = T- = 0. The rotational parameters w,, w,, and w- are zero. One obtains
H = b/Z, V = 0. In words, the horizontal disparity is equal to the ratio of the baseline to the
depth, and the vertical disparity is zero

This is, of course, the simplest viewing geometry (relationship between the two cameras)
that we could consider. Under normal viewing conditions, humans fixate; that is, there is some
point in the scene at which the optical axes of the two eyes intersect. Figure 24.13 shows two eyes
fixated. at a point PO, which is at a distance Z from the midpoint of the eyes. For convenience, we
will compute the angular disparity, measured in radians. The disparity at the point of fixation PO
is zero. For some other point P in the scene that is 6Z further away, we can compute the angular
displacements of the left and right images of P, which we will call PL and PR. Ifeach of these is
displaced by an angle 60/2 relative to PO, then the displacement between PL and PR, which is the
disparity of P, isjust 60. From simple geometry, we have

___-b

eZ
In humans, 5 (the baseline) is about 6 cm. Suppose that Z is about 100 cm. The smallest
detectable 69 (corresponding to the pixel size) is about 5 seconds of arc, or 2.42 x 107‘ radians,
givinga 6Z ofabout0.4 mm. ForZ = 30cm (1 ft), we get the impressively small value 6Z = 0.036
mm. Stating this in words, at a distance of 30 cm, humans can discriminate depths that differ by
as little as 0.036 mm, enabling us to thread needles and the like

 
