570

Chapter 19 Learning in Neural and Belief Networks

 

FEED-FORWARD
RECURRENT

We can get a feel for the operation of individual units by comparing them with logic gates.
One of the original motivations for the design of individual units (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943) was
their ability to represent basic Boolean functions. Figure 19.6 shows how the Boolean functions
AND, OR, and NOT can be represented by units with suitable weights and thresholds. This is
important because it means we can use these units to build a network to compute any Boolean
function of the inputs. .

2D 2EO> FES

AND OR NOT

 

 

 

Figure 19.6 Units with a step function for the activation function can act as logic gates, given
appropriate thresholds and weights.

 

 

 

Network structures

There are a variety of kinds of network structure, each of which results in very different com-
putational properties. The main distinction to be made is between feed-forward and recurrent
networks. In a feed-forward network, links are unidirectional, and there are no cycles. In a
recurrent network, the links can form arbitrary topologies. Technically speaking, a feed-forward
network is a directed acyclic graph (DAG). We will usually be dealing with networks that are
arranged in layers. In a layered feed-forward network, each unit is linked only to units in the next
layer; there are no links between units in the same layer, no links backward to a previous layer,
and no links that skip a layer. Figure 19.7 shows a very simple example ofa layered feed-forward
network. This network has two layers; because the input units (square nodes) simply serve to
pass activation to the next layer, they are not counted (although some authors would describe this
as a three-layer network).

The significance ofthe lack of cycles is that computation can proceed uniformly from input
units to output units. The activation from the previous time step plays no part in the computation,
because it is not fed back to an earlier unit. Hence, a feed-forward network simply computes a
function of the input values that depends on the weight settings—it has no internal state other
than the weights themselves. Such networks can implement adaptive versions of simple reflex
agents or they can function as components of more complex agents. In this chapter, we will focus
on feed-forward networks because they are relatively well-understood.

Obviously, the brain cannot be a feed-forward network, else we would have no short-term
memory. Some regions of the brain are largely feed-forward and somewhat layered, but there
are rampant back-connections. In our terminology, the brain is a recurrent network. Because
activation is fed back to the units that caused it, recurrent networks have internal state stored in
the activation levels of the units. This also means that computation can be much less orderly

 
