Section 15.4.

Inference in Multiply Connected Belief Networks 455

 

CUTSET

BOUNDED CUTSET
CONDITIONING

LOGIC SAMPLING

polytrees. Each simple network has one or more variables instantiated to a definite value. P(X\E)
is computed as a weighted average over the values computed by each polytree.

A set of variables that can be instantiated to yield polytrees is called a cutset. In Fig-
ure 15.11, the cutset is just {Cloudy},and because it is a Boolean variable, there are just two
resulting polytrees. In general, the number of resulting polytrees is exponential in the size of the
cutset, so we want to find a small'cutset if possible.

Cutset conditioning can be approximated by evaluating only some ofthe resulting polytrees.
The error in the approximation is bounded by the total probability weight of the polytrees not yet
evaluated. The obvious approach is to evaluate the most likely polytrees first. For example, if we
need an answer accurate to within 0.1, we evaluate trees in decreasing order of likelihood until
the total probability exceeds 0.9. This technique is called bounded cutset conditioning, and is
useful in systems that need to make approximately correct decisions quickly.

2 ~ =
«
(a)

 

 

     

Grass

 

 

Figure 15.11 Networks created by instantiation.

 

 

 

Stochastic simulation methods

In the stochastic simulation method known as logic sampling, we un repeated simulations of
the world described by the belief network, and estimate the probability we are interested in by
counting the frequencies with which relevant events occur. Each round of the simulation starts by
randomly choosing a value for each root node of the network, weighting the choice by the prior
probabilities. Ifthe prior P(Cloudy)= 0.5, then we would pick Cloudy = True half the time, and
Cloudy = False half the time. Whatever value is chosen, we can then choose values randomly for
Sprinkler and Rain, using the conditional probabilities of those nodes given the known value of
Cloudy. Finally, we do the same for WetGrass, and the first round is done

To estimate P( WetGrass|Cloudy) (or in general P(X|£)),we repeat the process many times,
and then compute the ratio of the number of runs where WetGrass and Cloudy are true to the
number ofruns where just Cloudy is true. This will always converge to the right value, although
it may take many runs.

The main problem is when we are interested in some assignment of values to E that rarely
occurs. For example, suppose we wanted to know

P(WetGrass|Sprinkler A Rain)
