830 ‘Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

 

relevant features. One possible solution is to stick to a small finite set of features, and add new
ones when needed. But according to him, "There is no known way ofadding new features should
the current set prove inadequate to account for the leamed facts." As we saw in Chapter 21, there
are well-principled ways to generate new features for inductive leaming.

Another difficult problem in reinforcement leaming arises when the available perceptual
inputs do not completely characterize the situation. In such cases, the agent must develop
additional internal state variables, in terms of which output mappings can be learned. Dreyfus
claims that "Since no one knows how to incorporate internal states appropriately, a breakthrough
will be necessary." Again, this is a tricky problem, but one on which some progress has been
made (see Chapter 20).

The final problem to which Dreyfus refers in What Computers Still Can’t Do is that of
controlling the acquisition of sensory data. He notes that the brain is able to direct its sensors to
seek relevant information and to process it to extract aspects relevant to the current situation. He
says (page xliv), "Currently, no details of this mechanism are understood or even hypothesized
in a way that could guide AI research." Yet the field of active vision, underpinned by the theory
of information value (Chapter 16), is concerned with exactly this problem, and already robots
incorporate the theoretical results obtained.

Dreyfus seems willing to grant that success in overcoming these obstacles would constitute
the kind of real progress in AI that he believes to be impossible. In our view, the fact that AI has
managed to reduce the problem of producing human-level intelligence to a set of relatively well-
defined technical problems seems to be progress in itself. Furthermore, these are problems that
are clearly soluble in principle, and for which partial solutions are already emerging. In summary,
we have seen that the life ofa weak-AI critic is not an easy one. Claims that "is impossible for
computers" (e.g., X might be beating a chess master) tend to be overtaken by actual events. They
also open the critic to the requirement of suggesting a mechanism by which humans do_X; this
forces them, essentially, to become AI researchers. On the other hand, perceptive criticism from
outside the field can be very useful. Many of the issues Dreyfus has focused on—background
commonsense knowledge, the qualification problem, uncertainty, learning, compiled forms of
decision making, the importance of considering situated agents rather than disembodied inference
engines—are now widely accepted as important aspects of intelligent agent design.

264 INTENTIONALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS

Many critics have objected to the Turing Test, stating that it is not enough to see how a machine
acts; we also need to know what internal "mental" states ithas. This is a valid and useful criticism;
certainly in trying to understand any computer program or mechanical device it is helpful to know
about its internal workings as well as its external behavior. Again, the objection was foreseen by
Turing. He cites a speech by a Professor Jefferson:

Not until a machine could write a sonnet or compose a concerto because of thoughts and
emotions felt, and not by the chance fall of symbols, could we agree that machine equals
brain—that is, not only write it but know that it had written it.

 
