Section 24.8.

Summary 767

The best current speech recognition systems recognize from about 80% to 98% ofthe words
correctly, depending on the quality ofthe signal, the allowable language, the length of each input,
and the variation in speakers. Speech recognition is easy when there is a good microphone, a
small vocabulary, a strong language model that predicts what words can come next, a limit of
one-word utterances (or a requirement for pauses between words), and when the system can be
trained specifically for a single speaker. The systems are not as accurate over phone lines, when
there is noise in the room, when there is a large vocabulary with no restrictions, when the words
of an utterance run together, and when the speaker is new to the system.

24.8 _ SUMMARY

Although perception appears to be an effortless activity for humans, it requires a significant
amount of sophisticated computation. This chapter studies vision as the prime example of
perceptual information processing. The goal of vision is to extract information needed for tasks
such as manipulation, navigation, and object recognition. We also looked at speech recognition.

The process of image formation is well-understood in its geometric and physical aspects
Given a description of a 3-D scene, we can easily produce a picture ofit from some arbitrary
camera position (the graphics problem). Inverting the process by going from an image to
a description of the scene is difficult.

To extract the visual information necessary for the tasks of manipulation, navigation,
and recognition, intermediate representations have to be constructed. Image-processing
algorithms extract primitive clements from the image, such as edges and regions.

In the image, there exist multiple cues that enable one to obtain 3-D information about
the scene. These include motion, stereopsis, texture, shading, and contour analysis. Each
of these cues relies on background assumptions about physical scenes in order to provide
unambiguous interpretations.

Object recognition in its full generality is a very hard problem. We discussed two relatively
simple techniques—alignment and indexing using geometric invariants—that provide ro-
bust recognition in restricted contexts.

Speech recognition is a problem in diagnosis. It can be solved with a language model and
an acoustic model. Current emphasis is on systems that do well both as a performance
element and a learning element.

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Systematic attempts to understand human vision can be traced back to ancient times. Euclid
(ca. 300 B.C.) wrote about natural perspective, the mapping that associates with each point P in
the three-dimensional world the direction of the ray OP joining the center of projection O to the
