Section 13.3.

Fully Integrated Planning and Execution 405

 

EXTENDING

REDUNDANT STEP

 

Sexe) [ Move(C,b)
ri) | Move
onibieva) Clear)
aa
x8) [_Finish_|
ons, 4
Clear) On{D.B)
Clear(D) On(D.G)
Geare) ——e Geer} | Move(D.B)

Figure 13.11 The initial plan constructed by the situated planning agent. The plan is indistin-
guishable, so far, from that produced by a normal partial-order planner.

Bees | Move(C.D)
1G) Move(C,
Ontabie(A) Glear(0)
ner,
: S168} [_ Fish]
Ono's
[oe ae
2)
Clear(D) Ondy
‘Clear(D)
Geana) Gear’ [ Move(0.8)

Figure 1312 After someone else moves D onto B, the unsupported links protecting Clear(B)
and On(D,G) are dropped, producing this plan.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

are now open, and the precondition On(D, y)is now uninstantiated because there is no reason to
assume the move will be from G any more.

Now the agent can take advantage of the "helpful" interference by noticing that the causal
link protecting On(D,B) and supplied by Move(D,B) can be replaced by a direct link from START.
This process is called extending a causal link, and is done whenever a condition can be supplied
by an earlier step instead ofa later one without causing a new threat.

Once the old link from Move(D,B) is removed, the step no longer supplies any causal links
at all. It is now a redundant step. All redundant steps are dropped from the plan, along with
any links supplying them. This gives us the plan shown in Figure 13.13.

 

 

Onic.0}
On(0,8)

 

CleaG)

 

 

Figure 13.13 The link supplied by MoveCD, B)has been replaced by one from START, and the
now-redundant step Move(D,B) has been dropped.

 

 

 

Now the step Move(C,D) is ready to be executed, because all of its preconditions are
satisfied by the START step, no other steps are necessarily before it, and it does not threaten any
other link in the plan. The step is removed from the plan and executed. Unfortunately, the agent
is clumsy and drops C onto 4 instead of D, giving the state shown in Figure 13.10(c). The new
