476

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

MONOTONIC
PREFERENCE

VALUE FUNCTION
‘ORDINAL UTILITY.

EXPECTED
MONETARY VALUE

The utility of money

Utility theory has its roots in economics, and economics provides one obvious candidate for a
utility measure: money (or more specifically, an agent's total net assets). The almost universal
exchangeability of money for all kinds of goods and services suggests that money plays a
significant role in human utility functions?

If we restrict our attention to actions that only affect the amount of money that an agent has,
then it will usually be the case that the agent prefers more money to less, all other things being
equal. We say that the agent exhibits a monotonic preference for money. This is not, however,
sufficient to guarantee that money behaves as a utility function. Technically speaking, money
behaves as a value function or ordinal utility measure, meaning just that the agent prefers to
have more rather than less when considering definite amounts. To understand monetary decision
making under uncertainty, we also need to examine the agent's preferences between lotteries
involving money.

Suppose you have triumphed over the other competitors in a television game show. The
host now offers you a choice: you can either take the $ 1,000,000 prize or you can gamble it on
the flip of a coin. If the coin comes up heads, you end up with nothing, but if it comes up tails,
you get $3,000,000. If you're like most people, you would decline the gamble and pocket the
million. Are you being irrational?

Assuming you believe that the coin is fair, the expected monetary value (EMV) of the
gamble is ($0) + ($3,000,000) = $1,500,000, and the EMV of taking the original prize is of
course $1,000,000, which is less. But that does not necessarily mean that accepting the gamble
is a better decision. Suppose we use S,, to denote the state of possessing total wealth $n, and
that your current wealth is $k. Then the expected utilities of the two actions of accepting and
declining the gamble are

EU(Accept) = 5U(S;) + 5U(Si+3,000.000)
EU(Decliney = U(Sk+1,000.000)

To determine what to do, we need to assign utilities to the outcome states. Utility is not directly
proportional to monetary value because the utility — the positive change in lifestyle — for your
first million is very high (or so we are told), whereas the utility for additional millions is much
smaller. Suppose you assign a utility of 5 to your current financial status (S;),a 10 to the state
Si+3,000.000, and an 8 to the state S,41,o00.000- Then the rational action wouldbe to decline, because
the expected utility of accepting is only 7.5 (less than the 8 for declining). On the other hand,
suppose that you happen to have $500,000,000 in the bank already (and appear on game shows
just for fun, one assumes). In this case, the gamble is probably acceptable, provided that you
prefer more money to less, because the additional benefit of the 503rd million is probably about
the same as that of the 501st million.

In 1738, long before television game shows, Bernoulli came up with an even more com-
pelling example, known as the St. Petersburg paradox. Suppose you are offered a chance to play
a game in which a fair coin is tossed repeatedly until it comes up heads. Ifthe first heads appears
on the nth toss, you win 2" dollars. How much would you pay for a chance to play this game?

3 This despite the assurances ofa well-known song to the effect that the best things in life are free

 
