 

Section 25.3.

Parts: What Are Robots Made Of? 777

on all fours—but with incredible strength." A futuristic full-body exoskeleton of this kind was
worn by Ripley (Sigoumey Weaver) in the final confrontation of the movie "Aliens."

No less fascinating is the attempt to duplicate lost human effectors. When an arm or
leg is amputated, the muscles in the stump still respond to signals from the brain, generating
myoelectric currents. Prosthetic limbs can pick up these signals and amplify them to flex joints
and move artificial fingers. Some prosthetics even have electrocutaneous feedback that gives a
sense of touch. There has also been work in giving humans artificial sensors. A Japanese MITI
project, for example, built a prototype robot guide dog for the blind. It uses ultrasound to make
sure that its master stays in a safe area as they walk along together. Artificial retinas and cochleas,
mostly based on analog VLSI, are the subject of intensive research at present.

25.3 PARTS: WHAT ARE ROBOTS MADE OF?

uNks
sont,

END EFFECTORS

EFFECTOR
ACTUATOR,

DEGREE OF
FREEDOM

LOCOMOTION
MANIPULATION

Robots are distinguished from each other by the effectors and sensors with which they are
equipped. For example, a mobile robot requires some kind of legs or wheels, and a teleoperated
robot needs a camera. We will assume that a robot has some sort of rigid body, with rigid links
that can move about. Links meet each other at joints, which allow motion. For example, on a
human the upper arm and forearm are links, and the shoulder and elbow are joints. The palm
is a link, and fingers and thumb have three links. Wrists and finger joints are joints. Robots
need not be so anthropomorphic; a wheel is a perfectly good link. Attached to the final links
of the robot are end effectors, which the robot uses to interact with the world. End effectors
may be suction cups, squeeze grippers, screwdrivers, welding guns, or paint sprayers, to name a
few. Some robots have special connectors on the last link that allow them to quickly remove one
end effector and attach another. The well-equipped robot also has one or more sensors, perhaps
including cameras, infrared sensors, radar, sonar, and accelerometers.

Effectors: Tools for action

An effector is any device that affects the environment, under the control of the robot. To have
an impact on the physical world, an effector must be equipped with an actuator that converts
software commands into physical motion. The actuators themselves are typically electric motors
or hydraulic or pneumatic cylinders. For simplicity, we will assume that each actuator determines
a single motion or degree offreedom. For example, an automatic phonograph turntable has three
degrees of freedom. It can spin the turntable, it can raise and lower the stylus arm, and it can
move the arm laterally to the first track. A side effect of the motion of the turntable is that one or
more vinyl recordings rotate as well. This motion, assuming the stylus has been lowered into a
recording groove, leads to a useful and musical product

Effectors are used in two main ways: to change the position of the robot within its
environment (locomotion), and to move other objects in the environment (manipulation). A
third use, to change the shape or other physical properties of objects, is more in the realm of
mechanical engineering than robotics, so we will not cover it.

 
