478

Chapter 16. Making Simple Decisions

 

RISK-AVERSE

RISK-SEEKNG

CERTANTY
EQUIVALENT

INSURANCE
PREMIUM

RISK-NEUTRAL

NORMALIZED
UTILITIES

‘STANDARD LOTTERY

$10,000,000 in debt might well accept a gamble on a fair coin with a gain of $ 10,000,000 for heads
and a loss of $20,000,000 for tails.* This yields the S-shaped curve shown in Figure 16.1(b).

If we restrict our attention to the positive part of the curves, where the slope is decreasing,
then for any lottery L, the utility of being faced with that lottery is less than the utility of being
handed the expected monetary value of the lottery as a sure thing:

U(S1) < USemvay)

That is, agents with curves of this shape are risk-averse: they prefer a sure thing with a payoff
that is less than the expected monetary value ofa gamble. On the other hand, in the "desperate"
region at large negative wealth in Figure 16.1(b), the behavior is risk-seeking. The value an agent
will accept in lieu ofa lottery is called the certainty equivalent of the lottery. Studies have shown
that most people will accept about $400 in lieu of a gamble that gives $1000 half the time and
$0 the other half—thatis, the certainty equivalent of the lottery is $400. The difference between
the expected monetary value of a lottery and its certainty equivalent is called the insurance
premium. Risk aversion is the basis for the insurance industry, because it means that insurance
premiums are positive. People would rather pay a small insurance premium than gamble with the
price of their house against the possibility ofa fire. From the insurance company’s point of view,
the risk is very low because the law of large numbers makes it almost certain that the claims it
pays will be substantially less than the premiums it receives.

Notice that for small changes in wealth relative to the current wealth, almost any curve
will be approximately linear. An agent that has a linear curve is said to be risk-neutral. For
gambles with small sums, therefore, we expect risk neutrality. In a sense, this justifies the
simplified procedure that proposed small gambles to assess probabilities and to justify the axioms
of probability in Chapter 14.

Utility scales and utility assessment

The axioms of utility do not specify a unique utility function for an agent, given its preference
behavior. It is simple to see that an agent using a utility function

U'(S)= ky +kU(S),
where k\ is a constant and k> is any positive constant, will behave identically to an agent using
U(S), provided they have the same beliefs.> The scale of utilities is therefore somewhat arbitrary.

One common procedure for assessing utilities is to establish a scale with a "best possible
prize" at U(S)= uy and a "worst possible catastrophe" at U(S) - u1. Normalized utilities
use a scale with uw; = 0 and MT = 1- Utilities of intermediate outcomes are assessed by asking
the agent to indicate a preference between the given outcome state S and a standard lottery
[p,.MT; (1 —p), “1 ]. The probabilityp is adjusted until the agent is indifferent between S and the
standard lottery. Assuming normalized utilities, the utility of S is given by p.

In medical, transportation, and environmental decision problems, among others, people's
lives are at stake. In such cases, u, is the value assigned to immediate death (or perhaps many

 

  

4 Such behavior mightbe called desperate, but it is nonetheless perfectly rational if one is already in a desperate situation.

5 In Chapter 5, we saw that move choice in deterministic games is unchanged by any monotonic transformation of the
evaluation function, but in backgammon, where positions are lotteries, only linear transformations preserve move choice

 
