416

Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

 

LAZINESS

THEORETICAL
IGNORANCE

agent therefore will not believe that plan Aoo will necessarily achieve the goal, and that makes it
difficult for the logical agent to conclude that plan Ayo is the right thing to do.

Nonetheless, let us suppose that Ago is in fact the right thing to do. What do we mean by
saying this? As we discussed in Chapter 2, we mean that out ofall the possible plans that couldbe
executed, Ago is expected to maximize the agent's performance measure, given the information it
has about the environment. The performance measure includes getting to the airport in time for
the flight, avoiding a long, unproductive wait at the airport, and avoiding speeding tickets along
the way. The information the agent has cannot guarantee any of these outcomes for Ago, but it
can provide some degree of belief that they will be achieved. Other plans, such as A129, might
increase the agent's belief that it will get to the airport on time, but also increase the likelihood of
a long wait. The right thing to do, the rational decision, therefore, depends on both the relative
importance of various goals and the likelihood that, and degree to which, they will be achieved.
The remainder of this section sharpens up these ideas, in preparation for the development of
the general theories of uncertain reasoning and rational decisions that we present in this and
subsequent chapters

Handling uncertain knowledge

In this section, we look more closely at the nature of uncertain knowledge. We will use a
simple diagnosis example to illustrate the concepts involved. Diagnosis—whether for medicine,
automobile repair, or whatever—is a task that almost always involves uncertainty. If we tried to
build a dental diagnosis system using first-order logic, we might propose rules such as

Vp Symptom(p,Toothache) => Disease(p, Cavity)

The problem is that this rule is wrong. Not all patients with toothaches have cavities; some of
them may have gum disease, or impacted wisdom teeth, or one of several other problems:

Vp Symptom(p,Toothache) =>
Disease(p, Cavity) V Disease(p, GumDisease) V Disease(p, ImpactedWisdom) ...

Unfortunately, in order to make the rule true, we have to add an almost unlimited list of possible
causes. We could try turning the rule into a causal rule:

Vp Disease(p, Cavity) => Symptom(p,Toothache)

But this rule is not right either; not all cavities cause pain. The only way to fix the rule is to
make it logically exhaustive: to extend the left-hand side to cover all possible reasons why a
cavity might or might not cause a toothache. Even then, for the purposes of diagnosis, one must
also take into account the possibility that the patient may have a toothache and a cavity that are 3
unconnected. 4
Trying to use first-order logic to cope with a domain like medical diagnosis thus fails for
three main reasons:

~ Laziness: It is too much work to list the complete set ofantecedents or consequents needed
to ensure an exceptionless rule, and too hard to use the enormous rules that result.

0 Theoretical ignorance: Medical science has no complete theory for the domain.

 
