468 Chapter 15. Probabilistic Reasoning Systems

 

c. How many independent values are contained in the joint probability distribution for eight
Boolean nodes, assuming no conditional independence relations hold among them?

d. How many independent probability values do your network tables contain?

e. The conditional probability table for Starts is a canonical one. Describe, in English, what
its structure will be in general, as more possible causes for not starting are added.

15.2. In your local nuclear power station, there is an alarm that senses when a temperature
gauge exceeds a given threshold. The gauge measures the core temperature. Consider the
Boolean variables 4 (alarm sounds), FA (alarm is faulty), and FC (gauge is faulty), and the
multivalued nodes G (gauge reading) and T (actual core temperature).

a. Draw a belief net for this domain, given that the gauge is more likely to fail when the core
temperature gets too high.

b. Is your network a polytree?

Suppose there are just two possible actual and measured temperatures, Normal and High:

and that the gauge gives the incorrect temperature x% of the time when it is working, but

y% of the time when it is faulty. Give the conditional probability table associated with G.

d. Suppose the alarm works unless it is faulty, in which case it never goes off. Give the

conditional probability table associated with A.

Suppose the alarm and gauge are working, and the alarm sounds. Calculate the probability

that the core temperature is too high.

Ina given time period, the probability that the temperature exceeds threshold isp. The cost

of shutting down the reactor is c,; the cost of not shutting it down when the temperature is

in fact too high is ¢,, (m is for meltdown). Assuming the gauge and alarm to be working

normally, calculate the maximum value for x for which the gauge is of any use (Le., ifx is

any higher than this, we have to shut down the reactor all the time).

g. Suppose we add a second temperature gauge H, connected so that the alarm goes off when
either gauge reads High. Where do H and F;, (the event of H failing) go in the network?

h. Are there circumstances under which adding a second gauge would mean that we would
need more accurate (i.e., more likely to give the correct temperature) gauges? Why (not)?

°

2

re

15.3. Two astronomers, in different parts of the world, make measurements M, and M2 of the
number of stars N in some small region of the sky, using their telescopes. Normally, there is
a small possibility of error by up to one star. Each telescope can also (with a slightly smaller
probability) be badly out of focus (events F\ and ), in which case the scientist will undercount
by three or more stars. Consider the three networks shown in Figure 15.12.
a. Which of these belief networks correctly (but not necessarily efficiently) represent the
above information?
b. Which is the best network?
Give a reasonable conditional probability table for the values of P(M,|N). (For simplicity,
consider only the possible values 1, 2, and 3 in this part.)
d. Suppose M,= 1 and M;=3. What are the possible numbers of stars?
e. Of these, which is the most likely number?

 
