2 cuarren one Digital Logic Circuits

computer hardware

symbols, such as decimal digits or letters of the alphabet. By judicious use of
binary arrangements and by using various coding techniques, the groups of
bits are used to develop complete sets of instructions for performing various
types of computations.

In contrast to the common decimal numbers that employ the base 10
system, binary numbers use a base 2 system with two digits: 0 and 1. The
decimal equivalent of a binary number can be found by expanding it into a
power series with a base of 2. For example, the binary number 1001011 repre-
sents a quantity that can be converted to a decimal number by multiplying each
bit by the base 2 raised to an integer power as follows:

1X B+OXPrOx We 1x P+ Ox Ps 1x P+ 1x P=75

The seven bits 1001011 represent a binary number whose decimal equivalent
is75. However, this same group of seven bits represents the letter K when used
in conjunction with a binary code for the letters of the alphabet. It may also
represent a control code for specifying some decision logicin a particular digital
computer. In other words, groups of bits in a digital computer are used to
represent many different things. This is similar to the concept that the same
letters of an alphabet are used to construct different languages, such as English
and French.

‘A computersystem is sometimes subdivided into two functional entities:
hardware and software. The hardware of the computer consists of all the
electronic components and electromechanical devices that comprise the phys-

entity of the device. Computer software consists of the instructions and
data that the computer manipulates to perform various data-processing tasks.
‘A sequence of instructions for the computer is called a program. The data that
are manipulated by the program constitute the data base.

‘Acomputer system is composed of its hardware and the system software
available for its use. The system software of a computer consists of a collection
of programs whose purpose is tomake more effective use of the computer. The
programs included in a systems software package are referred to as the oper-
ating system. They are distinguished from application programs written by the
user for the purpose of solving particular problems. For example, a high-level
language program written by a user to solve particular data-processing needs
is an application program, but the compiler that translates the high-level
language program to machine language is a system program. The customer
who buys a computer system would need, in addition to the hardware, any
available software needed for effective operation of the computer. The system
software is an indispensable part of a total computer system. Its function is to
compensate for the differences that exist between user needsand the capability
of the hardware

The hardware of the computer is usually divided into three major parts,
as shown in Fig. 1-1. The central processing unit (CPU) contains an arithmetic

 

 

 

 
