676

Chapter 22. Agents that Communicate

 

INTERVEDIATE FORM

‘QUASHLOGICAL
FORM

(QUANTIFED TERM

little odd (at least at first glance). The second problem is that we need to get the variable a as
an argument to the relation Perceive. In other words, the semantics of the sentence is formed by
plugging the semantics ofthe VP into the right argument slot of the NP, while also plugging the
variable a from the NP into the right argument slot of the semantics of the VP. It looks as ifwe
need two functional compositions, and promises to be rather confusing. The complexity stems
from the fact that the semantic structure is very different from the syntactic structure.

To avoid this confusion, many modern grammars take a different tack. They define an
intermediate form to mediate between syntax and semantics. The intermediate form has two
key properties. First, itis structurally similar to the syntax ofthe sentence, and thus can be easily
constructed through compositional means. Second, it contains enough information so that it can
be translated into a regular first-order logical sentence. Because it sits between the syntactic
and logical forms, it is sometimes called a quasitogical form.* In this chapter, we will use a
quasi-logical form that includes all of first-order logic and is augmented by lambda expressions
and one new construction, which we will call a quantified term. The quantified term that is the
semantic interpretation of "every agent" is written

[V a Agent(a)]
This looks like a logical sentence, but it is used in the same way that a logical term is used. ]

In the following example, we see quantified terms as arguments to the relation Perceive in the
interpretation of "Every agent smells a wumpus”:

3.e (e6 Perceive(|¥ a Agent(a)], [3 w Wumpus(w)] Nose) A During(Now,e))

We will write our grammar so that it generates this quasi-logical form. In Section 22.7 we will
see how to translate this into regular first-order logic.

It can be difficult to write a complex grammar that always comes up with the right se-
mantic interpretation, and everyone has their own way of attacking the problem. We suggest a
methodology based on these steps:

1. Decide on the logical or quasi-logical form you want to generate. Write down some
example sentences and their corresponding logical forms. One such example sentence is
at the top of Figure 22.17.

Make one-word-at-a-time modifications to your example sentences, and study the corre-

sponding logical forms. For example, the semantics of "Every agent smelled a wum-

pus" is the same as our example sentence, except that During(Now,e) is replaced with

After(Nowg). This suggests that During is part of the semantics of "smells" and Afier is

part of the semantics of "smelled." Similarly, changing the word "every" to "an" might

result in a change of V to 3 in the logical form. This gives you a hint about the semantic
interpretation of "an" and "every."

3. Eventually you should be able to write down the basic logical type ofeach lexical category
(noun, verb, and so on), along with some word/logical form pairs. This is motivated in
part by example sentences and in part by your intuitions. For example, it seems clear
enough that the pronoun "I" should denote the object Speaker (which happens to be a
fluent, dependent on the situation). Once we decide that one word in a category is of a

Nn

8 Some quasi-logical forms have the third property that they can succinctly represent ambiguities that could only be
represented in logical form by a long disjunction.
