626

Chapter 23 Minimum Spanning Trees

tree. We call such an edge a safe edge for A, since we can add it safely to A while
maintaining the invariant.

GENERIC-MST(G, w)

1 A=96

2 while A does not form a spanning tree

3 find an edge (u, v) that is safe for A
4 A=AU{(u,v)}

5 return A

We use the loop invariant as follows:

Initialization: After line 1, the set A trivially satisfies the loop invariant.

Maintenance: The loop in lines 2-4 maintains the invariant by adding only safe
edges.

Termination: All edges added to A are in a minimum spanning tree, and so the
set A returned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning tree.

The tricky part is, of course, finding a safe edge in line 3. One must exist, since
when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there is a spanning tree T such
that A C T. Within the while loop body, A must be a proper subset of T, and
therefore there must be an edge (u,v) € T such that (u,v) ¢ A and (u,v) is safe
for A.

In the remainder of this section, we provide a rule (Theorem 23.1) for recogniz-
ing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that use this rule to find
safe edges efficiently.

We first need some definitions. A cut (S,V — S) of an undirected graph G =
(V, E) is a partition of V. Figure 23.2 illustrates this notion. We say that an edge
(u,v) € E crosses the cut (S, V — S) if one of its endpoints is in S and the other
is in V —S. We say that a cut respects a set A of edges if no edge in A crosses the
cut. An edge is a light edge crossing a cut if its weight is the minimum of any edge
crossing the cut. Note that there can be more than one light edge crossing a cut in
the case of ties. More generally, we say that an edge is a light edge satisfying a
given property if its weight is the minimum of any edge satisfying the property.

Our rule for recognizing safe edges is given by the following theorem.

Theorem 23.1

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight func-
tion w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included in some minimum
spanning tree for G, let (S, V — S) be any cut of G that respects A, and let (u,v)
be a light edge crossing (S, V — S). Then, edge (u,v) is safe for A.
