 

”aArt Al: PRESENT AND

/ FUTURE

 

 

 

 

In which we take stock of where we are and where we are going, this being a good
thing to do before continuing.

27.1__HAVE WE SUCCEEDED YET?

In Part I, we proposed a unified view of AI as intelligent agent design. We showed that the
design problem depends on the percepts and actions available to the agent, the goals that the
agent's behavior should satisfy, and the nature of the environment. A variety of different agent
designs are possible, ranging from reflex agents to fully deliberative, knowledge-based agents.
Moreover, the components of these designs can have a number of different instantiations—for
example, logical, probabilistic, or "neural." The intervening chapters presented the principles by
which these components operate.

In areas such as game playing, logical inference and theorem proving, planning, and
medical diagnosis, we have seen systems based on rigorous theoretical principles that can perform
as well as, or better than, human experts. In other areas, such as learning, vision, robotics, and
natural language understanding, rapid improvements in performance are occurring through the
application ofbetter analytical methods and improvements in ourunderstanding ofthe underlying
problems. Continued research will bear fruit in the form of better capabilities in all of these areas.

Enthralled by the technical details, however, one can sometimes lose sight of the big

ie picture. We need an antidote for this tendency. We will consider therefore whether we have the
I tools with which to build a complete, general-purpose intelligent agent. This will also help to
reveal a number of gaps in our current understanding.

Let us begin with the question of the agent architecture. We discussed some general prin-
ciples and types in Chapter 2, and some specific architectures in Chapter 25. One key aspect of
a general architecture is the ability to incorporate a variety of types of decision making, ranging
from knowledge-based deliberation to reflex responses. Reflex responses are needed for situa-
tions in which time is of the essence, whereas knowledge-based deliberation allows the agent to

 

 

842
