Section 21.4.

Inductive Logic Programming 637

 

the research agenda in machine learning. This has happened for two reasons. First, it offers a
rigorous approach to the general KBJL. problem mentioned in the introduction. Second, it offers
complete algorithms for inducing general, first-order theories from examples, which can therefore
learn successfully in domains where attribute-based algorithms fail completely. ILP is a highly
technical field, relying on some fairly advanced material from the study of computational logic
We therefore cover only the basic principles of the two major approaches, referring the reader to
the literature for more details.*

An example

Recall from Equation (21.3) that the general knowledge-based induction problem is to "solve"
the entailment constraint

Background A Hypothesis A Descriptions — Classifications

for the unknown Hypothesis, given the Background knowledge and examples described by
Descriptions and Classifications. To illustrate this, we will use the problem of learning family
relationships from examples. The observations will consist of an extended family tree, described
in terms ofMother, Father, and Married relations, and Male and Female properties. The target
predicates will be such things as Grandparent, BrotherInLaw, and Ancestor. We will use the
family tree from Exercise 7.6, shown here in Figure 21.5. The example Descriptions include
facts such as

Father(Philip, Charles) Father(Philip, Anne)
Mother(Mum, Margaret) Mother(Mum, Elizabeth)
Married(Diana, Charles) Married(Elizabeth, Philip) ...
Male(Philip) Male(Charles)
Female(Beatrice) Female(Margaret)

The sentences in Classifications depend on the target concept being learned. If Q is Grandparent,
say, then the sentences in Classifications might include the following:

Grandparent(Mum,Charles) Grandparent(Elizabeth Beatrice)
<3Grandparent(Mum,Harry) | ~Grandparent(Spencer Peter)

The object of an inductive learning program is to come up with a set of sentences for
the Hypothesis such that the entailment constraint is satisfied. Suppose, for the moment, that
the agent has no background knowledge: Background is empty. Then one possible solution for
Hypothesis is the following:

Grandparent(x,>*) <> [3z Mother(x,z) A Mother(z,y)}
V [Sz Mother(x,z) A Father(z,y)
vo [Bz Father(x,z) \ Mother(z,y)1
Vo [Be Father(x,z) A Father(z, y)|

 

3. We suggest that it mightbe appropriate at this point for the reader to refer back to Chapter 9 for some ofthe underlying
concepts, including Horn clauses, conjunctive normal form, unification, and resolution.
