 

Section 1.1.

Logic

LoGIcisT

AGENT

What is AI? 7

all men are mortal; therefore Socrates is mortal." These laws of thought were supposed to govem
the operation of the mind, and initiated the field of logic.

The development of formal logic in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, which
we describe in more detail in Chapter 6, provided a precise notation for statements about all kinds
of things in the world and the relations between them. (Contrast this with ordinary arithmetic
notation, which provides mainly for equality and inequality statements about numbers.) By 1965,
programs existed that could, given enough time and memory, take a description of a problem
in logical notation and find the solution to the problem, if one exists. (If there is no solution,
the program might never stop looking for it.) The so-called logicist tradition within artificial
intelligence hopes to build on such programs to create intelligent systems.

There are two main obstacles to this approach. First, it is not easy to take informal
knowledge and state it in the formal terms required by logical notation, particularly when the
knowledge is less than 100% certain. Second, there is a big difference between being able to
solve a problem "in principle" and doing so in practice. Even problems with just a few dozen
facts can exhaust the computational resources of any computer unless it has some guidance as to
which reasoning steps to try first. Although both of these obstacles apply to any attempt to build
computational reasoning systems, they appeared first in the logicist tradition because the power
of the representation and reasoning systems are well-defined and fairly well understood.

Acting rationally: The rational agent approach

Acting rationally means acting so as to achieve one's goals, given one's beliefs. An agent is just
something that perceives and acts. (This may be an unusual use of the word, but you will get
used to it.) In this approach, AI is viewed as the study and construction of rational agents.

In the "laws of thought" approach to AI, the whole emphasis was on correct inferences.
Making correct inferences is sometimes part of being a rational agent, because one way to act
rationally is to reason logically to the conclusion that a given action will achieve one's goals,
and then to act on that conclusion. On the other hand, correct inference is not all of rationality,
because there are often situations where there is no provably correct thing to do, yet something
must still be done. There are also ways of acting rationally that cannot be reasonably said to
involve inference. For example, pulling one's hand off of a hot stove is a reflex action that is
more successfull than a slower action taken after careful deliberation.

All the "cognitive skills" needed for the Turing Test are there to allow rational actions. Thus,
we need the ability to represent knowledge and reason with it because this enables us to reach
good decisions in a wide variety of situations. We need to be able to generate comprehensible
sentences in natural language because saying those sentences helps us get by ina complex society.
We need learning not just for erudition, but because having a better idea of how the world works
enables us to generate more effective strategies for dealing with it. We need visual perception not
just because seeing is fun, but in order to get a better idea of what an action might achieve—for
example, being able to see a tasty morsel helps one to move toward it.

The study of AI as rational agent design therefore has two advantages. First, it is more
general than the "laws of thought" approach, because correct inference is only a useful mechanism
for achieving rationality, and not a necessary one. Second, it is more amenable to scientific
