818

Chapter 26. Philosophical Foundations

 

‘WEAK Al

stRONGAT

Other philosophers have openly derided the efforts of Al researchers and, by implication, their
philosophical fellow travellers:

Attificial intelligence pursued within the cult ofcomputationalism stands not even a ghost of
a chance of producing durable results ,., it is time to divert the efforts of AI researchers—
and the considerable monies made available for their support—into avenues other than the
computational approach. (Sayre, 1993)

After fifty years of effort, however, it is clear to all but a few diehards that this attempt to
produce general intelligence has failed. (Dreyfus, 1992)

The nature of philosophy is such that clear disagreements can continue to exist unresolved for
many years. Ifthere were any simple experiment that could resolve the disagreements, the issues
would not be of philosophical interest.

We will begin in Section 26.2 by looking at philosophical questions conceming which the
interests of AI and philosophy coincide—the "how to" questions concerning the basic capabilities
of perception, learning, and reasoning. This will help to clarify the concepts used later.

In Section 26.3, we look at the question "Can machines be made to act as ifthey were
intelligent." The assertion that they can is called the weak AI position. Arguments against weak
AI make one of these three claims:

+ There are things that computers cannot do, no matter how we program them.
* Certain ways of designing intelligent programs are bound to fail in the long run.

+ The task of constructing the appropriate programs is infeasible.

The arguments can be, and sometimes have been, refuted by exhibiting a program with the
supposedly unattainable capabilities. On the other hand, by making AI researchers think more
carefully about their unstated assumptions, the arguments have contributed to a more robust
methodology for AI.

In Section 26.4, we take on the real bone of contention: the strong AI position, which
claims that machines that act intelligently cannot have real, conscious minds. Debates about
strong AI bring up some of the most difficult conceptual problems in philosophy.

Note that one could legitimately believe in strong AI but not weak AI. It is perfectly
consistent to believe that it is infeasible to build machines that act intelligently, but to be willing
to grant such a machine full consciousness if it could in fact ever be built

We will try to present the arguments in their simplest forms, while preserving the lunges
and parries that characterize philosophical debates. We do not have space to do them fulljustice,
and we encourage the reader to consult the original sources. A caution: one ofthe most important
things to keep in mind when reading the contributions to a philosophical debate is that what often
appears to be an attempt to refute some proposition (such as "computers understand English") is
actually an attempt to refute a particularjustification for the proposition, or an attempt to show
that the proposition is merely possible rather than logically necessary. Thus, many of the debates
are not what they may seem at first, but there is still plenty to argue about.

 
