 

Section 15.3. Inference in Belief Networks 447
In both of these problems, the reasoning is diagnostic. But belief networks are not limited
to diagnostic reasoning and in fact can make four distinct kinds of inference:
RRSNOSES, 0 Diagnostic inferences (from effects to causes).
Given that JohnCalls, infer that P(Burglary|JohnCalls)= 0.016.
GSEs 0 Causal inferences (from causes to effects).
Given Burglary, P(JohnCalls|Burglary)= 0.86 and P(MaryCalls|Burglary= 0.67.
INFERENCES > Intercausal inferences (between causes of a common effect).

EXPLAINING AWAY
MINED INFERENCES

SENSITVITY
ANALYSS

SINGLY CONNECTED

 

Given Alarm, we have P(Burglary|Alarm) = 0.376. But if we add the evidence that

Earthquake is true, then P(Burglary|AlarmA Earthquake) goes down to 0.003. Even

though burglaries and earthquakes are independent, the presence of one makes the other

less likely. This pattern of reasoning is also known as explaining away.*

0 Mixed inferences (combining two or more of the above).
Setting the effect JohnCalls to true and the cause Earthquake to false gives
P(AlarmVohnCalls A >Earthquake) = 0.03
This is a simultaneous use of diagnostic and causal inference. Also,
P(Burglary|JohnCallsA. >Earthquake) - 0.017

This is a combination of intercausal and diagnostic inference
These four patterns are depicted in Figure 15.6. Besides calculating the beliefin query variables
given definite values for evidence variables, belief networks can also be used for the following:
Making decisions based on probabilities in the network and on the agent's utilities.
Deciding which additional evidence variables should be observed in order to gain useful
information.
Performing sensitivity analysis to understand which aspects ofthe model have the greatest
impact on the probabilities of the query variables (and therefore must be accurate).
Explaining the results of probabilistic inference to the user.
These tasks are discussed further in Chapter 16. In this chapter, we focus on computing posterior
probabilities of query variables. In Chapter 18, we show how belief networks can be learned
from example cases.

An algorithm for answering queries

In this section, we will derive an algorithm for BELIEF-NET-ASK. This is a rather technical
section, and some of the mathematics and notation are unavoidably intricate. The algorithm itself,
however, is very simple. Our version will work rather like the backward-chaining algorithm in
Chapter 9, in that it begins at the query variable and chains along the paths from that node until
it reaches evidence nodes. Because of the complications that may arise when two different paths
converge on the same node, we will derive an algorithm that works only on singly connected

3 To get this effect, we do not have to know that Earthquake is true, we just need some evidence for it. When one of the
authors first moved to Califomia, he lived in a rickety house that shook when large trucks went by. After one particularly
large shake, he tumed on the radio, heard the Carole King song / Feel the Earth Move, and considered this strong evidence
that a large truck had not gone by.
