Section 22.6.

Augmenting a Grammar 669

 

AUGMENT

are minimal in English compared to most languages; all verbs except "be" have only two forms.
One form (e.g. "smells") goes with third person singular subjects such as "he" or "the wumpus.”
The other form (e.g., "smell") goes with all other subjects, such as "I" or "you" or “wumpuscs.”

Now we are ready to fix our grammar. We will consider noun cases first. The problem is
that with the distinctions we have,made so far (i.e., the nonterminals we have defined), English
is not context-free. It is not the case that any NP can combine with a VP to form a sentence, for
example, the NP'T' can, but "me" cannot. Ifwe want to stick with a context-free grammar we will
have to introduce new categories such as NPsand NPo, to stand for noun phrases in the subjective
and objective case, respectively. We would also need to split the category Pronoun into the two
categories Pronouns (which includes "I") and Pronoung (which includes "me"). The necessary
changes to the grammar are outlined in Figure 22.9. Notice that all the NP mules are duplicated,

 

S — NPs VP |
NPs — Pronouns \ Noun \ Article Noun
NPo — Pronouno \ Noun \ Article Noun
VP — VPNPo| ...
PP — Preposition NPo
Pronouns — I\ you \ he\ she|...
Pronouno — me \ you \ him \ her| ...

 

 

Figure 22.9 The changes needed in & to handle subjective and objective cases.

 

 

 

once for NPs and once for NPo. It would not be too bad if the number of rules doubled once,
but it would double again when we changed the grammar to account for subject/verb agreement,
and again for the next distinction. Thus, the size of the grammar can grow exponentially with the
number of distinctions we need to make.

An alternative approach is to augment the existing rules of the grammar instead of intro-
ducing new ules. The result is a concise, compact grammar. We start by parameterizing the
categories NP and Pronoun so that they take a parameter indicating their case. In the rule for 5,
the NP must be in the subjective case, whereas in the rules for VP and PP, the NP must be in
the objective case. The rule for NP takes a variable as its argument. This use of a variable—
avoiding a decision where the distinction is not important—is what keeps the size of the rule set
manageable. Figure 22.10 shows the augmented grammar, which defines a language we call £).

The problem of subject/verb agreement could also be handled with augmentations, but we
delay showing this until the next chapter. Instead, we address a slightly harder problem: verb
subcategorization.

 

Verb Subcategorization

The £; language is an improvement over £p, but it still allows ungrammatical sentences. One
problem is in the way verb phrases are put together. We want to accept verb phrases like "give
me the gold" and "go to 1,2." All these are in £,, but unfortunately so are "go me the gold"
