424

Chapter 14. Uncertainty

 

 

The key to de Finetti's argument is the connection between degree of belief and actions.
The idea is that if an agent has some degree of belief in a proposition, 4, then the agent should
be able to state odds at which it is indifferent to a bet for or against 4. Think of it as a game
between two agents: Agent 1 states "my degree of belief in event A is 0.4." Agent 2 is then free
to choose whether to bet for or against 4, at stakes that are consistent with the stated degree of
belief. That is, Agent 2 could choose to bet that A will occur, betting $4 against Agent 1’s $6.
Or Agent 2 could bet $6 against $4 that 4 will not occur.® If an agent's degrees of belief do not
accurately reflect the world, then you would expect it would tend to lose money over the long
tun, depending on the skill of the opposing agent.

But de Finetti proved something much stronger: ifAgent I expresses a set ofdegrees of
belief that violate the axioms of probability theory then there is a betting strategy for Agent 2 that
guarantees that Agent I will lose money. So ifyou accept the idea that an agent should be willing
to "put its money where its probabilities are," then you should accept that it is irrational to have
beliefs that violate the axioms of probability.

One might think that this betting game is rather contrived. For example, what ifone refuses
to bet? Does that scupper the whole argument? The answer is that the betting game is an abstract
model for the decision-making situation in which every agent is unavoidably involved at every
moment. Every action (including inaction) is a kind of bet, and every outcome can be seen as a
payoff of the bet. One can no more refuse to bet than one can refuse to allow time to pass.

We will not provide the proof of de Finetti's theorem (see Exercise 14.15), but we will
show an example. Suppose that Agent 1 has the set of degrees of belief from Equation (14.2). If
Agent 2 chooses to bet $4 on 4, $3 on B, and $2 on —(A V B), then Figure 14.3 shows that Agent
1 always loses money, regardless of the outcomes for A and B.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agent 1 Agent 2 Outcome for Agent 1
Proposition Belief Bet Stakes AAB AA-B -AAS) --AA7B
A 04 A 4to6 -6 6 4 4
B 0.3 B 3to7 7 3 7 3

AVB 08 “(AVB) 2 to8 2 2 2 8

-ll -1 -l -1
Figure 143 Because Agent 1 has inconsistent beliefs, Agent 2 is able to devise a set of bets
that guarantees a loss for Agent 1, no matter what the outcome of A and B.

 

 

 

Other strong philosophical arguments have been put forward for the use of probabilities,
most notably those of Cox (1946) and Carnap (1950). The world being the way it is, however,
practical demonstrations sometimes speak louder than proofs. The success ofreasoning systems
based on probability theory has been much more effective in making converts. We now look at
how the axioms can be deployed to make inferences.

6 One might argue that the agent's preferences for different bank balances are such that the possibility of losing $1 is
not counterbalanced by an equal possibility of winning $1, We can make the bet amounts small enough to avoid this
problem, or we can use the more sophisticated treatment due to Savage (1954) to circurnventthis issue altogether.

 
