716

Chapter 23. Practical Natural Language Processing

 

where KB is the hearer's knowledge base, and KB’ is the hearer's knowledge base after incorpo-
rating the text. The difference between KB and KB’ is the hearer’s understanding of the text. At
least six types of knowledge come into play in arriving at an understanding:
1. General knowledge about the world.

General knowledge about the structure of coherent discourse.
. General knowledge about syntax and semantics.

Specific knowledge about the situation being discussed.
5. Specific knowledge about the beliefs of the characters.
6. Specific knowledge about the beliefs of the speaker.

Let us look at an example discourse:

wn

John went to a fancy restaurant.
He was pleased and gave the waiter a big tip.
He spent $50.

A proper understanding of this discourse would include the fact that John ate a fancy meal at the
restaurant, that the waiter was employed by the restaurant, and that John paid some ofthe $50 to
the waiter and most of it to the restaurant. We'll call this understanding (a). All the inferences
seem obvious, but to get them right we need to know a lot and apply the knowledge in just the
right way. To understand why this is hard, we give an alternative understanding (b):

John ducked into a fancy restaurant to ask directions. He was pleased that they were
able to help him. Back on the street, John bumped into a man that he had met at
a party the other night. All John could remember was that the man was a waiter at
another restaurant and that he was interested in getting a new radio. John gave the
man a tip that there was a great sale going on at the stereo store down the block. The
man spent $50 on a radio.

This is a situation that could conceivably be described by our three-sentence discourse. It is
far-fetched for two reasons: First, the situation in (a) has a higher a priori probability—people
go to restaurants to eat more often than to ask for directions. Second, the situation in (a) is more
probable given the text. A rational speaker would not expect a hearer to extract understanding
(b) from the discourse. To see why (a) is better, let us look at it piece by piece:

+ John ate a fancy meal at the restaurant.

To get this requires going beyond disambiguation and into incorporation. There is certainly
no part of the discourse that mentions the eating explicitly, but it still should be part of
the updated knowledge base that the hearer comes away with. To get it, the hearer has to
know that restaurants serve meals, and thus that a reason for going to a restaurant is to eat.
The hearer also knows that fancy restaurants serve fancy meals, and that $50 is a typical
price for such a meal, and that paying and leaving a tip are typically done after eating a
restaurant meal. Besides this general knowledge about the world, it also helps if the hearer
knows that discourses are commonly structured so that they describe some steps ofa plan
for a character, but leave out steps that can be easily inferred from the other steps. From
this, the hearer can infer from the first sentence that John has adopted the eat-at-restaurant
plan, and that the eat-meal step probably occurred even if it was not mentioned.

 
