24.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties 677

24,5-2

Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight function
w : E — R and source vertex s such that G satisfies the following property: For
every edge (u,v) € E, there is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s that contains (u,v)
and another shortest-paths tree rooted at s that does not contain (u,v).

24,5-3
Embellish the proof of Lemma 24.10 to handle cases in which shortest-path
weights are 00 or —00.

245-4
Let G = (VE) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s, and let G
be initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, 5). Prove that if a sequence of
relaxation steps sets s.7 to a non-NIL value, then G contains a negative-weight
cycle.

245-5

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight edges. Let
s € V be the source vertex, and suppose that we allow v. 7 to be the predecessor
of v on any shortest path to v from source s if v € V — {s} is reachable from s,
and NIL otherwise. Give an example of such a graph G and an assignment of
values that produces a cycle in G,. (By Lemma 24.16, such an assignment cannot
be produced by a sequence of relaxation steps.)

245-6

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E > R
and no negative-weight cycles. Lets € V be the source vertex, and let G be initial-
ized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, 5). Prove that for every vertex v € V,,
there exists a path from s to v in G, and that this property is maintained as an
invariant over any sequence of relaxations.

24,5-7

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph that contains no negative-weight
cycles. Let s € V be the source vertex, and let G be initialized by INITIALIZE-
SINGLE-SOURCE(G, 5). Prove that there exists a sequence of |V| — 1 relaxation
steps that produces v.d = 6(s,v) forall vy € V.

245-8

Let G be an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight cycle reach-
able from the source vertex s. Show how to construct an infinite sequence of relax-
ations of the edges of G such that every relaxation causes a shortest-path estimate
to change.
