33.3 Finding the convex hull 1031

and it eventually pops from the stack each point that is not a vertex of CH(Q).
When the algorithm terminates, stack S contains exactly the vertices of CH(Q), in
counterclockwise order of their appearance on the boundary.

The procedure GRAHAM-SCAN takes as input a set Q of points, where |Q| > 3.
It calls the functions Top(S), which returns the point on top of stack S without
changing S, and NExT-To-Top(S), which returns the point one entry below the
top of stack S without changing S. As we shall prove in a moment, the stack S
returned by GRAHAM-SCAN contains, from bottom to top, exactly the vertices
of CH(Q) in counterclockwise order.

GRAHAM-SCAN(Q)

1 let po be the point in Q with the minimum y-coordinate,
or the leftmost such point in case of a tie

2 let (pi. pr.---. Pm) be the remaining points in Q,
sorted by polar angle in counterclockwise order around po
(if more than one point has the same angle, remove all but
the one that is farthest from po)

3 let S be an empty stack

4  PusH(po. S)

5 PusH(pi, S)

6 PUSH(p2, S)

7 fori =3tom

8 while the angle formed by points NExT-To-Top(S), Top(S),

and p; makes a nonleft turn

9 Pop(S)
10 PusH(p;, S)

11 return S

Figure 33.7 illustrates the progress of GRAHAM-SCAN. Line | chooses point po
as the point with the lowest y-coordinate, picking the leftmost such point in case
of a tie. Since there is no point in Q that is below po and any other points with
the same y-coordinate are to its right, po must be a vertex of CH(Q). Line 2
sorts the remaining points of Q by polar angle relative to po, using the same
method —comparing cross products—as in Exercise 33.1-3. If two or more points
have the same polar angle relative to po, all but the farthest such point are convex
combinations of po and the farthest point, and so we remove them entirely from
consideration. We let m denote the number of points other than po that remain.
The polar angle, measured in radians, of each point in Q relative to po is in the
half-open interval [0, 77). Since the points are sorted according to polar angles,
they are sorted in counterclockwise order relative to po. We designate this sorted
sequence of points by (p;. P2..--. Pm). Note that points p; and p,, are vertices
