33.3 Finding the convex hull 1035

Pi Pk

Pi

Pr

Pi Pi

Po Po
(a) (b)

Figure 33.8 The proof of correctness of GRAHAM-SCAN. (a) Because pj's polar angle relative
to po is greater than p;’s polar angle, and because the angle Z px pj pj makes a left tun, adding p;
to CH(Q)) gives exactly the vertices of CH(Q; U {p;}). (b) If the angle Zp, p; pi makes a nonleft
turn, then p; is either in the interior of the triangle formed by po, pr, and pj or on a side of the
triangle, which means that it cannot be a vertex of CH(Q;).

vertices forms its own convex hull. Moreover, they appear in counterclockwise
order from bottom to top.

Maintenance: Entering an iteration of the for loop, the top point on stack S
is pj-1, which was pushed at the end of the previous iteration (or before the
first iteration, when i = 3). Let p; be the top point on S after executing the
while loop of lines 8-9 but before line 10 pushes p;, and let px be the point
just below p; on S. At the moment that p; is the top point on S and we have
not yet pushed p;, stack S contains exactly the same points it contained after
iteration j of the for loop. By the loop invariant, therefore, S contains exactly
the vertices of CH(Q;) at that moment, and they appear in counterclockwise
order from bottom to top.

Let us continue to focus on this moment just before pushing pj. We know
that p;’s polar angle relative to po is greater than p;’s polar angle and that
the angle Zp, p;p; makes a left turn (otherwise we would have popped p;).
Therefore, because S contains exactly the vertices of CH(Q )), We see from
Figure 33.8(a) that once we push p;, stack S will contain exactly the vertices
of CH(Q; U {p;}), still in counterclockwise order from bottom to top.

We now show that CH(Q ;U{ p;}) is the same set of points as CH(Q;). Consider
any point p, that was popped during iteration i of the for loop, and let p, be
the point just below p; on stack S at the time p; was popped (p, might be p;).
The angle Zp, p; p; makes a nonleft turn, and the polar angle of p; relative
to po is greater than the polar angle of p,. As Figure 33.8(b) shows, p; must
