1020

Chapter 33 Computational Geometry

Other applications of cross products

Later sections of this chapter introduce additional uses for cross products. In Sec-
tion 33.3, we shall need to sort a set of points according to their polar angles with
respect to a given origin. As Exercise 33.1-3 asks you to show, we can use cross
products to perform the comparisons in the sorting procedure. In Section 33.2, we
shall use red-black trees to maintain the vertical ordering of a set of line segments.
Rather than keeping explicit key values which we compare to each other in the
red-black tree code, we shall compute a cross-product to determine which of two
segments that intersect a given vertical line is above the other.

Exercises

33.1-1

Prove that if p; x pz is positive, then vector p; is clockwise from vector p2 with
respect to the origin (0,0) and that if this cross product is negative, then p; is
counterclockwise from p2.

33.1-2
Professor van Pelt proposes that only the x-dimension needs to be tested in line 1
of ON-SEGMENT. Show why the professor is wrong.

33.1-3

The polar angle of a point p; with respect to an origin point Pp is the angle of the
vector P; — Po in the usual polar coordinate system. For example, the polar angle
of (3,5) with respect to (2, 4) is the angle of the vector (1, 1), which is 45 degrees
or 7/4 radians. The polar angle of (3, 3) with respect to (2, 4) is the angle of the
vector (1,—1), which is 315 degrees or 7/4 radians. Write pseudocode to sort a
sequence (P1, P2..... Pn) of n points according to their polar angles with respect
toa given origin point po. Your procedure should take O(n lg 1) time and use cross
products to compare angles.

 

33.14
Show how to determine in O(n? 1gn) time whether any three points in a set of n
points are colinear.

33.1-5

A polygon is a piecewise-linear, closed curve in the plane. That is, it is a curve
ending on itself that is formed by a sequence of straight-line segments, called the
sides of the polygon. A point joining two consecutive sides is a vertex of the poly-
gon. If the polygon is simple, as we shall generally assume, it does not cross itself.
The set of points in the plane enclosed by a simple polygon forms the interior of
