124 carrer AVE Basic Computer Organization and Design

instruction code

operation code

operands, and the sequence by which processing has to occur. The data-
processing task may be altered by specifying a new program with different
instructions or specifying the same instructions with different data,

‘A computer instruction is a binary code that specifies a sequence of
microoperations for the computer. Instruction codes together with data are
stored in memory. The computer reads each instruction from memory and
places it in a control register. The control then interprets the binary code of the
instruction and proceeds to execute it by issuing a sequence of microopera-
tions. Every computer has its own unique instruction set. The ability to store
and execute instructions, the stored program concept, is the most important
property of a general-purpose computer.

‘An instruction code is a group of bits that instruct the computer to
perform a specific operation. It is usually divided into parts, each having its
own particular interpretation. The most basic part of an instruction code is its
operation part. The operation code of an instruction is a group of bits that
define such operations as add, subtract, multiply, shift, and complement. The
number of bits required for the operation code of an instruction depends on
the total number of operations available in the computer. The operation code
must consist of at least m bits for a given 2" (or less) distinct operations. As an
illustration, consider a computer with 64 distinct operations, one of them being
an ADD operation. The operation code consists of six bits, with a bit configu-
ration 110010 assigned to the ADD operation. When this operation code is
decoded in the control unit, the computer issues control signals to read an
operand from memory and add the operand to a processor register.

‘At this point we must recognize the relationship between a computer
operation and a microoperation. An operation is part of an instruction stored
in computer memory. It is a binary code that tells the computer to perform a
specific operation The control unit receives the instruction from memory and
interprets the operation code bits. It then issues a sequence of control signals
to initiate microoperations in internal computer registers. For every operation
code, the control issues a sequence of microoperations needed for the hard-
ware implementation of the specified operation. For this reason, an operation
code is sometimes called a macrooperation because it specifies a set of micro-
operations.

The operation part of an instruction code specifies the operation to be
performed. This operation must be performed on some data stored in proces-
sor registers or in memory. An instruction code must therefore specify not only
the operation but also the registers or the memory words where the operands
are to be found, as well as the register or memory word where the result is to
be stored Memory words can be specified in instruction codes by their ad-
dress. Processor registers can be specified by assigning to the instruction
another binary code of k bits that specifies one of 2 registers. There are many
variations for arranging thebinary code of instructions, and each computer has
its own particular instruction code format. Instruction code formats are con-
