1034

Chapter 33 Computational Geometry

of CH(Q) (see Exercise 33.3-1). Figure 33.7(a) shows the points of Figure 33.6
sequentially numbered in order of increasing polar angle relative to po.

The remainder of the procedure uses the stack S. Lines 3-6 initialize the stack
to contain, from bottom to top, the first three points po, pi, and p2. Figure 33.7(a)
shows the initial stack S. The for loop of lines 7-10 iterates once for each point
in the subsequence (p3. P4..... Pm). We shall see that after processing point p;,
stack S contains, from bottom to top, the vertices of CH({po, P1.---. Pi}) in coun-
terclockwise order. The while loop of lines 8-9 removes points from the stack if
we find them not to be vertices of the convex hull. When we traverse the convex
hull counterclockwise, we should make a left turn at each vertex. Thus, each time
the while loop finds a vertex at which we make a nonleft turn, we pop the vertex
from the stack. (By checking for a nonleft turn, rather than just a right turn, this
test precludes the possibility of a straight angle at a vertex of the resulting convex
hull. We want no straight angles, since no vertex of a convex polygon may be a
convex combination of other vertices of the polygon.) After we pop all vertices
that have nonleft turns when heading toward point pj, we push p; onto the stack.
Figures 33.7(b)-(k) show the state of the stack S after each iteration of the for
loop. Finally, GRAHAM-SCAN returns the stack S in line 11. Figure 33.7(1) shows
the corresponding convex hull.

The following theorem formally proves the correctness of GRAHAM-SCAN.

Theorem 33.1 (Correctness of Graham’s scan)

If GRAHAM-SCAN executes on a set Q of points, where |Q| > 3, then at termina-
tion, the stack S consists of, from bottom to top, exactly the vertices of CH(Q) in
counterclockwise order.

Proof After line 2, we have the sequence of points (p;, P2..... Pm). Let us
define, fori = 2,3,..., m, the subset of points O; = {po.Pi..... Di}. The
points in QO — Q,,, are those that were removed because they had the same polar
angle relative to Po as some point in Q,,; these points are not in CH(Q), and
so CH(Q,,) = CH(Q). Thus, it suffices to show that when GRAHAM-SCAN
terminates, the stack S consists of the vertices of CH(Q,,) in counterclockwise
order, when listed from bottom to top. Note that just as po, Pi, and p,, are vertices
of CH(Q), the points po, p1, and p; are all vertices of CH(Q;).
The proof uses the following loop invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 7-10, stack S consists of,
from bottom to top, exactly the vertices of CH(Q;_;) in counterclockwise
order.

Initialization: The invariant holds the first time we execute line 7, since at that
time, stack S consists of exactly the vertices of Q2 = Qj-1, and this set of three
