1038

Chapter 33 Computational Geometry

with respect to p;, and so on. When we reach the highest vertex, say px (breaking
ties by choosing the farthest such vertex), we have constructed, as Figure 33.9
shows, the right chain of CH(Q). To construct the left chain, we start at px and
choose px+1 as the point with the smallest polar angle with respect to px, but from
the negative x-axis. We continue on, forming the left chain by taking polar angles
from the negative x-axis, until we come back to our original vertex po.

We could implement Jarvis’s march in one conceptual sweep around the convex
hull, that is, without separately constructing the right and left chains. Such imple-
mentations typically keep track of the angle of the last convex-hull side chosen and
require the sequence of angles of hull sides to be strictly increasing (in the range
of 0 to 27 radians). The advantage of constructing separate chains is that we need
not explicitly compute angles; the techniques of Section 33.1 suffice to compare
angles.

If implemented properly, Jarvis’s march has a running time of O(n/). For each
of the h vertices of CH(Q), we find the vertex with the minimum polar angle. Each
comparison between polar angles takes O(1) time, using the techniques of Sec-
tion 33.1. As Section 9.1 shows, we can compute the minimum of 7 values in O(n)
time if each comparison takes O(1) time. Thus, Jarvis’s march takes O(/) time.

 

Exercises

33.3-1
Prove that in the procedure GRAHAM-SCAN, points p; and p,, must be vertices
of CH(Q).

33.3-2

Consider a model of computation that supports addition, comparison, and multipli-
cation and for which there is a lower bound of Q(n lg) to sort n numbers. Prove
that Q(n1gn) is a lower bound for computing, in order, the vertices of the convex
hull of a set of n points in such a model.

33.3-3
Given a set of points Q, prove that the pair of points farthest from each other must
be vertices of CH(Q).

333-4

For a given polygon P and a point g on its boundary, the shadow of q is the set
of points r such that the segment 97 is entirely on the boundary or in the interior
of P. As Figure 33.10 illustrates, a polygon P is star-shaped if there exists a
point p in the interior of P that is in the shadow of every point on the boundary
of P. The set of all such points p is called the kernel of P. Given an n-vertex,
