33.2 Determining whether any pair of segments intersects 1021

the polygon, the set of points on the polygon itself forms its boundary, and the set
of points surrounding the polygon forms its exterior. A simple polygon is convex
if, given any two points on its boundary or in its interior, all points on the line
segment drawn between them are contained in the polygon’s boundary or interior.
A vertex of a convex polygon cannot be expressed as a convex combination of any
two distinct points on the boundary or in the interior of the polygon.

Professor Amundsen proposes the following method to determine whether a se-
quence (po. P1..... Pn—1) of n points forms the consecutive vertices of a convex
polygon. Output “yes” if the set {Zp; Pi+1Pi42 11 = 0.1,....n — 1}, where sub-
script addition is performed modulo 7, does not contain both left turns and right
turns; otherwise, output “no.” Show that although this method runs in linear time,
it does not always produce the correct answer. Modify the professor’s method so
that it always produces the correct answer in linear time.

33.1-6

Given a point py = (Xo. Vo), the right horizontal ray from po is the set of points
{pi = (Xj. Yi) 1 X; = Xo and y; = yo}, that is, it is the set of points due right of po
along with po itself. Show how to determine whether a given right horizontal ray
from po intersects a line segment DP; P> in O(1) time by reducing the problem to
that of determining whether two line segments intersect.

33.1-7

One way to determine whether a point po is in the interior of a simple, but not
necessarily convex, polygon P is to look at any ray from po and check that the ray
intersects the boundary of P an odd number of times but that po itself is not on
the boundary of P. Show how to compute in ©() time whether a point po is in
the interior of an n-vertex polygon P . (Hint: Use Exercise 33.1-6. Make sure your
algorithm is correct when the ray intersects the polygon boundary at a vertex and
when the ray overlaps a side of the polygon.)

33.1-8
Show how to compute the area of an n-vertex simple, but not necessarily convex,
polygon in @(n) time. (See Exercise 33.1-5 for definitions pertaining to polygons.)

 

33.2. Determining whether any pair of segments intersects

This section presents an algorithm for determining whether any two line segments
in a set of segments intersect. The algorithm uses a technique known as “‘sweep-
ing,” which is common to many computational-geometry algorithms. Moreover, as
