1046

Chapter 33 Computational Geometry

b. Give an O(n? Ig n)-time algorithm to pair Ghostbusters with ghosts in such a
way that no streams cross.

33-4 Picking up sticks

Professor Charon has a set of 1 sticks, which are piled up in some configuration.
Each stick is specified by its endpoints, and each endpoint is an ordered triple
giving its (x, y,Z) coordinates. No stick is vertical. He wishes to pick up all the
sticks, one at a time, subject to the condition that he may pick up a stick only if
there is no other stick on top of it.

a. Give a procedure that takes two sticks a and b and reports whether a is above,
below, or unrelated to b.

b. Describe an efficient algorithm that determines whether it is possible to pick up
all the sticks, and if so, provides a legal order in which to pick them up.

33-5 Sparse-hulled distributions

Consider the problem of computing the convex hull of a set of points in the plane
that have been drawn according to some known random distribution. Sometimes,
the number of points, or size, of the convex hull of n points drawn from such a
distribution has expectation O(n'*) for some constant € > 0. We call such a
distribution sparse-hulled. Sparse-hulled distributions include the following:

* Points drawn uniformly from a unit-radius disk. The convex hull has expected
size @(n"/3),

* Points drawn uniformly from the interior of a convex polygon with k sides, for
any constant k. The convex hull has expected size O(Ig 77).

* Points drawn according to a two-dimensional normal distribution. The convex
hull has expected size O(,/Ig7).

a. Given two convex polygons with n, and n vertices respectively, show how to
compute the convex hull of all 7; +/2 points in O(n, +72) time. (The polygons
may overlap.)

b. Show how to compute the convex hull of a set of 7 points drawn independently
according to a sparse-hulled distribution in O(n) average-case time. (Hint:
Recursively find the convex hulls of the first 1/2 points and the second n/2
points, and then combine the results.)
