156 CHAPTER FVE Basic Computer Organization and Design

modified fetch phase

read from memory during the fetch phase, control goes to the indirect phase
(because! = 1) toread the effective address. The effective addressisin location
Oand is the return address that was stored there during the previous interrupt
cycle. The execution of the indirect BUN instruction results in placing into PC
the retum address from location 0.

Interrupt Cycle

We are now ready to list the register transfer statements for theinterrupt cycle.
The interrupt cycle is initiated after the last execute phase if the interrupt
flip-flop R is equal to 1. This flip-flop is set to 1 if IEN = 1 and either FGI or
FGO are equal to 1. This can happen with any clock transition except when
timing signals T., T,, or T, are active. The condition for setting flip-flop R to
1 can be expressed with the following register transfer statement:

TsTWTAUEN)(FGI + FGO): R<-1

The symbol + between FGI and FGOin the control function designates a logic
OR operation. This is ANDed with JEN and T;IjT3.

We now modify the fetch and decode phases of the instruction cycle.
Instead of using only timing signals To, T;, and T; (as shown in Fig. 5-9) we
will AND the three timing signals with R’ so that the fetch and decode phases
will be recognized from the three control functions R’To, R’T;, and R’T;. The
reason for this is that after the instruction is executed and SC is cleared to 0,
the control will go through a fetch phase only if R = 0. Otherwise, if R = 1,
the control will go through an interrupt cycle. The interrupt cycle stores the
return address (available in PC) into memory location 0, branches to memory
location 1, and clears JEN, R, and SC to 0. This can be done with the following
sequence of microoperations:

RTg AR<—0, TR<—PC
RT; MI[ARJ—TR, PC<0
RT; PC<PC +1, IEN<0, R<0, SC<—O

During the first timing signal AR is cleared to 0, and the content of PC is
transferred to the temporary register TR. With the second timing signal, the
return address is stored in memory at location 0 and PC is cleared to 0. The
third timing signal increments PC to 1, clears IEN and R, and control goes back
to Ty by clearing SC to 0. The beginning of the next instruction cycle has the
condition R’Ty and the content of PC is equal to 1 The control then goes
through an instruction cycle that fetches and executes the BUN instruction in
location 1.
