968

Chapter 31 Number-Theoretic Algorithms

As we shall see, a little more cleverness, and some randomization, will yield a
primality-testing routine that works well on all inputs.

Unfortunately, we cannot entirely eliminate all the errors by simply checking
equation (31.40) for a second base number, say a = 3, because there exist com-
posite integers n, known as Carmichael numbers, that satisfy equation (31.40) for
alla € Z*. (We note that equation (31.40) does fail when ged(a,n) > 1—that
is, when a ¢ Z*—but hoping to demonstrate that 1 is composite by finding such
an a can be difficult ifm has only large prime factors.) The first three Carmichael
numbers are 561, 1105, and 1729. Carmichael numbers are extremely rare; there
are, for example, only 255 of them less than 100,000,000. Exercise 31.8-2 helps
explain why they are so rare.

We next show how to improve our primality test so that it won’t be fooled by
Carmichael numbers.

The Miller-Rabin randomized primality test

The Miller-Rabin primality test overcomes the problems of the simple test PSEU-
DOPRIME with two modifications:

* It tries several randomly chosen base values a instead of just one base value.

* While computing each modular exponentiation, it looks for a nontrivial square
root of 1, modulo n, during the final set of squarings. If it finds one, it stops
and returns COMPOSITE. Corollary 31.35 from Section 31.6 justifies detecting
composites in this manner.

The pseudocode for the Miller-Rabin primality test follows. The input 1 > 2 is
the odd number to be tested for primality, and s is the number of randomly cho-
sen base values from Z;* to be tried. The code uses the random-number generator
RANDOM described on page 117: RANDOM(1,” — 1) retums a randomly chosen
integer a satisfying | <a <n—1. The code uses an auxiliary procedure WITNESS
such that WITNESS (a, 7) is TRUE if and only if a is a “witness” to the composite-
ness of n —that is, if it is possible using a@ to prove (in a manner that we shall see)
that 1 is composite. The test WITNESS (a, 72) is an extension of, but more effective
than, the test

a" £1 (mod n)

that formed the basis (using @ = 2) for PSEUDOPRIME. We first present and
justify the construction of WITNESS, and then we shall show how we use it in the
Miller-Rabin primality test. Let —1 = 2'w where t > 1 and uw is odd; ie.,
the binary representation of 1 — | is the binary representation of the odd integer u
followed by exactly t zeros. Therefore, a"~! = (a“)”" (mod 7), so that we can
