160 — crarten rive Basic Computer Organization and Design

control unit

are similar to integrated circuit type 74163. The flip-flops can be either of the
Dork type, as described in Sec. 1-6, The two decoders are standard compo-
nents similar to the ones presented in Sec. 2-2. The common bus system can
be constructed with sixteen 8 x 1 multiplexers in a configuration similar to the
‘one shown in Fig. 4-3. We are now going to show how to design the control
logic gates. The next section deals with the design of the adder and logiccircuit
associated with AC.

Control Logic Gates

The block diagram of the control logic gates is shown in Fig. 5-6. The inputs

to this circuit come from the two decoders, the I flip-flop, and bits 0 through

U1 of IR. The other inputs to the control logicare: AC bits 0 through 15 tocheck
Oand to detect the sign bit in AC(15); DR bits 0 through 15 to check if
0; and the values of the seven flip-flops.

“The outputs of the control logic circuit are:

 

1. Signals to control the inputs of the nine registers,
2. Signals to control the read and write inputs of memory
3. Signals to set, clear, or complement the flip-flops

4. Signals for S;, 5, and Sq to select a register for the bus
5. Signals to control the AC adder and logic circuit

The specifications for the various control signals can be obtained directly from
the list of register transfer statements in Table 5-6.

Control of Registers and Memory

The registers of the computer connected to a common bus system are shown
in Fig. 5-4. The control inputs of the registers are LD (load), INR (increment),
and CLR (clear). Suppose that we want toderive the gate structure associated
with the control inputs of AR. We scan Table5-6 to find all the statements that
change the content of AR:

RTs AR@PC
RT: AR <IR(-11)

D3ITy: AR<M[AR]
RT: ARO

DsT¢ ARCAR +1

The first three statements specify transfer of information from a register
or memory to AR. The content of the source register or memory is placed on
