section 5.8.

Summary 147

 

56 Prove that with a positive linear transformation of leaf values, the move choice remains
unchanged in a game tree with chance nodes.

5.7 Consider the following procedure for choosing moves in games with chance nodes:

* Generate a suitable number (say, 50) dice-roll sequences down to a suitable depth (say, 8).

+ With known dice rolls, the game tree becomes deterministic. For each dice-roll sequence,
solve the resulting deterministic game tree using alpha-beta.

* Use the results to estimate the value of each move and choose the best.
Will this procedure work correctly? Why (not)?

58 Let us consider the problem of search in a three-player game. (You can assume no alliances
are allowed for now.) We will call the players 0, 1, and 2 for convenience. The first change is
that the evaluation function will return a list of three values, indicating (say) the likelihood of
winning for players 0, 1, and 2, respectively.

a. Complete the following game tree by filling in the backed-up value triples for all remaining
nodes, including the root:

 

 

 

to move
eo
1 LN co)
A AL ALA
0 4129) (429) (612) (74-1) (5-1-1) (152) (77-1) (548)
Figure ยง.15 The first three ply ofa game tree with three players (0, 1, and 2).

 

 

 

b. Rewrite MINIMAX-DecisION and MINIMAX-VALUE so that they work correctly for the
three-player game.

c. Discuss the problems that might arise ifplayers could form and terminate alliances as well
as make moves "on the board." Indicate briefly how these problems might be addressed.

59 Describe and implement a general game-playing environment for an arbitrary number of
players. Remember that time is part of the environment state, as well as the board position.

5.10 Suppose we play a variant of Tic-Tac-Toe in which each player sees only his or her own
moves. If the player makes a move on a square occupied by an opponent, the board "beeps" and
the player gets another try. Would the backgammon model suffice for this game, or would we
need something more sophisticated? Why?

 
