142

Chapter 5. Game Playing

 

(Morrison and Morrison, 1961). He believed that ifhis most ambitious design for a mechanical
digital computer, the Analytical Engine, were ever completed, it could be programmed to play
checkers and chess. He also designed, but did not build, a special-purpose machine for playing
Tic-Tac-Toe. Ernst Zermelo, the designer of modern axiomatic set theory, later speculated on
the rather quixotic possibility of searching the entire game tree for chess in order to determine
a perfect strategy (Zermelo, 1976). The first functioning (and nonfraudulent) game-playing
machine was designed and built around 1890by the Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres y Quevedo.
It specialized in the “KRK” chess endgame (king and rook vs. king), playing the side with the
king and rook against a human opponent attempting to defend with the lone king. Its play was
correct and it was capable of forcing mate from any starting position (with the machine moving
first). The “Nimotron” (Condon ef al., 1940) demonstrated perfect play for the very simple
game of Nim. Significantly, a completely optimal strategy for Nim and an adequate strategy for
the KRK chess endgame (i.e, one which will always win when given the first move, although
not necessarily in the minimal number of moves) are both simple enough to be memorized and
executed algorithmically by humans.

Torres y Quevedo's achievement, and even Babbage's and Zermelo's speculations, re-
mained relatively isolated until the mid-1940s—the era when programmable electronic digital
computers were first being developed. The comprehensive theoretical analysis of game strategy
in Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (Von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1944) placed
emphasis on minimaxing (without any depth cutoff) as a way to define mathematically the
game-theoretic value of a position in a game. Konrad Zuse (1945), the first person to design
a programmable computer, developed ideas as to how mechanical chess play might be accom-
plished. Adriaan de Groot (1946) carried out in-depth psychological analysis of human chess
strategy, which was useful to designers of computer chess programs. Norbert Wiener's (1948)
book Cybernetics included a brief sketch of the functioning ofa possible computer chess-playing
program, including the idea of using minimax search with a depth cutoff and an evaluation func-
tion to select a move. Claude Shannon (1950) wrote a highly influential article that laid out the
basic principles underlying modem computer game-playing programs, although the article did
not actually include a program of his own. Shannon described minimaxing with a depth cutoff
and evaluation function more clearly and in more detail than had Wiener, and introduced the
notion of quiescence ofa position. Shannon also described the possibility of using nonexhaustive
("type B”) as opposed to exhaustive ("type A") minimaxing. Slater (1950) and the commentators
on his article in the same volume also explored the possibilities for computer chess play. In
particular, Good (1950) developed the notion of quiescence independently of Shannon.

In 1951, Alan Turing wrote the first actual computer program capable of playing a full
game of chess. (The program was published in Turing (1953).) But Turing's program never
actually ran on a computer; it was tested by hand simulation against a very weak human player,
who defeated it. Meanwhile D. G. Prinz (1952) had written, and actually run, a program that
solved chess problems, although it did not play a full game.

Checkers, rather than chess, was the first of the classic games for which a program actually
running on a computer was capable of playing out a full game. Christopher Strachey (1952) was
the first to publish such research, although Slagle (1971) mentions a checkers program written
by Arthur Samuel as early as 1947. Chinook, the checkers program that recently took over the
world title from Marion Tinsley, is described by Schaefferet al. (1992).
