Section 5.8.

Summary 141

 

in chess: it was capable of solving some chess problems requiring an 18-move combination. As
yet, however, there is no good understanding of how to combine the two kinds of algorithm into
a robust and efficient system. Such a system would be a significant achievement not just for
game-playing research, but also for AI research in general, because it would be much more likely
to apply to the problem faced by a general intelligent agent.

5.8 SUMMARY

Games are fascinating, and writing game-playing programs perhaps even more so. We might
say that game playing is to AI as Grand Prix motor racing is to the car industry: although the
specialized task and extreme competitive pressure lead one to design systems that do not look
much like your garden-variety, general-purpose intelligent system, a lot of leading-edge concepts
and engineering ideas come out of it. On the other hand, just as you would not expect a Grand
Prix racing car to perform well on a bumpy dirt road, you should not expect advances in game
playing to translate immediately into advances in less abstract domains.
The most important ideas are as follows:

A game can be defined by the initial state (how the board is set up), the operators (which
define the legal moves), a terminal test (which says when the game is over), and a utility
or payoff function (which says who won, and by how much)

In two-player games with perfect information, the minimax algorithm can determine the
best move for a player (assuming the opponent plays perfectly) by enumerating the entire
game tree.

The alpha-beta algorithm does the same calculation as minimax, but is more efficient
because it prunes away branches of the search tree that it can prove are irrelevant to the
final outcome.

Usually, it is not feasible to consider the whole game tree (even with alpha-beta), so we
need to cut off the search at some point and apply an evaluation function that gives an
estimate of the utility of a state.

Games of chance can be handled by an extension to the minimax algorithm that evaluates
chance nodes by taking the average utility of all its children nodes, weighted by the
probability ofthe child.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

The early history of mechanical game playing was maired by numerous frauds. The most
notorious of these was Baron Wolfgang von Kempelen's "Turk," exhibited in 1769, a supposed.
chess-playing automaton whose cabinet actually concealed a diminutive human chess expert
during play. The Turk is described in Harkness and Battell (1947). In 1846, Charles Babbage
appears to have contributed the first serious discussion ofthe feasibility of computer game playing
