SECTION $7 Input-Output and Interrupt 153

 

can be denoted by pB; for
to 0 when p = D,ITs = 1.

The INP instruction transfers the input information from INPR into the
eight low-order bits of AC and also clears the input flag to 0 The OUT
instruction transfers the eight least significantbits of AC into the output register
OUTR and clears the output flag to 0. The next two instructions in Table 5-5
check the status of the flags and cause a skip of the next instruction if the flag
is 1 The instruction that is skipped will normally be a branch instruction to
retum and check the flag again. The branch instruction is not skipped if the
flag is 0. Ifthe flag is 1, the branch instruction is skipped and an input or output
instruction is executed. (Examples of input and output programs are given
in Sec. 68.) The last two instructions set and clear an interrupt enable flip-
flop IEN. The purpose of JEN is explained in conjunction with the interrupt
operation.

6 though 11. The sequence counter SCiscleared

Program Interrupt

The process of communication just described is referred to as programmed
control transfer. The computer keeps checking the flag bit, and when it finds
it set, it initiates an information transfer. The difference of information flow
rate between the computer and that of the input-output device makes this type
of transfer inefficient. To see why this is inefficient, consider a computer that can
g0 through an instruction cycle in 1 us. Assume that the input-output device can
transfer information at a maximum rate of 10 characters per second. This is
equivalent to one character every 100,000 1s. Two instructions are executed when
the computer checks the flag bit and decides not to transfer the information. This
means that at the maximum rate, the computer will check the flag 50,000 times
between each transfer. The computer is wasting time while checking the flag
instead of doing some other useful processing task.

An alternative to the programmed controlled procedureis to let the external
device inform the computer when itis ready for the transfer. In the meantime the
computer can be busy with other tasks. This type of transfer uses the interrupt
facility. While the computer is running a program, it does not check the flags.
However, when a flag is set, the computer is momentarily interrupted from
proceeding with the current program and is informed of the fact that a flag has,
been set. The computer deviates momentarily from what it is doing to take care
ofthe input or output transfer. It then returns to the current program to continue
what it was doing before the interrupt.

The interrupt enable flip-flop IEN can be set and cleared with two instruc-
tions. When IEN is cleared to 0 (with the IOF instruction), the flags cannot,
interrupt the computer. When IEN is set to 1 (with the ION instruction), the
computer can be interrupted. These two instructions provide the programmer
with the capability of making a decision as to whether or not to use the
interrupt facility.
