1024

Chapter 33 Computational Geometry

solely on simple properties of the input data. In particular, each segment endpoint
is an event point. We sort the segment endpoints by increasing x-coordinate and
proceed from left to right. (If two or more endpoints are covertical, i.e., they have
the same x-coordinate, we break the tie by putting all the covertical left endpoints
before the covertical right endpoints. Within a set of covertical left endpoints, we
put those with lower y-coordinates first, and we do the same within a set of cover-
tical right endpoints.) When we encounter a segment’s left endpoint, we insert the
segment into the sweep-line status, and we delete the segment from the sweep-line
status upon encountering its right endpoint. Whenever two segments first become
consecutive in the total preorder, we check whether they intersect.

The sweep-line status is a total preorder T, for which we require the following
operations:

+ INSERT(T, 5): insert segment s into T.
+ DELETE(T,s): delete segment s from T.
+ ABOVE(T,s): return the segment immediately above segment s in T.

+ BELOW(T,5s): return the segment immediately below segment s in T.

It is possible for segments s; and s2 to be mutually above each other in the total
preorder 7; this situation can occur if s; and 52 intersect at the sweep line whose
total preorder is given by 7. In this case, the two segments may appear in either
order in T.

If the input contains n segments, we can perform each of the operations INSERT,
DELETE, ABOVE, and BELOw in O(lg7) time using red-black trees. Recall that
the red-black-tree operations in Chapter 13 involve comparing keys. We can re-
place the key comparisons by comparisons that use cross products to determine the
relative ordering of two segments (see Exercise 33.2-2).

Segment-intersection pseudocode

The following algorithm takes as input a set S of n line segments, returning the
boolean value TRUE if any pair of segments in S intersects, and FALSE otherwise.
A red-black tree maintains the total preorder T.
