flowchart for basic
computer

SECTION 5.9 Design of Basic Computer 157.

5-8 Complete Computer Description

The final flowchart of the instruction cycle, including the interrupt cycle for the
basic computer, is shown in Fig. 5-15. The interrupt flip-flop R may be set at
any time during the indirect orexecute phases. Controlreturns to timing signal
Ty after SC is cleared to 0. If R = 1, the computer goes through an interrupt
cycle. IFR = 0, the computer goes through an instruction cycle. If the instruc-
tion is one of the memory-reference instructions, the computer first checks if
there is an indirect address and then continues to execute the decoded instruc-
tion according to the flowchart of Fig, 5-11. If the instruction is one of the
register-reference instructions, it is executed with one of the microoperations
listed in Table 5-3. If it is an input-output instruction, itis executed with one of,
the microoperations listed in Table 5-5.

Instead of using a flowchart, we can describe the operation of the computer
with a list of register transfer statements. This is done by accumulating all the
control functions and microoperations in one table. The entries in the table are
taken from Figs 5-11 and 5-15, and Tables 5-3 and 5-5.

The control functions and microoperations for the entire computer are
summarized in Table 5-6, The register transfer statements in this table describe
in a concise form the internal organization of the basic computer. They also give
all the information necessary for the design of the logic circuits of the computer.
The control functions and conditional control statements listed in the table
formulate the Boolean functions for the gates in the control unit. The list of
microoperations specifies the type of control inputs needed for the registers and
memory. A register transferlanguage is useful not only for describing the internal
organization of a digital system but also for specifying the logic circuits needed
for its design.

5-9 Design of Basic Computer
The basic computer consists of the following hardware components:

1. Amemory unit with 4096 words of 16 bits each

2. Nine registers: AR, PC, DR, AC, IR, TR, OUTR, INPR, and SC

3. Seven flip-flops: I, S, E, R, IEN, FGI, and FGO

4. Two decoders: a 3 x 8 operation decoder and a 4 x 16 timing decoder
5. A 16-bit common bus

6. Control logic gates

7. Adder and logic circuit connected to the input of AC

The memory unit is a standard component that can be obtained readily
from a commercial source. The registers are of the type shown in Fig. 2-11 and
