Section 1.3.

The History of Artificial Intelligence 7

 

Princeton was home to another influential figure in Al, John McCarthy. After graduation,
McCarthy moved to Dartmouth College, which was to become the official birthplace of the
field. McCarthy convinced Minsky, Claude Shannon, and Nathaniel Rochester to help him bring
together U.S. researchers interested in automata theory, neural nets, and the study ofintelligence
They organized a two-month workshop at Dartmouth in the summer of 1956, All together there
were ten attendees, including Trenchard More from Princeton, Arthur Samuel from IBM, and
Ray Solomonoff and Oliver Selfridge from MIT.

Two researchers from Carnegie Tech,'? Alien Newell and Herbert Simon, rather stole the
show. Although the others had ideas and in some cases programs for particular applications
such as checkers, Newell and Simon already had a reasoning program, the Logic Theorist (LT),
about which Simon claimed, "We have invented a computer program capable of thinking non-
numerically, and thereby solved the venerable mind-body problem.”'* Soon after the workshop,
the program was able to prove most of the theorems in Chapter 2 of Russell and Whitehead’s
Principia Mathematica. Russell was reportedly delighted when Simon showed him that the pro-
gram had come up with a proof for one theorem that was shorter than the one in Principia. The
editors of the Journal of Symbolic Logic were less impressed; they rejected a paper coauthored.
by Newell, Simon, and Logic Theorist.

The Dartmouth workshop did not lead to any new breakthroughs, but it did introduce all
the major figures to each other. For the next 20 years, the field would be dominated by these
people and their students and colleagues at MIT, CMU, Stanford, and IBM. Perhaps the most
lasting thing to come out of the workshop was an agreement to adopt McCarthy's new name for
the field: artificial intelligence.

Early enthusiasm, great expectations (1952-1969)

The early years of AI were full of successes—in a limited way. Given the primitive computers
and programming tools of the time, and the fact that only a few years earlier computers were
seen as things that could do arithmetic and no more, it was astonishing whenever a computer did
anything remotely clever. The intellectual establishment, by and large, preferred to believe that "a
machine can never do.X” (see Chapter 26 for a long list ofX’s gathered by Turing). AI researchers
naturally responded by demonstrating one X after another. Some modern AI researchers refer to
this period as the "Look, Ma, no hands!" era.

Newell and Simon's early success was followed up with the General Problem Solver,
or GPS. Unlike Logic Theorist, this program was designed from the start to imitate human
problem-solving protocols. Within the limited class of puzzles it could handle, it turned out that
the order in which the program considered subgoals and possible actions was similar to the way
humans approached the same problems. Thus, GPS was probably the first program to embody
the "thinking humanly" approach. The combination of AI and cognitive science has continued
at CMU up to the present day.

13, Now Camegie Mellon University (CMU)

4 Newell and Simon also invented a list-processing language, TPL., to write LT. They had no compiler, and translated it
into machine code by hand. To avoid errors, they worked in parallel, calling out binary numbers to each other as they
wrote each instruction to make sure they agreed.
