1072

 

Chapter 34 NP-Completeness

 

(a) (b)

Figure 34.8 Two instances of the circuit-satisfiability problem. (a) The assignment (x1 =1,
x2 = 1, x3 =0) to the inputs of this circuit causes the output of the circuit to be 1. ‘The circuit
is therefore satisfiable. (b) No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause the output of the
circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore unsatisfiable.

A truth assignment for a boolean combinational circuit is a set of boolean input
values. We say that a one-output boolean combinational circuit is satisfiable if it
has a satisfying assignment: a truth assignment that causes the output of the circuit
to be 1. For example, the circuit in Figure 34.8(a) has the satisfying assignment
(x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0), and so it is satisfiable. As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to
show, no assignment of values to x1, X2, and x3 causes the circuit in Figure 34.8(b)
to produce a | output; it always produces 0, and so it is unsatisfiable.

The circuit-satisfiability problem is, “Given a boolean combinational circuit
composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisfiable?” In order to pose this
question formally, however, we must agree on a standard encoding for circuits.
The size of a boolean combinational circuit is the number of boolean combina-
tional elements plus the number of wires in the circuit. We could devise a graphlike
encoding that maps any given circuit C into a binary string (C) whose length is
polynomial in the size of the circuit itself. As a formal language, we can therefore
define

CIRCUIT-SAT = {(C) : C is asatisfiable boolean combinational circuit} .

The circuit-satisfiability problem arises in the area of computer-aided hardware
optimization. If a subcircuit always produces 0, that subcircuit is unnecessary;
the designer can replace it by a simpler subcircuit that omits all logic gates and
provides the constant 0 value as its output. You can see why we would like to have
a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.

Given a circuit C, we might attempt to determine whether it is satisfiable by
simply checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately, if the circuit
has k inputs, then we would have to check up to 2“ possible assignments. When
