Problems for Chapter 34 1103

34-3 Graph coloring

Mapmakers try to use as few colors as possible when coloring countries on a map,
as long as no two countries that share a border have the same color. We can model
this problem with an undirected graph G = (V, E) in which each vertex repre-
sents a country and vertices whose respective countries share a border are adjacent.
Then, a k-coloring is a function c : V — {1,2,...,k} such that c(u) A c(v) for
every edge (u,v) € E. In other words, the numbers 1,2,..., k represent the k col-
ors, and adjacent vertices must have different colors. The graph-coloring problem
is to determine the minimum number of colors needed to color a given graph.

a. Give an efficient algorithm to determine a 2-coloring of a graph, if one exists.

b. Cast the graph-coloring problem as a decision problem. Show that your deci-
sion problem is solvable in polynomial time if and only if the graph-coloring
problem is solvable in polynomial time.

c. Let the language 3-COLOR be the set of graphs that can be 3-colored. Show
that if 3-COLOR is NP-complete, then your decision problem from part (b) is
NP-complete.

To prove that 3-COLOR is NP-complete, we use a reduction from 3-CNF-SAT.
Given a formula ¢ of m clauses on n variables x), X2,...,X,, We construct a graph
G = (V,E) as follows. The set V consists of a vertex for each variable, a vertex
for the negation of each variable, 5 vertices for each clause, and 3 special vertices:
TRUE, FALSE, and RED. The edges of the graph are of two types: “literal” edges
that are independent of the clauses and “clause” edges that depend on the clauses.
The literal edges form a triangle on the special vertices and also form a triangle on
X;, 7X;, and RED fori = 1,2,..., n.

d. Argue that in any 3-coloring c of a graph containing the literal edges, exactly
one of a variable and its negation is colored c(TRUE) and the other is colored
c(FALSE). Argue that for any truth assignment for ¢, there exists a 3-coloring
of the graph containing just the literal edges.

The widget shown in Figure 34.20 helps to enforce the condition corresponding to
aclause (x V y Vv Z). Each clause requires a unique copy of the 5 vertices that are
heavily shaded in the figure; they connect as shown to the literals of the clause and
the special vertex TRUE.

e. Argue that if each of x, y, and z is colored c(TRUE) or c(FALSE), then the
widget is 3-colorable if and only if at least one of x, y, or z is colored c(TRUE).

f. Complete the proof that 3-COLOR is NP-complete.
