1102

Chapter 34 NP-Completeness

. Formulate a related decision problem for the independent-set problem, and

prove that it is NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from the clique problem.)

Suppose that you are given a “black-box” subroutine to solve the decision prob-
lem you defined in part (a). Give an algorithm to find an independent set of max-
imum size. The running time of your algorithm should be polynomial in |V|
and |£|, counting queries to the black box as a single step.

Although the independent-set decision problem is NP-complete, certain special
cases are polynomial-time solvable.

c.

Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when each ver-
tex in G has degree 2. Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm
works correctly.

|. Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when G is

bipartite. Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm works cor-
rectly. (Hint: Use the results of Section 26.3.)

34-2 Bonnie and Clyde

Bonnie and Clyde have just robbed a bank. They have a bag of money and want
to divide it up. For each of the following scenarios, either give a polynomial-time
algorithm, or prove that the problem is NP-complete. The input in each case is a
list of the n items in the bag, along with the value of each.

a. The bag contains 7 coins, but only 2 different denominations: some coins are

worth x dollars, and some are worth y dollars. Bonnie and Clyde wish to divide
the money exactly evenly.

The bag contains 7 coins, with an arbitrary number of different denominations,
but each denomination is a nonnegative integer power of 2, i.e., the possible
denominations are | dollar, 2 dollars, 4 dollars, etc. Bonnie and Clyde wish to
divide the money exactly evenly.

The bag contains n checks, which are, in an amazing coincidence, made out to
“Bonnie or Clyde.” They wish to divide the checks so that they each get the
exact same amount of money.

|. The bag contains 1 checks as in part (c), but this time Bonnie and Clyde are

willing to accept a split in which the difference is no larger than 100 dollars.
