Chapter 34 NP-Completeness 1049

we can find the edges of the Euler tour in O(E£) time. A hamiltonian cycle of
a directed graph G = (V, E) is a simple cycle that contains each vertex in V.
Determining whether a directed graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.
(Later in this chapter, we shall prove that determining whether an undirected
graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)

2-CNF satisfiability vs. 3-CNF satisfiability: A boolean formula contains vari-
ables whose values are 0 or 1; boolean connectives such as A (AND), Vv (OR),
and — (NOT); and parentheses. A boolean formula is satisfiable if there exists
some assignment of the values 0 and | to its variables that causes it to evaluate
to 1. We shall define terms more formally later in this chapter, but informally, a
boolean formula is in k-conjunctive normal form, or k-CNF, if it is the AND
of clauses of ORs of exactly k variables or their negations. For example, the
boolean formula (x; V 7x2) A (=x1 V x3) A (x2 V 7X3) is in 2-CNF. (It has
the satisfying assignment x; = 1,x2 = 0,x3 = 1.) Although we can deter-
mine in polynomial time whether a 2-CNF formula is satisfiable, we shall see
later in this chapter that determining whether a 3-CNF formula is satisfiable is
NP-complete.

NP-completeness and the classes P and NP

Throughout this chapter, we shall refer to three classes of problems: P, NP, and
NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. We describe them infor-
mally here, and we shall define them more formally later on.

The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in polynomial time.
More specifically, they are problems that can be solved in time O(n*) for some
constant k, where 1 is the size of the input to the problem. Most of the problems
examined in previous chapters are in P.

The class NP consists of those problems that are “verifiable” in polynomial time.
What do we mean by a problem being verifiable? If we were somehow given a
“certificate” of a solution, then we could verify that the certificate is correct in time
polynomial in the size of the input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-
cycle problem, given a directed graph G = (V, E), a certificate would be a se-
quence (V1, V2,V3..... v\y|) of |V | vertices. We could easily check in polynomial
time that (vj, ¥;41) € E fori = 1,2,3. |V|—1 and that (vjyj, v1) € E as well.
As another example, for 3-CNF satisfiability, a certificate would be an assignment
of values to variables. We could check in polynomial time that this assignment
satisfies the boolean formula.

Any problem in P is also in NP, since if a problem is in P then we can solve it
in polynomial time without even being supplied a certificate. We shall formalize
this notion later in this chapter, but for now we can believe that P C NP. The open
question is whether or not P is a proper subset of NP.

 

 
