158

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

 

ENTAILMENT

Provided the syntax and semantics are defined precisely, we can call the language a logic?
From the syntax and semantics, we can derive an inference mechanism for an agent that uses the
language. We now explain how this comes about.

First, recall that the semantics of the language determine the fact to which a given sentence
refers (see Figure 6.5). It is impprtant to distinguish between facts and their representations.
Facts are part of the world,* whereas their representations must be encoded in some way that can
be physically stored within an agent. We cannot put the world inside a computer (nor can we put
it inside a human), so all reasoning mechanisms must operate on representations of facts, rather
than on the facts themselves. Because sentences are physical configurations of parts of the agent,
reasoning must be a process of constructing new physical configurations from old ones. Proper
reasoning should ensure that the new configurations represent facts that actually follow from the

facts that the old configurations represent.

 

Sentences -—_—-_——-> Sentence
Entails o
Representation g 5
———— g,————___-~~—.8| _______
World 8 &
Facts ————__ Fact
Follows

 

 

Figure 65 The connection between sentences and facts is provided by the semantics of the
language. The property of one fact following from some other facts is mirrored by the property of
one sentence being entailed by some other sentences. Logical inference generates new sentences
that are entailed by existing sentences.

 

 

 

Consider the following example. From the fact that the solar system obeys the laws of
gravitation, and the fact of the current arrangement of the sun, planets, and other bodies, it follows
(so the astronomers tell us) that Pluto will eventually spin offinto the interstellar void. But ifour
agent reasons improperly, it might start with representations of the first two facts and end with a
representation that means that Pluto will shortly amive in the vicinity of Bucharest. Or we might
end up with "logical" reasoning like that in Figure 6.6. ve

We want to generate new sentences that are necessarily true, given that the old sentences
are true. This relation between sentences is called entailment, and mirrors the relation of one
fact following from another (Figure 6.5). In mathematical notation, the relation of entailment
between a knowledge base KB and a sentence a is pronounced “KBentails a” and written as

KB ka. boy

An inference procedure can do one of two things: given a know! ledge base KB, it can generate

3 This is perhaps a rather broad interpretation of the term "logic," one that makes "representation language" and "logic"
synonymous. However, most of the principles of logic apply at this general level, rather than just at the level of the
particular languages most often associated with the term.

+ As Wittgenstein (1922) put it in his famous Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus: "The world is everything that is the
case.” We are using the word "fact" in this sense: as an "arrangement" ofthe world that may or may not be the case.
