1114

Chapter 35 Approximation Algorithms

By Exercise 23.2-2, even with a simple implementation of MST-PRIM, the run-
ning time of APPROX-TSP-Tour is @(V7). We now show that if the cost function
for an instance of the traveling-salesman problem satisfies the triangle inequality,
then APPROX-TSP-TOUR returns a tour whose cost is not more than twice the cost
of an optimal tour.

Theorem 35.2
APPROX-TSP-TouR is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the
traveling-salesman problem with the triangle inequality.

Proof We have already seen that APPROX-TSP-TOUR runs in polynomial time.

Let H* denote an optimal tour for the given set of vertices. We obtain a spanning
tree by deleting any edge from a tour, and each edge cost is nonnegative. Therefore,
the weight of the minimum spanning tree T computed in line 2 of APPROX-TSP-
TOUR provides a lower bound on the cost of an optimal tour:

c(T) <c(H*). (35.4)
A full walk of T lists the vertices when they are first visited and also whenever

they are returned to after a visit to a subtree. Let us call this full walk W. The full
walk of our example gives the order

a,b,c, b,h,b,a,d,e, fie,g.e.d.a.

Since the full walk traverses every edge of T exactly twice, we have (extending
our definition of the cost c in the natural manner to handle multisets of edges)

c(W) = 2c(T). (35.5)
Inequality (35.4) and equation (35.5) imply that
c(W) < 2c(H*), (35.6)

and so the cost of W is within a factor of 2 of the cost of an optimal tour.

Unfortunately, the full walk W is generally not a tour, since it visits some ver-
tices more than once. By the triangle inequality, however, we can delete a visit to
any vertex from W and the cost does not increase. (If we delete a vertex v from W
between visits to u and w, the resulting ordering specifies going directly from u
to w.) By repeatedly applying this operation, we can remove from W all but the
first visit to each vertex. In our example, this leaves the ordering

a,b.c,h,d,e, fig.

This ordering is the same as that obtained by a preorder walk of the tree T. Let H
be the cycle corresponding to this preorder walk. It is a hamiltonian cycle, since ev-
