152

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

KNOWLEDGE
REPRESENTATION
LANGUAGE

INFERENCE

BACKGROUND
KNOWLEDGE

of English and other natural languages, but is not identical.) The sentences are expressed in a
language called a knowledge representation language.

There must be a way to add new sentences to the knowledge base, and a way to query what
is known. The standard names for these tasks are TELL and Ask, respectively. The fundamental
requirement that we will impose on TELL and ASK is that when one ASKS a question of the
knowledge base, the answer should follow from what has been told (or rather, TELLed) to the
knowledge base previously. Later in the chapter, we will be more precise about the crucial word
"follow." For now, take it to mean that the knowledge base should notjust make up things as
it goes along. Determining what follows from what the KB has been TELLed is the job of the
inference mechanism, the other main component ofa knowledge-based agent.

Figure 6,1 shows the outline of a knowledge-based agent program. Like all our agents, it
takes a percept as input and returns an action. The agent maintains a knowledge base, KB, which
may initially contain some background knowledge. Each time the agent program is called, it
does two things. First, it TELLS the knowledge base what it perceives.' Second, it ASKS the
knowledge base what action it should perform. In the process of answering this query, logical
reasoning is used to prove which action is better than all others, given what the agent knows and
what its goals are. The agent then performs the chosen action.

 

function KB-AGENT(percept) returns an action
static: KB, aknowledge base
t, a counter, initially 0, indicating time

TELL(KB, MAKE-PERCEPT-SENTENCE( percept, 1)
action — ASK( KB, MAKE-ACTION-QUERY(1))
TELL(KB, MakeE-ACTION-SENTENCE(action, 1))
t—i+4

return action

 

 

Figure 6.1 A generic knowledge-based agent.

 

 

 

The details of the representation language are hidden inside two functions that implement
the interface between the agent program "shell" and the core representation and reasoning system.
MAKE-PERCEPT-SENTENCE takes a percept and atime and returns a sentence representing the fact
that the agent perceived the percept at the given time, and MAKE-ACTION-QUERY takes a time as
input and returns a sentence that is suitable for asking what action should be performed at that
time. The details of the inference mechanism are hidden inside TELL and ASK. Later sections
will reveal these details

A careful examination of Figure 6,1 reveals that it is quite similar to the design of agents
with internal state described in Chapter 2. Because of the definitions of TELL and ASK, however,
the knowledge-based agent is not an arbitrary program for calculating actions based on the internal
state variable. At any point, we can describe a knowledge-based agent at three levels:

1! You might think of TELL and ASK as procedures that humans can use to communicate with knowledge bases. Don't
be confused by the fact that here it is the agent that is TELLing things to its own knowledge base
