Section 6.2. The Wumpus World Environment 155

 

Finally, the action Climb is used to leave the cave; it is effective only when the agent is in
the start square

The agent dies a miserable death ifit enters a square containing a pit or a live wumpus. It
is safe (but smelly) to enter a square with a dead wumpus

The agent's goal is to find the gold and bring it back to the start as quickly as possible,
without getting killed. To be precise, 1000 points are awarded for climbing out of the
cave while carrying the gold, but there is a 1-point penalty for each action taken, and a
10,000-pointpenalty for getting killed.

As we emphasized in Chapter 2, an agent can do well in a single environment merely by
memorizing the sequence of actions that happens to work in that environment. To provide a real
test, we need to specify a complete class of environments, and insist that the agent do well, on
average, over the whole class. We will assume a4 x 4 grid surrounded by walls. The agent
always starts in the square labeled (1,1), facing toward the right. The locations of the gold and
the wumpus are chosen randomly, with a uniform distribution, from the squares other than the
start square. In addition, each square other than the start can be a pit, with probability 0.2

In most of the environments in this class, there is a way for the agent to safely retrieve the
gold. In some environments, the agent must choose between going home empty-handed or taking
a chance that could lead either to death or to the gold. And in about 21% of the environments
(the ones where the gold is in a pit or surrounded by pits), there is no way the agent can get a
positive score. Sometimes life is just unfair.

After gaining experience with this class of environments, we can experiment with other
classes. In Chapter 22 we consider worlds where two agents explore together and can commu-
nicate with each other. We could also consider worlds where the wumpus can move, or where
there are multiple troves of gold, or multiple wumpuses.”

Acting and reasoning in the wumpus world

We now know the rules of the wumpus world, but we do not yet have an idea of how a wumpus
world agent should act. An example will clear this up and will show why a successful agent
will need to have some kind of logical reasoning ability. Figure 6.3(a) shows an agent's state of
knowledge at the start of an exploration of the cave in Figure 6.2, after it has received its initial
percept. To emphasize that this is only a representation, we use letters such as 4 and OK to
represent sentences, in contrast to Figure 6.2, which used (admittedly primitive) pictures of the
wumpus and pits.

From the fact that there was no stench or breeze in [1,1], the agent can infer that [1,2] and
[2,1] are free of dangers. They are marked with an OK to indicate this. From the fact that the
agent is still alive, it can infer that [1,1] is also OK. A cautious agent will only move into a square
that it knows is OK. Let us suppose the agent decides to move forward to [2,1], giving the scene
in Figure 6.3(b).

The agent detects a breeze in [2,1], so there must be a pit in a neighboring square, either
[2.2] or [3,1]. The notation P? indicates a possible pit. The pit cannot be in [1,1], because the

2 Oris it wumpi?

 
