1070

Chapter 34 NP-Completeness

oS
CO

Figure 34.6 How most theoretical computer scientists view the relationships among P, NP,
and NPC. Both P and NPC are wholly contained within NP, and PM NPC = 9.

ered, a proof that a problem is NP-complete provides excellent evidence that it is
intractable.

Circuit satisfiability

We have defined the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this point, we
have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete. Once we prove that at
least one problem is NP-complete, we can use polynomial-time reducibility as a
tool to prove other problems to be NP-complete. Thus, we now focus on demon-
strating the existence of an NP-complete problem: the circuit-satisfiability prob-
lem.

Unfortunately, the formal proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-
complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text. Instead, we shall
informally describe a proof that relies on a basic understanding of boolean combi-
national circuits.

Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational elements
that are interconnected by wires. A boolean combinational element is any circuit
element that has a constant number of boolean inputs and outputs and that performs
a well-defined function. Boolean values are drawn from the set {0,1}, where 0
represents FALSE and | represents TRUE.

The boolean combinational elements that we use in the circuit-satisfiability prob-
lem compute simple boolean functions, and they are known as logic gates. Fig-
ure 34.7 shows the three basic logic gates that we use in the circuit-satisfiability
problem: the NOT gate (or inverter), the AND gate, and the OR gate. The NOT
gate takes a single binary input x, whose value is either 0 or 1, and produces a
binary output z whose value is opposite that of the input value. Each of the other
two gates takes two binary inputs x and y and produces a single binary output z.

We can describe the operation of each gate, and of any boolean combinational
element, by a truth table, shown under each gate in Figure 34.7. A truth table gives
the outputs of the combinational element for each possible setting of the inputs. For
