 

Section 6.2. The Wumpus World Environment 153

KNOWLEDGE LEVEL * The knowledge level or epistemological level is the most abstract; we can describe the

FERTEMOLOGICAL agent by saying what it knows. For example, an automated taxi might be said to know that
the Golden Gate Bridge links San Francisco and Marin County. If TELL and ASK work
correctly, then most of the time we can work at the knowledge level and not worry about
lower levels.

LOGICAL LEVEL * The logical level is the level at which the knowledge is encoded into sentences. For example,

IMPLEMENTATION
LEVEL

 

DECLARATIVE

 

6.2 TH

 

 

 

WUMPUS WORLD

the taxi might be described as having the logical sentence Links(GGBridge, SF, Marin) in
its knowledge base.

The implementation level is the level that runs on the agent architecture. It is the
level at which there are physical representations of the sentences at the logical level. A
sentence such as Links(GGBridge,SF, Marin) could be represented in the KB by the string
"Links (GGBridge, SF,Marin)" contained in a list of strings; or by a "1" entry in
a three-dimensional table indexed by road links and location pairs; or by a complex set
of pointers connecting machine addresses corresponding to the individual symbols. The
choice ofimplementation is very important to the efficient performance of the agent, but it
is irrelevant to the logical level and the knowledge level.

We said that it is possible to understand the operation of a knowledge-based agent in terms of
what it knows. It is possible to construct a knowledge-based agent by TELLing it what it needs
to know. The agent's initial program, before it starts to receive percepts, is built by adding one
by one the sentences that represent the designer's knowledge of the environment. Provided that
the representation language makes it easy to express this knowledge in the form of sentences,
this simplifies the construction problem enormously. This is called the declarative approach
to system building. Also, one can design learning mechanisms that output general knowledge
about the environment given a series of percepts. By hooking up a learning mechanism to a
knowledge-based agent, one can make the agent fully autonomous

E WUMPUS WORLD ENVIRONMENT

Before launching into a full exposition of knowledge representation and reasoning, we will
describe a simple environment class—the wumpus world—that provides plenty of motivation
for logical reasoning. Wumpus was an early computer game, based on an agent who explores
a cave consisting of rooms connected by passageways. Lurking somewhere in the cave is the
wumpus, a beast that eats anyone who enters its room. To make matters worse, some rooms
contain bottomless pits that will trap anyone who wanders into these rooms (except for the
wumpus, who is too big to fall in). The only mitigating feature of living in this environment is
the occasional heap of gold.

It turns out that the wumpus game is rather tame by modern computer game standards.
However, it makes an excellent testbed environment for intelligent agents. Michael Genesereth
was the first to suggest this.

 
