1100

Chapter 34 NP-Completeness

respond to literals with the value | in the satisfying assignment. Having included
either v; or v/, but not both, for all 7, and having put 0 in the digits labeled by
variables in all s; and Sj we see that for each variable-labeled digit, the sum of the
values of S’ must be 1, which matches those digits of the target t. Because each
clause is satisfied, the clause contains some literal with the value 1. Therefore,
each digit labeled by a clause has at least one 1 contributed to its sum by a v; or v;
value in S’. In fact, 1, 2, or 3 literals may be 1 in each clause, and so each clause-
labeled digit has a sum of 1, 2, or 3 from the v; and v; values in S’. In Figure 34.19
for example, literals =x, +2, and x3 have the value | in a satisfying assignment.
Each of clauses C, and C, contains exactly one of these literals, and so together v{,,
v3, and v3 contribute | to the sum in the digits for C, and C4. Clause C, contains
two of these literals, and v}, v5, and v3 contribute 2 to the sum in the digit for C).
Clause C3 contains all three of these literals, and v}, v3, and v3 contribute 3 to the
sum in the digit for C3. We achieve the target of 4 in each digit labeled by clause C;
by including in S’ the appropriate nonempty subset of slack variables {s,s}. In
Figure 34.19, S’ includes 51, 51,55, 53, 54, and s/,. Since we have matched the target
in all digits of the sum, and no carries can occur, the values of S’ sum to ¢.

Now, suppose that there is a subset S’ C S that sums to ¢. The subset S’ must

include exactly one of v; and v; for each i = 1,2,..., n, for otherwise the digits
labeled by variables would not sum to 1. If v; € S’, we set x; = 1. Otherwise,
v; € S’, and we set x; = 0. We claim that every clause Cj, for j = 1,2,..., kis

satisfied by this assignment. To prove this claim, note that to achieve a sum of 4 in
the digit labeled by C;, the subset S’ must include at least one v; or vj value that
has a 1 in the digit labeled by C;, since the contributions of the slack variables 5;
and s’ together sum to at most 3. If S’ includes a v; that has a | in C;’s position,
then the literal x; appears in clause Cj. Since we have set x; = 1 when v; € S’,
clause C; is satisfied. If S’ includes a vj that has a | in that position, then the
literal +x; appears in C;. Since we have set x; = 0 when v/ € S’, clause C; is
again satisfied. Thus, all clauses of ¢ are satisfied, which completes the proof. =

Exercises

34.5-1

The subgraph-isomorphism problem takes two undirected graphs G; and G2, and
it asks whether G; is isomorphic to a subgraph of G2. Show that the subgraph-
isomorphism problem is NP-complete.

34.5-2
Given an integer m x n matrix A and an integer m-vector b, the 0-1 integer-
programming problem asks whether there exists an integer n-vector x with ele-
