34.5 NP-complete problems 1091

reduction: the graph G has a clique of size k if and only if the graph G has a vertex
cover of size |V| —k.

Suppose that G has a clique V’ C V with |V’| = k. We claim that V — V’ isa
vertex cover in G. Let (u,v) be any edge in E. Then, (u,v) ¢ E, which implies
that at least one of u or v does not belong to V’, since every pair of vertices in V’ is
connected by an edge of E. Equivalently, at least one of u or v is in V —V’, which
means that edge (u,v) is covered by V — V’. Since (uw, v) was chosen arbitrarily
from E, every edge of E is covered by a vertex in V — V’. Hence, the set V — V’,
which has size |V | — k, forms a vertex cover for G.

Conversely, suppose that G has a vertex cover V’ C V, where |V’| = |V| —k.
Then, for all u,v € V, if (u,v) € ‘E, then u € V’ or v € V’ or both. The
contrapositive of this implication is that for allu,v € V, ifu ¢ V’ andv ¢V’,
then (u,v) € E. Inother words, V—V’ is a clique, and it has size |V|—|V’| =k. m

Since VERTEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don’t expect to find a polynomial-
time algorithm for finding a minimum-size vertex cover. Section 35.1 presents a
polynomial-time “approximation algorithm,” however, which produces “approxi-
mate” solutions for the vertex-cover problem. The size of a vertex cover produced
by the algorithm is at most twice the minimum size of a vertex cover.

Thus, we shouldn’t give up hope just because a problem is NP-complete. We
may be able to design a polynomial-time approximation algorithm that obtains
near-optimal solutions, even though finding an optimal solution is NP-complete.
Chapter 35 gives several approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems.

34.5.3. The hamiltonian-cycle problem

We now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem defined in Section 34.2.

Theorem 34.13
The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.

Proof We first show that HAM-CYCLE belongs to NP. Given a graph G =
(V, E), our certificate is the sequence of |V| vertices that makes up the hamiltonian
cycle. The verification algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex
in V exactly once and that with the first vertex repeated at the end, it forms a cycle
in G. That is, it checks that there is an edge between each pair of consecutive
vertices and between the first and last vertices. We can verify the certificate in
polynomial time.

We now prove that VERTEX-COVER <p HAM-CYCLE, which shows that
HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete. Given an undirected graph G = (V, £) and an

 
