1098

Chapter 34 NP-Completeness

three distinct literals, the reduction algorithm constructs an instance (S, t) of the
subset-sum problem such that ¢ is satisfiable if and only if there exists a subset
of S whose sum is exactly ¢. Without loss of generality, we make two simplifying
assumptions about the formula @. First, no clause contains both a variable and its
negation, for such a clause is automatically satisfied by any assignment of values
to the variables. Second, each variable appears in at least one clause, because it
does not matter what value is assigned to a variable that appears in no clauses.

The reduction creates two numbers in set S for each variable x; and two numbers
in S for each clause C;. We shall create numbers in base 10, where each number
contains n +k digits and each digit corresponds to either one variable or one clause.
Base 10 (and other bases, as we shall see) has the property we need of preventing
carries from lower digits to higher digits.

As Figure 34.19 shows, we construct set S and target t as follows. We label
each digit position by either a variable or a clause. The least significant k digits are
labeled by the clauses, and the most significant n digits are labeled by variables.

* The target ¢ has a 1 in each digit labeled by a variable and a 4 in each digit
labeled by a clause.

* For each variable x;, set S contains two integers v; and v/. Each of vj and vj
has a | in the digit labeled by x; and 0s in the other variable digits. If literal x;
appears in clause Cj, then the digit labeled by C; in v; contains a 1. If lit-
eral +x; appears in clause C;, then the digit labeled by C; in v; contains a 1.
All other digits labeled by clauses in v; and v/ are 0.

All v; and v; values in set S are unique. Why? For / ¥ i, no v; or v; values can
equal v; and v; in the most significant n digits. Furthermore, by our simplifying
assumptions above, no v; and v; can be equal in all k least significant digits.
If vj and v; were equal, then x; and x; would have to appear in exactly the
same set of clauses. But we assume that no clause contains both x; and 7x;
and that either x; or x; appears in some clause, and so there must be some
clause C; for which v; and v; differ.

* For each clause C;, set S contains two integers s; and Sj. Each of s; and Sj has
Os in all digits other than the one labeled by Cj. For s;, there is a 1 in the C;
digit, and s; has a 2 in this digit. These integers are “slack variables,” which we
use to get each clause-labeled digit position to add to the target value of 4.
Simple inspection of Figure 34.19 demonstrates that all s; and s; values in S
are unique in set S.

Note that the greatest sum of digits in any one digit position is 6, which occurs in
the digits labeled by clauses (three 1s from the v; and v; values, plus 1 and 2 from
