34.3 NP-completeness and reducibility 1071

 

 

x |x
0 1
1 0

 

x
0
0
1
1

Horo

(a) (b) (©)

Figure 34.7. Three basic logic gates, with binary inputs and outputs. Under each gate is the truth
table that describes the gate’s operation. (a) The NOT gate. (b) The AND gate. (c) The OR gate.

example, the truth table for the OR gate tells us that when the inputs are x = 0
and y 1, the output value is z = 1. We use the symbols — to denote the NOT
function, A to denote the AND function, and V to denote the OR function. Thus,
for example, 0 Vv 1 = 1.

We can generalize AND and OR gates to take more than two inputs. An AND
gate’s output is | if all of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise. An OR gate’s
output is 1 if any of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise.

A boolean combinational circuit consists of one or more boolean combinational
elements interconnected by wires. A wire can connect the output of one element
to the input of another, thereby providing the output value of the first element as an
input value of the second. Figure 34.8 shows two similar boolean combinational
circuits, differing in only one gate. Part (a) of the figure also shows the values on
the individual wires, given the input (x; = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0). Although a single
wire may have no more than one combinational-element output connected to it, it
can feed several element inputs. The number of element inputs fed by a wire is
called the fan-out of the wire. If no element output is connected to a wire, the wire
is a circuit input, accepting input values from an external source. If no element
input is connected to a wire, the wire is a circuit output, providing the results of
the circuit’s computation to the outside world. (An internal wire can also fan out
to a circuit output.) For the purpose of defining the circuit-satisfiability problem,
we limit the number of circuit outputs to 1, though in actual hardware design, a
boolean combinational circuit may have multiple outputs.

Boolean combinational circuits contain no cycles. In other words, suppose we
create a directed graph G = (V, E) with one vertex for each combinational element
and with k directed edges for each wire whose fan-out is k; the graph contains
a directed edge (u,v) if a wire connects the output of element u to an input of
element v. Then G must be acyclic.

 
