174 CHAPTER Sx Programming the Basic Computer

instruction set

the physical computer that runs his program. For example, a program written
in standard Fortran is machine independent because most computers provide
a translator program that converts the standard Fortran program to the binary
code of the computer available in the particular installation. But the translator
program itself is machine dependent because it must translate the Fortran
program to the binary code recognized by the hardware of the particular
computer used.

This chapter introduces some elementary programming concepts and
shows theirrelation to the hardware representation of instructions. The first
part presents the basic operation and structure of a program that translates a
user’s symbolic program into an equivalent binary program. The discussion
emphasizes the important concepts of the translator rather than the details of
actually producing the program itself. The usefulness of various machine
instructions is then demonstrated by means of several basic programming
examples.

‘The instruction set of the basic computer, whose hardware organization
was explored in Chap. 5, is used in this chapter to illustrate many of the
techniques commonly used to program a computer. In this way it is possible
to explore the relationship between a program and the hardware operations
that execute the instructions.

The 25 instructions of the basic computer are repeated in Table 6-1 to
provide an easy reference for the programming examples that follow. Each
instruction is assigned athree-letter symbol to facilitate writing symbolic pro-
grams. The first seven instructions are memory-reference instructions and the
other 18 are register-reference and input-output instructions. A memory-
reference instruction has three parts: a mode bit, an operation code of three
bits, and a 12-bit address. The first hexadecimal digit of a memory-reference
instruction includes the mode bit and the operation code. The other three digits
specify the address. In an indirect address instruction the mode bit is 1 and the
first hexadecimal digit ranges in value from 8 to E. Ina direct mode, the range
is from 0 to 6. The other 18 instructions have a 16-bit operation code. The code
for each instruction is listed as a four-digit hexadecimal number. The first digit
ofa register-reference instruction is always7. The first digit of an input-output
instruction is always F. The symbol m used in the description column denotes
the effective address. The letter M refersto the memory word (operand) found
at the effective address.

6-2 Machine Language

A program is a list of instructions or statements for directing the computer to
perform a required data-processing task. There are various types of program-
ming languages that one may write fora computer, but the computer can execute
programs only when they are represented internally in binary form. Programs
