166

FULLY Logic

6.4 PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC: A VERY SIMPLE LOGIC

‘CONJUNCTION
(oaic)

DISJUNCTION

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically 3

wumpus-world agent might believe that the wumpus is in [1,3] with probability 0.75. Systems
based on fuzzy logic can have degrees of belief in a sentence, and also allow degrees of truth:
a fact need not be true or false in the world, but can be true to a certain degree. For example,
"Vienna is a large city" might be true only to degree 0.6. The ontological and epistemological
commitments of various logics are summarized in Figure 6.7. y

  
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Language Ontological Commitment Epistemological Commitment
(What exists in the world) (What an agent believes about facts)

Propositional logic | facts true/false/unknown

First-order logic facts, objects, relations true/false/unknown

Temporal logic facts, objects, relations, times | true/false/unknown

Probability theory | facts degree of belief 0...1

Fuzzy logic degree of truth degree of belief 0...1

Figure 67 Formal languages and their ontological and epistemological commitments.

 

 

 

Despite its limited expressiveness, propositional logic serves to illustrate many of the concepts
of logic just as well as first-order logic. We will describe its syntax, semantics, and associated
inference procedures.

Syntax

The syntax of propositional logic is simple. The symbols of propositional logic are the logical
constants True and False, proposition symbols such as P and Q, the logical connectives A, V, +, |
=, and -, and parentheses, (). All sentences are made by putting these symbols together using
the following rules:

* The logical constants True and False are sentences by themselves.
+ A propositional symbol such as P or Q is a sentence by itself.
+ Wrapping parentheses around a sentence yields a sentence, for example, (P A Q).
+ A sentence can be formed by combining simpler sentences with one of the five logical
connectives: -
A (and). A sentence whose main connective is A, such as PA (O V R), is called a
conjunction (logic); its parts are the conjuncts. (The A looks like an "A" for “And.”)
V (on). A sentence using V, such as A V (PA Q), is a disjunction of the disjuncts 4

and (P A Q). (Historically, the V comes from the Latin “vel,” which means "or." For
most people, it is easier to remember as an upside-down and.)
