162

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE LANGUAGE OF THOUGHT

 

 

 

Philosophers and psychologists have long pondered how it is that humans and other
animals represent knowledge. It is clear that the evolution of natural language has
played an important role in developing this ability in humans. But it is also true that
humans seem to represent much of their knowledge in a nonverbal form. Psychologists
have done studies to confirm that humans remember the "gist" of something they have
read rather than the exact words. You could look at Anderson's (1980, page 96)
description of an experiment by Wanner, or you could perform your own experiment
by deciding which of the following two phrases formed the opening of Section 6.3:

"In this section, we will discuss the nature of representation languages ...”

"This section covers the topic of knowledge representation languages ...”

In Wanner's experiment, subjects made the right choice at chance level—about 50%
of the time—but remembered the overall idea of what they read with better than
90% accuracy. This indicates that the exact words are not part of the representations
they formed. A similar experiment (Sachs, 1967) showed that subjects remember the
words for a short time (seconds to tens of seconds), but eventually forget the words
and remember only the meaning. This suggests that people process the words to form
some kind of nonverbal representation which they maintain as memories.

The exact mechanism by which language enables and shapes the representation of
ideas in humans remains a fascinating question. The famous Sapir-Whorfhypothesis
claims that the language we speak profoundly influences the way in which we think
and make decisions, in particular by setting up the category structure by which we
divide up the world into different sorts of objects. Whorf (1956) claimed that Eskimos
have many words for snow, and thus experience snow in a different way from speakers
of other languages. His analysis has since been discredited (Pullum, 1991); Inuit,
Yupik, and other related languages seem to have about the same number of words
for snow-related concepts as English (consider blizzard, sprinkling, flurries, powder,
slush, snowbank, snowdrift, etc.). Of course, different languages do carve up the
world differently. Spanish has two words for "fish," one for the live animal and one
for the food. English does not make this distinction, but it does have the cow/beef
distinction. There is no evidence that this means that English and Spanish speakers
think about the world in fundamentally different ways.

For our purposes, it is important to remember that the language used to represent
an agent's internal knowledge is quite different from the extemal language used to
communicate with other agents. (See Chapter 22 for the study of communication.)

 

 
