Problems for Chapter 35 1137

Suppose that we use the following greedy algorithm for parallel machine schedul-
ing: whenever a machine is idle, schedule any job that has not yet been scheduled.

c. Write pseudocode to implement this greedy algorithm. What is the running
time of your algorithm?

d. For the schedule returned by the greedy algorithm, show that

1
Coax SF dS mK + MAX Pk -

isksn

Conclude that this algorithm is a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm.

35-6 Approximating a maximum spanning tree

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph with distinct edge weights w(u, v) on each
edge (u,v) € E. For each vertex v € V, let max(v) = maxqyeg {w(u, v)} be
the maximum-weight edge incident on that vertex. Let Sg = {max(v):v €V}
be the set of maximum-weight edges incident on each vertex, and let Tg be the
maximum-weight spanning tree of G, that is, the spanning tree of maximum total
weight. For any subset of edges E’ C E, define w(E’) = Dy yyex, W(U, V).

a. Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which Sg = Tg.
b. Give an example of a graph with at least 4 vertices for which Sg 4 Tg.
c. Prove that Sg € Tg for any graph G.

d. Prove that w(Tg) = w(Sg)/2 for any graph G.

e. Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute a 2-approximation to the maxi-
mum spanning tree.

35-7 An approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem

Recall the knapsack problem from Section 16.2. There are n items, where the ith
item is worth v; dollars and weighs w; pounds. We are also given a knapsack
that can hold at most W pounds. Here, we add the further assumptions that each
weight w; is at most W and that the items are indexed in monotonically decreasing
order of their values: vy > v2 >+++ > Vy.

In the 0-1 knapsack problem, we wish to find a subset of the items whose total
weight is at most W and whose total value is maximum. The fractional knapsack
problem is like the 0-1 knapsack problem, except that we are allowed to take a
fraction of each item, rather than being restricted to taking either all or none of

 
