170° cuarrer Five Basic Computer Organization and Design

516,

547.

5-18,

549.

520,

A computer uses a memory of 65,536 words with eight bits in each word.
Ithas the following registers: PC, AR, TR (16 bits each), and AC, DR, IR
(eight bits each). A memory-reference instruction consistsofthree words: an
8-bit operation-code (one word) and a16-bit address (in thenexttwo words)
All operands are eight bits. There is no indirect bit.

a. Drawablock diagram of the computer showing the memory and registers
as in Fig. 5-3. (Do not use a common bus).

'b. Draw a diagram showing the placement in memory of a typical three-
‘word instruction and the corresponding 8-bit operand.

«. List the sequence of microoperations for fetching a memory reference
instruction and then placing the operand in DR. Start from timing sig-
nal To.

A digital computer has a memory unit with a capacity of 16,384 words, 40
bits per word. The instruction code format consists of six bits for the oper-
ation part and 14 bits for the address part (no indirect mode bit). Two
instructions are packed in one memory word, and a 40-bit instruction regis-
ter Ris availablein the control unit. Formulate a procedure for fetching and
executing instructions for this computer.

‘An output program resides in memory starting from address 2300. It is

executedafter the computer recognizes an interrupt when FGO becomes a

1 (while IEN = 1)

a. What instruction must be placed at address 1?

'b. What must be the last two instructions of the output program?

‘The register transfer statements for a register R and the memory in a com-

puter are as follows (the X’s are control functions that occur at random):

: Re-M[AR] Read memory word into R
ReAC Transfer AC to R
XiX: MIAR]—R — Write R to memory

 

‘The memory has data inputs, data outputs, address inputs, and control
inputs to read and write as in Fig. 2-12. Draw the hardware implementation
of Rand the memory in block diagram form. Show how the control functions
X; through X select the load control input of R, the select inputs of multi-
plexers that you include in the diagram, and the read and write inputs of
the memory.

‘The operations to be performed with a flip-flop F (not used in the basic
computer) are specified by the following register transfer statements:

xTy: Fel Set Ftol

yt: FeO Clear F to0

2x: FF — Complement F

wis FOG Transfer value of G to F

 

Otherwise, the content of F must not change. Draw the logic diagram
showing the connections of the gates that form the control functions and the
inputs of flip-flop F. Use a JK flip-flop and minimize the number of gates.
