Section 6.3.

Representation, Reasoning, and Logic 163

 

COMPOSITIONAL

 

LOGICAL INFERENCE
DEDUCTION

VAUD

it corresponds to. A sentence does not mean something by itself This is a difficult concept to
accept, because we are used to languages like English where the interpretation of most things
was fixed a long time ago.

The idea of interpretation is easier to see in made-up languages. Imagine that one spy
wants to pass a message to another, but worries that the message may be intercepted. The two
spies could agree in advance on a nonstandard interpretation in which, say, the interpretation of
"Pope" is a particular piece of microfilm and the interpretation of "Denver" is the pumpkin left
on the porch, and so forth. Then, when the first spy sends a newspaper clipping with the headline
"The Pope is in Denver," the second spy will know that the microfilm is in the pumpkin.

It is possible, in principle, to define a language in which every sentence has a completely
arbitrary interpretation. But in practice, all representation languages impose a systematic relation-
ship between sentences and facts. The languages we will deal with are all compositional—the
meaning of a sentence is a function of the meaning of its parts. Just as the meaning of the math-
ematical expression x? +’ is related to the meanings of x? andy, we would like the meaning
of the sentence “S;4and S},2” to be related to the meanings of “S,4” and “S;2.” It would be
very strange if"514" meant there is a stench in square [1,4] and “S; 2” meant there is a stench in
square [1,2], but “S,,4 and S; 2” meant that France and Poland drew 1-1 in last week's ice-hockey
qualifying match. In Section 6.4, we describe the semantics ofa simple language, the language
of propositional logic, that obeys constraints like these. Such constraints make it easy to specify
a proof theory that respects the semantics.

Once a sentence is given an interpretation by the semantics, the sentence says that the
world is this way and not that way. Hence, it can be true or false. A sentence is true under a
particular interpretation if the state of affairs it represents is the case. Note that truth depends
both on the interpretation of the sentence and on the actual state of the world. For example, the
sentence “S) »” would be true under the interpretation in which it means that there is a stench in
[1,2], in the world described in Figure 6.2. But it would be false in worlds that do not have a
stench in [1,2], and it would be false in Figure 6.2 under the interpretation in which it means that
there is a breeze in {1,2].

Inference

The terms "reasoning" and "inference" are generally used to cover any process by which con-
clusions are reached. In this chapter, we are mainly concerned with sound reasoning, which
we will call logical inference or deduction. Logical inference is a process that implements the
entailment relation between sentences. There are a number of ways to approach the design of
logical inference systems. We will begin with the idea of a necessarily true sentence.

Validity and satisfiability

A sentence is valid or necessarily true if and only ifit is true under all possible interpretations in
all possible worlds, that is, regardless of what it is supposed to mean and regardless of the state
of affairs in the universe being described. For example, the sentence

“There is a stench at [1,1] or there is not a stench at [1,1].”

See
