analysis

SECTION 15 Combinational Circuits 19

   
 

input 7 | Combinational ‘moutput
variables | circuit variables
—_|

 

Figure 1-15 Block dagram of acombinational circuit.

The analysis of a combinational circuit starts with a given logic circuit
diagram and culminates with a set of Boolean functions or a truth table. If the
digital circuit is accompanied by a verbal explanation of its function, the
Boolean functionsor the truth table is sufficient for verification. If the function
of the circuit is under investigation, it is necessary to interpret the operation of
the circuit from the derived Boolean functions or the truth table. The success
of such investigation is enhanced if one has experience and familiarity with
digital circuits, The ability to correlate a truth table or a set of Boolean functions
with an information-processing task is anart that one acquires with experience.

The design of combinational circuits starts from the verbal outline of the
problem and ends in a logic circuit diagram. The procedure involves the
following steps:

 

1. The problem is stated.

2. The input and output variables are assigned letter symbols.

3. Thetruth table thatdefines the relationship between inputs and outputs
is derived.

4. The simplified Boolean functions for each output are obtained.

5. The logic diagram is drawn.

To demonstrate the design of combinational circuits, we present two
examples of simple arithmetic circuits. These circuits serve as basic building
blocks for the construction of more complicated arithmetic circuits.

Half-Adder

The most basic digital arithmetic circuit is the addition of two binary digits. A
combinational circuit that performs the arithmetic addition of two bits is called
a half-adder. One that performs the addition of three bits (two significant bits
anda previous carry) is called a full-adder. The name of the former stems from
the fact that two half-adders are needed to implement a full-adder.

The input variables of a half-adder are called the augend and addend
bits. The output variables the sum and carry. It is necessary to specify two
output variables because the sum of 1 + 1is binary 10, which has two digits.
We assign symbols x and y to the two input variables, and S (for sum) and C
