   
  
  
  
  

i
\

Section 6.3. Representation, Reasoning, and Logic 165

 

To reiterate, the great thing about formal inference is that it can be used to derive valid
conclusions even when the computer does not know the interpretation you are using. The
computer only reports valid conclusions, which must be true regardless of your interpretation.
Because you know the interpretation, the conclusions will be meaningful to you, and they are
guaranteed to follow from your premises. The word “you” in this paragraph can be applied

I es equally to human and computer agents.

Logics
To summarize, we can say that a logic consists of the following:

1. A fonnal system for describing states of affairs, consisting of

(a) the syntax of the language, which describes how to make sentences, and

(b) the semantics of the language, which states the systematic constraints on how sen-
tences relate to states of affairs.

2. The proof theory—a set of rules for deducing the entailments of a set of sentences.

We will concentrate on two kinds of logic: propositional or Boolean logic, and first-order logic
(more precisely, first-order predicate calculus with equality).

PROPOSITIONAL In propositional logic, symbols represent whole propositions (facts); for example, D
might have the interpretation "the wumpus is dead." which may or may not be a true proposition,
BOTTA es Proposition symbols can be combined using Boolean connectives to generate sentences with more

complex meanings. Such a logic makes very little commitment to how things are represented, so
it is not surprising that it does not give us much mileage as a representation language.
First-order logic commits to the representation of worlds in terms of objects and predicates
on objects (ie., properties of objects or relations between objects), as well as using connectives
and quantifiers, which allow sentences to be written about everything in the universe at once.
First-order logic seems to be able to capture a good deal of what we know about the world, and
has been studied for about a hundred years. We will spend therefore a good deal of time looking
at how to do representation and deduction using it
It is illuminating to consider logics in the light of their ontological and epistemological
oeanoueses commitments. Ontological commitments have to do with the nature of reality. For example,
propositional logic assumes that there are facts that either hold or do not in the world. Each fact
can be in one of two states: true or false. First-order logic assumes more: namely, that the world
consists of objects with certain relations between them that do or do not hold. Special-purpose
TEMPORAL LOGIC logics make still further ontological commitments; for example, temporal logic assumes that
the world is ordered by a set of time points or intervals, and includes built-in mechanisms for
reasoning about time.

“Epistemological commitments have to do with the possible states of knowledge an agent
can have using various types of logic. In both propositional and first-order logic, a sentence
represents a fact and the agent either believes the sentence to be true, believes it to be false,
or is unable to conclude either way. These logics therefore have three possible states of belief
regarding any sentence. Systems using probability theory, on the other hand, can have any
degree of belief, ranging from 0 (total disbelief) to 1 (total belief). For example, a probabilistic

Epistes

 
