168

  

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

TRUTH TABLE

Semantics

    
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
  

The semantics of propusitional logic is also quite straightforward. We define it by specifying
the interpretation of the proposition symbols and constants, and specifying the meanings of the
logical connectives.

A proposition symbol casi mean whatever you want. That is, its interpretation can be any
arbitrary fact. The interpretation of P might be the fact that Paris is the capital of France or that
the wumpus is dead. A sentence containing just a proposition symbol is satisfiable but not valid:
it is true just when the fact that it refers to is the case.

With logical constants, youhave no choice; the sentence True always has as its interpretation
the way the world actually is—the true fact. The sentence False always has as its interpretation
the way the world is not.

A complex sentence has a meaning derived from the meaning ofits parts. Each connective_
can be thought of as a function. Just as addition is a function that takes two numbers as input,
and returns a number, so and is a function that takes two truth values as input and returns a truth
value. We know that one way to define a function is to make a table that gives the output value
for every possible input value. For most functions (such as addition), this is impractical because
of the size of the table, but there are only two possible truth values, so a logical function with
two arguments needs a table with only four entries. Such a table is called a truth table. We give
truth tables for the logical connectives in Figure 6.9. To use the table to determine, for example,
the value of True V False, first look on the left for the row where P is true and Q isfalse (the third
row). Then look in that row under the P V Q column to see the result: True.

 

 

~
P Q =P PAQ PVQ P=0) P#Q
False False True False False True True
False True True False True True False
True False ' False False True False” False

“True True False True True True True

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 69 Truth tables for the five logical connectives.

 

 

 

Truth tables define the semantics of sentences such as True A True. Complex sentences
such as (P V 0 A 4S are defined by a process of decomposition: first, determine the meaning of
(P A O) and of 5S, and then combine them using the definition ofthe A function. This is exactly
analogous to the way a complex arithmetic expression such as (px g) + —s is evaluated.

The truth tables for "and," "or," and "not" are in close accord with our intuitions about the
English words. The main point of possible confusion is that P V @Q is true when either or both P
and O are true. There is a different connective called "exclusive or" (“xor” for short) that gives
false when both disjuncts are true.’ There is no consensus on the symbol for exclusive or; two
choices are V and +. 7

In some ways, the implication connective = is the most important, and its truth table might
seem puzzling at first, because it does not quite fit our intuitive understanding of "P implies Q”

7 Latin has a separate word, aut, for exclusive or.
