176

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

3. Applying Modus Ponens to +52, and the sentence labelled R2, and then applying And-
Elimination to the result, we obtain the three sentences

AW) AW) AW,
4. Applying Modus Ponens to 5,2 and the sentence labelled Ry, we obtain
Wisv Wiav WooV Wis

5. Now we apply the unit resolution rule, where a is W).3 V Wi2V W22 and 3 is Wi. (We
derived =W;,; in step 2.) Unit resolution yields

Wrav Wi2v Wo2

6. Applying unit resolution again with W:3V Wy. as a and W22 as 3 (~W>,2 was derived in
step 3), we obtain

Wisv Wir

7. Finally, one more resolution with W;3as Q and W/ 2 as 3 (we derived =W, > in step 2)
gives us the answer we want, namely, that the wumpus is in [1,3]:

Wis

Translating knowledge into action

We have shown how propositional logic can be used to infer knowledge such as the whereabouts
of the wumpus. But the knowledge is only useful if it helps the agent take action. To do that,
we will need additional rules that relate the current state of the world to the actions the agent
should take. For example, ifthe wumpus is in the square straight ahead, then it is a bad idea to
execute the action Forward. We can represent this with a series of rules, one for each location
and orientation in which the agent might be. Here is the rule for the case where the agent is in
[1,1] facing east:

Aj, A East, A W2) => Forward

Once we have these rules, we need a way to ASK the knowledge base what action to take.
Unfortunately, propositional logic is not powerful enough to represent or answer the question
“what action should I take?,” but it is able to answer a series of questions such as "should I go
forward?" or "should I tun right?" That means that the algorithm for a knowledge-based agent
using propositional logic would be as in Figure 6.16.

Problems with the propositional agent

Propositional logic allows us to get across all the important points about what a logic is and how
it can be used to perform inference that eventually results in action. But propositional logic is so
weak that it really cannot handle even a domain as simple as the wumpus world

The main problem is that there are just too many propositions to handle. The simple rule
"don't go forward if the wumpus is in front of you" can only be stated in propositional logic by
a set of 64 rules (16 squares x 4 orientations for the agent). Naturally, it just gets worse ifthe
