646

Chapter 24 Single-Source Shortest Paths

 

Figure 24.1 Negative edge weights in a directed graph. The shortest-path weight from source s
appears within each vertex. Because vertices e and f forma negative-weight cycle reachable from s,
they have shortest-path weights of oo. Because vertex g is reachable from a vertex whose shortest-
path weight is —oo, it, too, has a shortest-path weight of —oo. Vertices such as h, i, and j are not
reachable from s, and so their shortest-path weights are oo, even though they lie on a negative-weight
cycle.

Some shortest-paths algorithms, such as Dijkstra’s algorithm, assume that all
edge weights in the input graph are nonnegative, as in the road-map example. Oth-
ers, such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm, allow negative-weight edges in the in-
put graph and produce a correct answer as long as no negative-weight cycles are
reachable from the source. Typically, if there is such a negative-weight cycle, the
algorithm can detect and report its existence.

Cycles

Can a shortest path contain a cycle? As we have just seen, it cannot contain a
negative-weight cycle. Nor can it contain a positive-weight cycle, since remov-
ing the cycle from the path produces a path with the same source and destination

vertices and a lower path weight. That is, if p = (vo. ¥1...., Ve) is a path and
c = (Vj, Viai,---, Vs) is a positive-weight cycle on this path (so that v; = v; and
w(c) > 0), then the path p’ = (vo, V1, .... V7. Vjti. Vie... Ve) has weight

w(p’) = w(p) — w(c) < w(p), and so p cannot be a shortest path from V9 to vx.

That leaves only 0-weight cycles. We can remove a 0-weight cycle from any
path to produce another path whose weight is the same. Thus, if there is a shortest
path from a source vertex s to a destination vertex v that contains a 0-weight cycle,
then there is another shortest path from s to v without this cycle. As long as a
shortest path has 0-weight cycles, we can repeatedly remove these cycles from the
path until we have a shortest path that is cycle-free. Therefore, without loss of
generality we can assume that when we are finding shortest paths, they have no
cycles, i.e., they are simple paths. Since any acyclic path in a graph G = (V, E)
