Section 6.4.

 

MONOTONICITY

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Propositional Logic: A Very Simple Logic 173
a g 7 ave a8V7 avi
False False False False True False
False False True False True True
False True False True False False
False True ~ True True True True
True False False True True True
True False True True True True
True True False True False True
True True True True True True
Figure 614 A truth table demonstrating the soundness of the resolution inference rule. We
have underlined the rows where both premises are true.

 

 

 

As we mentioned above, a logical proof consists of a sequence of applications of inference
tules, starting with sentences initially in the KB, and culminating in the generation ofthe sentence
whose proof is desired. To prove that P follows from (P V A) and —H, for example, we simply
require one application of the resolution rule, with a as P, 3 as H, and 7 empty. The job of an
inference procedure, then, is to construct proofs by finding appropriate sequences of applications
of inference rules.

Complexity of propositional inference

The truth-table method of inference described on page 169 is complete, because it is always
possible to enumerate the 2" rows of the table for any proof involving n proposition symbols.
On the other hand, the computation time is exponential in n, and therefore impractical. One
might wonder whether there is a polynomial-time proof procedure for propositional logic based
on using the inference rules from Section 6.4.

In fact, a version of this very problem was the first addressed by Cook (1971) in his theory
of NP-completeness. (See also the appendix on complexity.) Cook showed that checking a set of
sentences for satisfiability is NP-complete, and therefore unlikely to yield to a polynomial-time
algorithm. However, this does not mean that all instances of propositional inference are going to
take time proportional to 2". In many cases, the proof of a given sentence refers only to a small
subset of the KB and can be found fairly quickly. In fact, as Exercise 6.15 shows, really hard
problems are quite rare.

The use of inference rules to draw conclusions from a knowledge base relies implicitly
on a general property of certain logics (including propositional and first-order logic) called
monotonicity. Suppose that a knowledge base KB entails some set of sentences. A logic is

_monotonic if when we add some new sentences to the knowledge base, all the sentences entailed
by the original KB are still entailed by the new larger knowledge base. Formally, we can state
the property of monotonicity ofa logic as follows:

ifKB, a then (KB\U KB2) ka

This is true regardless of the contents of KB,—it can be irrelevant or even contradictory to KB.
