174

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

LOCAL

HORN SENTENCES

It is fairly easy to show that propositional and first-order logic are monotonic in this sense;
one can also show that probability theory is not monotonic (see Chapter 14). An inference rule”
such as Modus Ponens is local because its premise need only be compared with a small portion
of the KB (two sentences, in fact). Were it not for monotonicity, we could not have any local
inference rules because the rest of the KB might affect the soundness of the inference. This
would potentially cripple any inference procedure.

There is also a useful class of sentences for which a polynomial-time inference procedure
exists. This is the class called Horn sentences.* A Horn sentence has the form:

P, AP» A...AP, >

where the P; and O are nonnegated atoms. There are two important special cases: -First, when
Qis the constant False, we get a sentence that is equivalent to—P; V ... V =P, Second, when ~
n= 1 and P, = True, we get True > Q, which is equivalent to the atomic sentence Q. Not every
knowledge base can be written as a collection ofHorn sentences, but for those that can, we can use

a simple inference procedure: apply Modus Ponens wherever possible until no new inferences
remain to be made. We discuss Horn sentences and their associated inference procedures in more
detail in the context of first-order logic (Section 9.4).

 

6.5 AN AGENT FOR THE WUMPUS WORLD

 

 

 

In this section, we show a snapshot of a propositional logic agent reasoning about the wumpus
world. We assume that the agent has reached the point shown in Figure 6.4(a), repeated here as
Figure 6.15, and show how the agent can conclude that the wumpus is in {1,3}.

The knowledge base

On each turn, the agent's percepts are converted into sentences and entered into the knowledge
base, along with some valid sentences that are entailed by the percept sentences. Let us assume
that the symbol? S;2, for example, means "There is a stench in [1,2].” Similarly, 8) means
"There is a breeze in [2,1].” At this point, then, the knowledge base contains, among others, the
percept sentences

S11 Bi,
7S2,1 Bry
Siz Bi 2

In addition, the agent must start out with some knowledge of the environment. For example, the
agent knows that ifa square has no smell, then neither the square nor any ofits adjacent squares

8 Also known as Hom clauses. The name honors the logician Alfred Horn,
9 The subscripts make these symbols look like they have some kind of intemal structure, but do not let that mislead you
We could have used Q or StenchOneTwoinstead of $2, but we wanted symbols that are both mnemonic and succinct.
