170

Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

MODEL

 

that a reasoning system be able to draw conclusions that follow from the premises, regardless
of the world to which the sentences are intended to refer. But it is a good idea for a reasoning
system to follow this principle in any case. Suppose we replace the "user" in Figure 6,11 with
a camera-based visual processing system that sends input sentences to the reasoning system. It
makes no difference! Even though the computer now has "direct access" to the world, inference
can still take place through direct operations on the syntax of sentences, without any additional 4
information as to their intended meaning.

 

input sentences

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6.11 Sentences often refer to a world to which the agent has no independent access.

 

 

 

Models

Any world in which a sentence is true under a particular interpretation is called a model of that
sentence under that interpretation. Thus, the world shown in Figure 6.2 is a model of the sentence
“S$; 2” under the interpretation in which it means that there is a stench in [1,2]. There are many
other models of this sentence—you can make up a world that does or does not have pits and gold
in various locations, and as long as the world has a stench in [1,2], it is a model of the sentence.
The reason there are so many models is because “S,.>” makes a very weak claim about the world.
The more we claim (i.e., the more conjunctions we add into the knowledge base), the fewer the
models there will be. -

Models are very important in logic, because, to restate the definition of entailment, a
sentence a is entailed by a knowledge base KB ifthe models of KB are all models ofa. If this is
the case, then whenever KB is true, a must also be true.

In fact, we could define the meaning of a sentence by means of set operations on sets of
models. For example, the set of models of P A Q is the intersection of the models of P and the
models of QO. Figure 6,12 diagrams the set relationships for the four binary connectives.

We have said that models are worlds. One might feel that real worlds are rather messy
things on which to base a formal system. Some authors prefer to think of models as mathematical
objects. In this view, a model in propositional logic is simply a mapping from proposition symbols

 
