symbolic address

SECTION 63 Assembly Language 179

instructions that form the sum. Thus a compiler program translates the sym-
bols of the Fortran program into the binary values listed in the program of
Table 6-2.

6-3 Assembly Language

A programming language is defined by a set of rules. Users must conform with
all format rules of the language if they want their programs to be translated
correctly. Almost every commercial computer has its own particular assembly
language The rules for writing assembly language programs are documented
and published in manuals which are usually available from the computer
manufacturer.

The basic unit of an assembly language program isa line of code. The
specific language is defined by a set of rules that specify the symbols that can
be used and how they may be combined to form a line of code. We will now
formulate the rules of an assembly language for writing symbolic programs for
the basic computer.

Rules of the Language

Each line of an assembly language program is arranged in three columns called
fields. The fields specify the following information.

1. The label field may be empty or it may specify a symbolic address.

2. The instruction field specifies a machine instruction or a pseudoin-
struction .

3. The comment field may be empty or it may include a comment.

Asymbolicaddressconsists of one, two, orthree, but notmore than three
alphanumeric characters. The first character must be a letter; the next two may
be letters or numerals, The symbol can be chosen arbitrarily by the pro-
grammer. A symbolic address in the label field is terminated by a comma so
that it will be recognized as a label by the assembler.

The instruction field in an assembly language program may specify one
of the following items:

1. A memory-reference instruction (MRI)
2. A register-reference or input-output instruction (non-MRI)
3. A pseudoinstruction with or without an operand

Amemory-reference instruction occupies two or three symbols separated
by spaces. The first must be a three-letter symbol defining an MRI operation
