178 carrer six Programming the Basic Computer

TABLE 6-5 Assembly Language Program to Add Two Numbers

 

ORGO —_/Origin of program is location 0

LDA A {Load operand from location A

ADDB —_/Add operand from location B

STAC ‘Store sum in location C

HLT ‘Halt computer

DEC 83 Decimal operand

DEC -23 Decimal operand

C, DECO ‘Sum stored in location C
END FEnd of symbolic program

PP

symbolic address and each hexadecimal operand by a decimal operand. This
is convenient because one usually does not know exactly the numeric memory
location of operands while writing a program. If the operands are placed in
memory following the instructions, and if the length of the program is not
known in advance, the numerical location of operands is not known until the
end of the program is reached. In addition, decimal numbers are more familiar
than their hexadecimal equivalents.

The program in Table 6-5 is the assembly-language program for adding
two numbers. The symbol ORG followed by a number is not a machine
instruction. Its purpose is to specify an origin, that is, the memory location of
the next instruction below it. The next three lines have symbolic addresses.
Their value is specified by their being present as a label in the first column.
Decimal operands are specified following the symbol DEC. The numbers may
be positive or negative, but ifnegative, they must be converted to binary in the
signed-2's complement representation. The last line has the symbol END
indicating the end of the program. The symbols ORG, DEC, and END, called
pseudoinstructions, are defined in the next section. Note that all comments are
preceded by a slash.

The equivalent Fortran program for adding two integer numbers is listed
in Table 6-6. The two values for A and B may be specified by an input statement
or by a data statement. The arithmetic operation for the two numbers is
specified by one simple statement. The translation of this Fortran program into
a binary program consists of assigning three memory locations, one each for
the augend, addend, and sum, and then deriving the sequence of binary

TABLE 6-6 Fortran Program to Add Two Numbers

INTEGER A, B, C
DATAA,63 B,-23
C=A+B
END
