Section 6.4.

Propositional Logic: A Very Simple Logic 169

or "ifP then QO.” For one thing, propositional logic does not require any relation of causation or
relevance between P and Q. The sentence "5 is odd implies Tokyo is the capital of Japan" is a true
sentence of propositional logic (under the normal interpretation), even though it is a decidedly
odd sentence of English. Another point of confusion is that any implication is true whenever its
antecedent is false. For example, "5 is even implies Sam is smart" is true, regardless of whether
Sam is smart. This seems bizarre, but it makes sense ifyou think of "P = Q'" as saying, "IfP
is true, then I am claiming that Q is true. Otherwise I am making no claim."

Validity and inference

Truth tables can be used not only to define the connectives, but also to test for valid sentences.
Given a sentence, we make a truth table with one row for each ofthe possible combinations of
truth values for the proposition symbols in the sentence. For each row, we can calculate the truth
value of the entire sentence. Ifthe sentence is true in every row, then the sentence is valid. For
example, the sentence

(PV H)A 7H) => P

is valid, as can be seen in Figure 6.10. We include some intermediate columns to make it clear
how the final column is derived, but it is not important that the intermediate columns are there, as
long as the entries in the final column follow the definitions of the connectives. Suppose P means
that there is a wumpus in [1,3] and H means there is a wumpus in [2,2]. Ifat some point we leam
(P V H) and then we also learn sH, then we can use the valid sentence above to conclude that P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

is true—that the wumpus is in [1,3].
P H PVH (PVH)A>H_ | (PV H)A7H) > P
False False False False True
False True True False True
True False True True True
True True True False True
Figure 6.10 Truth table showing validity of a complex sentence.

 

 

 

This is important. It says that ifa machine has some premises and a possible conclusion,
it can determine ifthe conclusion is true. It can do this by building a truth table for the sentence
Premises => Conclusion and checking all the rows. If every row is true, then the conclusion is
entailed by the premises, which means that the fact represented by the conclusion follows from
the state of affairs represented by the premises. Even though the machine has no idea what the
conclusion means, the user could read the conclusions and use his or her interpretation of the
proposition symbols to see what the conclusions mean—in this case, that the wumpus is in [1,3].
Thus, we have fulfilled the promise made in Section 6.3

It will often be the case that the sentences input into the knowledge base by the user refer
to a world to which the computer has no independent access, as in Figure 6.11, where it is the
user who observes the world and types sentences into the computer. It is therefore essential
