Section 6.6.

Summary 179

 

out by Aristotle, whose work was assembled by his students after his death in 322 B.C. as a
treatise called the Organon, the first systematic treatise on logic. However, Aristotle's logic
‘was very weak by modem standards; except in a few isolated instances, he did not take account
of logical principles that depend essentially on embedding one entire syntactic structure within
another structure of the same type, in the way that sentences are embedded within other sentences
in modern propositional logic. Because of this limitation, there was a fixed limit on the amount
of internal complexity within a sentence that could be analyzed using Aristotelian logic.

The closely related Megarian and Stoic schools (originating in the fifth century B.C. and
continuing for several centuries thereafter) introduced the systematic study of implication and
other basic constructs still used in modem propositional logic. The Stoics claimed that their logic
was complete in the sense of capturing all valid inferences, but what remains is too fragmentary
to tell. A good account of the history of Megarian and Stoic logic, as far as it is known, is given
by Benson Mates (1953).

The ideas of creating an artificial formal language patterned on mathematical notation
in order to clarify logical relationships, and of reducing logical inference to a purely formal
and mechanical process, were due to Leibniz (1646-1716). Leibniz's own mathematical logic,
however, was severely defective, and he is better remembered simply for introducing these ideas
as goals to be attained than for his attempts at realizing them.

George Boole (1847) introduced the first reasonably comprehensive and approximately
correct system of logic based on an artificial formal language with his book The Mathematical
Analysis of Logic. Boole's logic was closely modeled on the ordinary algebra of real numbers.
Boole’s system subsumed the main parts of Aristotelian logic and also contained a close analogue
to modern propositional logic. Although Boole's system still fell short of full propositional logic,
it was close enough that other 19th-century writers following Boole could quickly fill in the gaps.
The first comprehensive exposition of modern propositional logic (and first-order logic) is found
in Gottlob Frege's (1879) Begriffschriff'Concept Writing" or "Conceptual Notation").

Truth tables as a method of testing the validity or unsatisfiability of sentences in the lan-
guage of propositional logic were independently introduced simultaneously by Ludwig Wittgen-
stein (1922) and by Emil Post (1921). (As a method of explaining the meanings of propositional
connectives, truth tables go back to Philo of Megara.)

Quine (1982) describes “truth-value analysis," a proof method closely resembling truth
tables but more efficient because, in effect, it can handle multiple lines of the truth table si-
multaneously. Wang (1960) takes a general proof method for first-order logic designed by
Gentzen (1934) and selects a convenient and efficient subset of inference rules for use in a
tree-based procedure for deciding validity in propositional logic.

John McCarthy's (1968) paper "Programs with Common Sense" promulgated the notion
of agents that use logical reasoning to mediate between percepts and actions. This paper was the
first to make this conception widely known, although it draws on much earlier work (McCarthy,
1958). The 1968 paper is also called the "Advice Taker" paper because it introduces a hypothetical
program by that name which uses logic to enable its designers to communicate useful knowledge to
it without having to write further directly executable computer code. Alien Newell's (1982) article
"The Knowledge Level" focuses on the use oflogic by agent designers to describe the knowledge
that is, in effect, being used by the agents they are designing, whether or not the agents themselves
use explicit logical formulas to represent this knowledge internally. This theme of Newell's was
