26

Maximum Flow

Just as we can model a road map as a directed graph in order to find the shortest
path from one point to another, we can also interpret a directed graph as a “flow
network” and use it to answer questions about material flows. Imagine a mate-
rial coursing through a system from a source, where the material is produced, to
a sink, where it is consumed. The source produces the material at some steady
rate, and the sink consumes the material at the same rate. The “flow” of the mate-
rial at any point in the system is intuitively the rate at which the material moves.
Flow networks can model many problems, including liquids flowing through pipes,
parts through assembly lines, current through electrical networks, and information
through communication networks.

We can think of each directed edge in a flow network as a conduit for the mate-
rial. Each conduit has a stated capacity, given as a maximum rate at which the ma-
terial can flow through the conduit, such as 200 gallons of liquid per hour through
a pipe or 20 amperes of electrical current through a wire. Vertices are conduit
junctions, and other than the source and sink, material flows through the vertices
without collecting in them. In other words, the rate at which material enters a ver-
tex must equal the rate at which it leaves the vertex. We call this property “flow
conservation,” and it is equivalent to Kirchhoff’s current law when the material is
electrical current.

In the maximum-flow problem, we wish to compute the greatest rate at which
we can ship material from the source to the sink without violating any capacity
constraints. It is one of the simplest problems concerning flow networks and, as
we shall see in this chapter, this problem can be solved by efficient algorithms.
Moreover, we can adapt the basic techniques used in maximum-flow algorithms to
solve other network-flow problems.

This chapter presents two general methods for solving the maximum-flow prob-
lem. Section 26.1 formalizes the notions of flow networks and flows, formally
defining the maximum-flow problem. Section 26.2 describes the classical method
of Ford and Fulkerson for finding maximum flows. An application of this method,
