710

 

OO
“EEK oO"
* A | ‘
O=ar-&

Chapter 26 Maximum Flow

Edmonton Saskatoon

 

Calgary Regina
(a) (b)

Figure 26.1 (a) A flow network G = (V,E) for the Lucky Puck Company’s trucking problem.
The Vancouver factory is the source s, and the Winnipeg warehouse is the sink r. The company ships
pucks through intermediate cities, but only c(w, v) crates per day can go from city w to city v. Each
edge is labeled with its capacity. (b) A flow f in G with value | f| = 19. Each edge (1, v) is labeled
by f(,v)/c(u,v). The slash notation merely separates the flow and capacity; it does not indicate
division.

We call the nonnegative quantity f (u,v) the flow from vertex u to vertex v. The
value | f | of a flow f is defined as

Ifl= of.) - 2 fO,5), (26.1)

veV vev

that is, the total flow out of the source minus the flow into the source. (Here, the |-|
notation denotes flow value, not absolute value or cardinality.) Typically, a flow
network will not have any edges into the source, and the flow into the source, given
by the summation }°,<y f(v.5), will be 0. We include it, however, because when
we introduce residual networks later in this chapter, the flow into the source will
become significant. In the maximum-flow problem, we are given a flow network G
with source s and sink ft, and we wish to find a flow of maximum value.

Before seeing an example of a network-flow problem, let us briefly explore the
definition of flow and the two flow properties. The capacity constraint simply
says that the flow from one vertex to another must be nonnegative and must not
exceed the given capacity. The flow-conservation property says that the total flow
into a vertex other than the source or sink must equal the total flow out of that
vertex —informally, “flow in equals flow out.”

An example of flow

A flow network can model the trucking problem shown in Figure 26.1(a). The
Lucky Puck Company has a factory (source s) in Vancouver that manufactures
hockey pucks, and it has a warehouse (sink f) in Winnipeg that stocks them. Lucky
