712

Chapter 26 Maximum Flow

antiparallel edges. Figure 26.2(b) displays this equivalent network. We choose
one of the two antiparallel edges, in this case (v;, v2), and split it by adding a new
vertex v’ and replacing edge (v1, v2) with the pair of edges (1), v’) and (v’, v2).
We also set the capacity of both new edges to the capacity of the original edge.
The resulting network satisfies the property that if an edge is in the network, the
reverse edge is not. Exercise 26.1-1 asks you to prove that the resulting network is
equivalent to the original one.

Thus, we see that a real-world flow problem might be most naturally modeled
by a network with antiparallel edges. It will be convenient to disallow antipar-
allel edges, however, and so we have a straightforward way to convert a network
containing antiparallel edges into an equivalent one with no antiparallel edges.

Networks with multiple sources and sinks

A maximum-flow problem may have several sources and sinks, rather than just
one of each. The Lucky Puck Company, for example, might actually have a set
of m factories {5,,52,.... Sm} and a set of n warehouses {f),f..... t,}, as shown
in Figure 26.3(a). Fortunately, this problem is no harder than ordinary maximum
flow.

We can reduce the problem of determining a maximum flow in a network with
multiple sources and multiple sinks to an ordinary maximum-flow problem. Fig-
ure 26.3(b) shows how to convert the network from (a) to an ordinary flow network
with only a single source and a single sink. We add a supersource s and add a
directed edge (s, s;) with capacity c(s,s;) = 00 foreachi = 1,2,..., m. We also
create anew supersink t and add a directed edge (t;,t) with capacity c(t;,t) = 00
for eachi = 1,2,..., n. Intuitively, any flow in the network in (a) corresponds to
a flow in the network in (b), and vice versa. The single source s simply provides
as much flow as desired for the multiple sources s;, and the single sink f likewise
consumes as much flow as desired for the multiple sinks t;. Exercise 26.1-2 asks
you to prove formally that the two problems are equivalent.

Exercises

26.1-1

Show that splitting an edge in a flow network yields an equivalent network. More
formally, suppose that flow network G contains edge (u,v), and we create a new
flow network G’ by creating a new vertex x and replacing (u,v) by new edges
(u,x) and (x,v) with c(u,x) = c(x,v) = c(u,v). Show that a maximum flow
in G’ has the same value as a maximum flow in G.
