Section 6.5.

An Agent for the Wumpus World 177

 

 

function PROPOSITIONAL-KB-AGENT percept) returns an action
static: KB, a knowledge base
t, acounter, initially 0, indicating time

TELL(KB, MAKE-PERCEPT-SENTENCE( percept, f))
for each action in the list of possible actions do
if ASK(KB, MAKE-ACTION-QUERY(f, action)) then
t—t+1
return action
end

 

 

Figure 6.16 A knowledge-based agent using propositional logic.

 

 

 

world is larger than a 4 x 4 grid. Given this multiplication ofrules, it will take thousands ofrules
to define a competent agent. The problem is notjust that it is taxing to write the rules down, but
also that having so many of them slows down the inference procedure. Remember that the size
ofa truth table is 2”, where n is the number of propositional symbols in the knowledge base.

Another problem is dealing with change. We showed a snapshot of the agent reasoning at
a particular point in time, and all the propositions in the knowledge base were true at that time.
But in general the world changes over time. When the agent makes its first move, the proposition
A,, becomes false and A>, becomes true. But it may be important for the agent to remember
where it was in the past, so it cannotjust forget A;.;. To avoid confusion, we will need different
propositional symbols for the agent's location at each time step. This causes difficulties in two
ways. First, we do not know how long the game will go on, so we do not know how many of these
time-dependent propositions we will need. Second, we will now have to go back and rewrite
time-dependent versions of each rule. For example, we will need

AY, A East) A WS, = —Forward®
AL) A East, AW3, => Forward!
Aj, A Bast 3A W3, => ~Forward?

A’, ANorth, AW), => —Forward®
Aj, ANorth\ A Wi, => Forward!
Ai, A Northy AW; => >Forward?

where the superscripts indicate times. If we want the agent to run for 100 time steps, we will
need 6400 of these rules, just to say one should not go forward when the wumpus is there.

In summary, the problem with propositional logic is that it only has one representational
device: the proposition. In the next chapter, we will introduce first-order logic, which can
represent objects and relations between objects in addition to propositions. In first-order logic,
the 6400 propositional rules can be reduced to one.

 
