178 Chapter 6. Agents that Reason Logically

 

6.6 __ SUMMARY

We have introduced the idea of a knowledge-based agent, and showed how we can define a logic
with which the agent can reason.about the world and be guaranteed to draw correct conclusions,
given correct premises. We have also showed how an agent can turn this knowledge into action.
The main points are as follows:

Intelligent agents need knowledge about the world in order to reach good decisions.

Knowledge is contained in agents in the form of sentences in a knowledge representation
language that are stored in a knowledge base.

A knowledge-based agent is composed of a knowledge base and an inference mechanism.
It operates by storing sentences about the world in its knowledge base, using the inference
mechanism to infer new sentences, and using them to decide what action to take.

A representation language is defined by its syntax and semantics, which specify the
structure of sentences and how they relate to facts in the world.

The interpretation of a sentence is the fact to which it refers. If it refers to a fact that is
part of the actual world, then it is true.

Inference is the process of deriving new sentences from old ones. We try to design sound
inference processes that derive true conclusions given true premises. An inference process
is complete ifit can derive all true conclusions from a set of premises.

A sentence that is true in all worlds under all interpretations is called valid. Ifan implication
sentence can be shown to be valid, then we can derive its consequent if we know its premise.
The ability to show validity independent of meaning is essential.

Different logics make different commitments about what the world is made of and what
kinds of beliefs we can have regarding facts.

Logics are useful for the commitments they do not make, because the lack of commitment
gives the knowledge base writer more freedom.

Propositional logic commits only to the existence of facts that may or may not be the case in
the world being represented. It has a simple syntax and semantics, but suffices to illustrate
the process of inference.

Propositional logic can accommodate certain inferences needed by a logical agent, but
quickly becomes impractical for even very small worlds.

 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES

Logic had its origins in ancient Greek philosophy and mathematics. Logical principles—
principles connecting the syntactic structure of sentences with their truth and falsity, their
meaning, or the validity of arguments in which they figure—can be found in scattered loca-
tions in the works of Plato (428-348 B.C.). The first known systematic study of logic was carried
