20

CHAPTER ONE Digital Logic Circuits

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

popes] * s

oo | OO

orld

Pole t —

ri fto ye
{_

(0) Truth ble (rLoviedingam

Figure 116 Half-adder.

(for carry) to the two output variables. The truth table for the half-adder is
shown in Fig. 1-16(a). The C output is 0 unless both inputs are 1. The S output
represents the least significant bit of the sum. The Boolean functions for the
two outputs can be obtained directly from the truth table:

Sax'ytxy'=20y
Cay

The logic diagram is shown in Fig. 1-16(b). It consists of an exclusive-OR gate
and an AND gate.

Full-Adder

A full-adder is a combinational circuit that forms the arithmetic sum of three
input bits. It consists of three inputs and two outputs. Two of the input
variables, denoted by x and y, represent the two significant bits to be added.
The third input, z, represents the carry from the previous lower significant
position. Two outputs are necessary because thearithmetic sum of three binary
digits ranges in value from to, and binary 2 or 3 needs two digits. The two
outputs are designated by the symbols $ (for sum) and C (for carry). The binary
variable S gives the value of the least significant bit of the sum. The binary
variable C gives the output carry. The truth table of the full-adder is shown in
Table 1-2. The eight rows under the input variables designate all possible
combinations that the binary variables may have. The value of the output
variables are determined from the arithmetic sum of the input bits. When all
input bits are 0, the output is 0. The S output is equal to 1 when only one input
is equal to 1 or when all three inputs are equal to 1. The C output has a carry
of 1 if two or three inputs are equal to 1.

‘The maps of Fig. 1-17 are used to find algebraic expressions for the two
output variables. The I’s in the squares for the mapsof Sand C are determined
directly from the minterms in the truth table. The squares with I's for the S
‘output do not combine in groups of adjacent squares. But since the output is
when an odd number of inputs are 1, S is an odd function and represents
