192

pointer

‘auPTER SIX Programming the Basic Computer

symbolized by SUM (in line 17) for storing the value of this variable at the
termination of the loop.

The program loop specified by the DO statement is translated to the
sequence of instructions listed in lines 7 through 10. Line7 specifies an indirect
ADD instruction because it has the symbol I. The address of the current
operand is stored in location PTR. When this location is addressed indirectly
the computer takes the content of PTR to be the address of the operand. As
aresult, the operand in location 150 is added to the accumulator. Location PTR
is then incremented with the ISZ instruction in line 8, so its value changes to
the value of the address of the next sequential operand. Location CTR is
incremented in line 9, andif tis not zero, the computer does not skip the next
instruction. The next instruction is a branch (BUN) instruction to the beginning
of the loop, so the computer returns to repeat the loop once again. When
location CTR reaches zero (after the loop is executed 100 times), the next
instruction is skipped and the computer executes the instructions in lines 11
and 12. The sum formedinthe accumulatorisstored inSUM and the computer
halts. The halt instruction isinserted here forclarity;actually, the program will
branch to a location where it will continue to execute the rest of the program
or branch to the beginning of another program. Note that ISZ.in line 8 is used
merely to add 1 to the address pointer PTR. Since the address is a positive
number, a skip will never occur.

The program of Table 6-13 introdufces the idea of a pointer and a counter
which can be used, together with the indirect address operation, to form a
program loop. The pointer points to the address of the current operand and
the counter counts the number of times that the program loop is executed. In
this example we use two memory locations for these functions. In computers
with more than one processor register, it is possible to use one processor
registeras a pointer, another as acounter, and a third asan accumulator. When
processor registers are used as pointers and counters they are called index
registers. Index registers are discussed in Sec. 8-5.

6-6 Programming Arithmetic
and Logic Operations

‘The number of instructions available in a computer may be a few hundred in
a large system or a few dozen ina small one. Some computers perform a given
operation with one machine instruction; others may require a large number of
machine instructions to perform the same operation. As an illustration, con-
sider the four basic arithmetic operations. Some computers have machine
instructions to add, subtract, multiply, and divide Others, such as the basic
computer, have only onearithmeticinstruction, suchas ADD. Operations not
included inthe set of machine instructions mustbe implementedby a program.
