 

FIRST-ORDER LOGIC

 

 

 

FIRST-ORDER LOGIC

OBIECTS
PROPERTIES
RELATIONS
FUNCTIONS

In which we introduce a logic that is sufficientfor building knowledge-based agents

In Chapter 6, we showed how a knowledge-based agent could represent the world in which it
operates and use those representations to deduce what actions to take. We used propositional
logic as our representation language because it is one of the simplest languages that demonstrates
all the important points. Unfortunately, propositional logic has a very limited ontology, making
only the commitment that the world consists of facts. This made it difficult to represent even
something as simple as the wumpus world.

In this chapter, we examine first-order logic,’ which makes a stronger set of ontological
commitments. The main one is that the world consists of objects, that is, things with individual
identities and properties that distinguish them from other objects

Among these objects, various relations hold. Some of these relations are functions—
relations in which there is only one "value" for a given "input." It is easy to start listing examples
of objects, properties, relations, and functions:

* Objects: people, houses, numbers, theories, Ronald McDonald, colors, baseball games,
wars, centuries ...

+ Relations: brother of, bigger than, inside, part of, has color, occurred after, owns ...

+ Properties: red, round, bogus, prime, multistoried ...

_# Functions: father of, best friend, third inning of, one more than ...

Indeed, almost any fact can be thought ofas referring to objects and properties or relations. Some
examples follow:

* "One plus two equals three"
Objects: one, two, three, one plus two; Relation: equals; Function: plus. (One plus two is
a name for the object that is obtained by applying the function plus to the objects one and
two. Three is another name for this object.)

* "Squares neighboring the wumpus are smelly."
Objects: wumpus, square; Property: smelly; Relation: neighboring.

|! Also called first-order predicate calculus, and sometimes abbreviated as FOL or FOPC.

185

 
