Chapter 24 Single-Source Shortest Paths 647

contains at most |V’| distinct vertices, it also contains at most |V| — 1 edges. Thus,
we can restrict our attention to shortest paths of at most |V| — 1 edges.

Representing shortest paths

We often wish to compute not only shortest-path weights, but the vertices on short-
est paths as well. We represent shortest paths similarly to how we represented
breadth-first trees in Section 22.2. Given a graph G = (V, E), we maintain for
each vertex v € V a predecessor v.1 that is either another vertex or NIL. The
shortest-paths algorithms in this chapter set the z attributes so that the chain of pre-
decessors originating at a vertex v runs backwards along a shortest path from s to v.
Thus, given a vertex v for which v.2 4 NIL, the procedure PRINT-PATH(G, 5, v)
from Section 22.2 will print a shortest path from s to v.

In the midst of executing a shortest-paths algorithm, however, the 7 values might
not indicate shortest paths. As in breadth-first search, we shall be interested in the
predecessor subgraph G,, = (V,, E,) induced by the values. Here again, we
define the vertex set Vz to be the set of vertices of G with non-NIL predecessors,
plus the source s:

Vr ={v eV i:v.m ANIL}U {5} .

The directed edge set E, is the set of edges induced by the z values for vertices
in Vz:

Ex = {(v.0,v) € E:v € Vy —{s}}.

We shall prove that the z values produced by the algorithms in this chapter have
the property that at termination G, is a “‘shortest-paths tree” — informally, a rooted
tree containing a shortest path from the source s to every vertex that is reachable
from s. A shortest-paths tree is like the breadth-first tree from Section 22.2, but it
contains shortest paths from the source defined in terms of edge weights instead of
numbers of edges. To be precise, let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph
with weight function w : E — R, and assume that G contains no negative-weight
cycles reachable from the source vertex s € V, so that shortest paths are well
defined. A shortest-paths tree rooted at s is a directed subgraph G’ = (V’, E’),
where V’ C V and E’ C E, such that

1. V’ is the set of vertices reachable from s in G,
2. G’ forms a rooted tree with root s, and

3. forall v € V’, the unique simple path from s to v in G’ is a shortest path from s
tovinG.
