Section 6.6.

Summary 183

 

climbing search algorithm. The initial state is a random assignment of true and false to the
proposition symbols. For example, for the preceding 3-CNF sentence, we might start with P and
Q false and R, S, and T true.

The evaluation function measures the number of satisfied clauses, that is, clauses with at
least one true disjunct. Thus, the initial state gets an evaluation of 3, because the second, third,
and fourth clauses are true. If there are n proposition symbols, then there are n operators, where
each operator is to change the truth assignment for one of the symbols. As a hill-climbing search,
we always use the operator that yields the best evaluation (randomly choosing one if there are
several equally good operators). Our example 3-CNF sentence is solved in one step, because
changing S from true tofalse yields a solution. As with a random-restart algorithm, unless we
find a solution after a certain amount of hill-climbing, we give up and start over from a new
random truth assignment. After a certain number of restarts, we give up entirely. The complete
algorithm is shown in Figure 6.17.

 

function Gsat(sentence,max-restarts, max-climbs) returns a truth assignment or failure

for 1— 1 to max-restarts do
4A —A randomly generated truth assignment
forj— 1 to max-climbs do
if A satisfies sentence then return 4
A—arandom choice of one of the best successors ofA
end
end
return failure

 

 

Figure 6.17 The Gsar algorithm for satisfiability testing. The successors of an assignment A
are truth assignment with one symbol flipped. A "best assignment” is one that makes the most
clauses true.

 

 

 

Answer the following questions about the algorithm:

|. Is the GSAT algorithm sound?
Is it complete?
Implement GSAT and use it to solve the problems in Exercise 6.3
Use GSAT to solve randomly generated 3SAT problems of different sizes. There are two
key parameters: N, the number of propositional symbols, and C, the number of clauses.
We will investigate the effects of the ratio C/N on the execution time of GSAT. With N
fixed at 20, make a graph of the median execution time versus C/N for C/N from 1 to 10.
(The median is a better statistic than the mean because one or two outliers can really throw
off the mean.) Use N as the value of max-restarts and 5N as the value of max-climbs.

e. Repeat for other values of N as time permits.

f. What can you conclude about the difficulty of 3SAT problems for different values of C, N,
and the ratio C/N?

Boge
