Section 7.1.

Syntax and Semantics 193

 

OUALITY SYMBOL

This is just like variable scoping in block-structured programming languages like Pascal and Lisp,
where an occurrence of a variable name refers to the innermost block that declared the variable.
Another way to think of it is this: 4x Brother(Richard,x)is a sentence about Richard (that he
has a brother), not about.x; so putting a Vx outside it has no effect. It could equally well have
been written 3z Brother(Richard, z). Because this can be a source of confusion, we will always
use different variables.

_ _ Every variable must be introduced by a quantifierbefore it is used. A sentence like Vx P(y),
in which y does not have a quantifier, is incorrect.) The term well-formed formula or wif is
sometimes used for sentences that have all their variables properly introduced.

Connections between V and 3

The two quantifiers are actually intimately connected with each other, through negation. When
one says that everyone dislikes parsnips, one is also saying that there does not exist someone who
likes them; and vice versa:

Vx Likes(x,Parsnips) is equivalent to >4.x Likes(x, Parsnips)
We can go one step further. "Everyone likes ice cream" means that there is no one who does not
like ice cream:

Vx Likes(x, IceCream) is equivalent to “3x Likes(x,eeCream) 5

Because V is really a conjuniétion over the universe of objects and 3 is a ‘Uisjunction,, it should
not be surprising that they obey De Morgan's rules. The De Morgan rules for quantified and
unquantified sentences are as follows:

Vx aP = AAx P “PA-Q
“Wax P 3x —P —(P AQ) =PV-Q

Vx P adx AP PAQ =(-P V AQ)
dx P= 7AVx -P PVQ = ~(-P AQ)

Thus, we do not really need both V and 3, just as we do not really need both A and V. Some
formal logicians adopt a principal of parsimony, throwing out any syntactic item that is not strictly
necessary. For the purposes of Al, the content, and hence the readability, of the sentences are
important. Therefore, we will keep both of the quantifiers.

=(P VQ)

 

Equality

First-order logic includes one more way to make atomic sentences, other than using a predicate
and terms as described earlier. We can use the equality symbol to make statements to the effect
that two terms refer to the same object. For example,

Father(John) = Henry
says that the object referred to by Father(John)and the object referred to by Henry are the same

5 Sometimes there is an assumption that all unquantified variables are introduced with an implicit V. This is the case in
most logic programming languages

 

 

 

 
