192

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

On the surface, this might look like a reasonable rendition of our sentence. But expanded out
into a disjunction, it becomes

(Sister(Spot,Spot) =» Cat(Spot))V

(Sister(Rebecca,Spot) => Cat(Rebecca))V

(Sister(Felix, Spot) => Cat(Felix))V.

(Sister(Richard,Spot) => Cat(Richard))V

(Sister(John,Spot) => Cat(John))V

Now, this disjunction will be satisfied if any of its disjuncts are tre. An implication is true
if both premise and conclusion are true, or ifits premise is false. So if Richard the Lionheart
is not Spot's sister, then the implication Sister(Spot, Richard) = Cat(Richard)is true and the
entire disjunction is therefore true. So, an existentially quantified implication sentence is true in
a universe containing any object for which the premise of the implication is false; hence such~
sentences really do not say much at all. —™

Nested quantifiers

We will often want to express more complex sentences using multiple quantifiers. The simplest
case is where the quantifiers are of the same type. For example, "For all x and all y, ifx is the
parent ofy then y is the child of x" becomes

Vx,y Parent(x,y)=> Child(y,x)

Vx,y is equivalent to Vx Vy. Similarly, the fact that a person's brother has that person as a
sibling is expressed by

Vx," Brother(x,y) => Sibling(y,x)
In other cases we will have mixtures. "Everybody loves somebody" means that for every person,
there is someone that person loves:

Vx dy Loves(x,y)
On the other hand, to say "There is someone who is loved by everyone" we write

Fy Vx Loves(x,y)
The order of quantification is therefore very important. It becomes clearer if we put in parentheses.
In general, Vx (3 P(x.y)),Where P(x,y) is some arbitrary sentence involving x and y, says
that every object in the universe has a particular property, namely, the property that it is related to
some object by the relation P_On the other hand, 4x (Vy P(x,y) says that there is some object
in the world that has a particular property, namely the property of being related by P to every
object in the world. ~~

A minor difficulty arises when two quantifiers are used with the same variable name.
Consider the sentence

Vx [Cat(x) V Ax Brother(Richard, x))]

Here the x in Brother(Richard, x)is existentially quantified. The rule is that the variable belongs
to the innermost quantifier that mentions it; then it will not be subject to any other quantification.
