Section 7.1.

Syntax and Semantics 191

 

this would be equivalent to

Cat(Spot) A Mammal(Spot)A
Cat(Rebecca)A Mammal(Rebecca)A
Cat(Felix) A Mammal(Felix)A
Cat(Richard)A Mammal(Richard) A
Cat(John)A Mammal(John)A

 

Obviously, this does not capture what we want, because it says that Richard the Lionheart is both
a cat and a mammal.

Existential quantification (3)

Universal quantification makes statements about every object. Similarly, we can make a statement
about some object in the universe without naming it, by using an existential quantifier. To say,
for example, that Spot has a sister who is a cat, we write

3x Sister(x, Spot) A Cat(x)

 

3 is pronounced "There exists . In general, 3x P is true if P is true for some object in the
universe. It therefore can be thought of as equivalent to the disjunction (ie., the V) of all the
sentences obtained by substituting the name of an object forthe variable x. Doing the substitution
for the above sentence, we would get

(Sister(Spot Spot) A. Cat(Spot))V
(Sister(Rebecca,Spot) A Cat(Rebecca))V
(Sister(Felix, Spot) A Cat(Felix))V
(Sister(Richard,Spot) A Cat(Richard))V
(Sister(JohnSpot) A Cat(John)yV

The existentially quantified sentence is true just in case at least one of these disjuncts is true. If
Spot had two sisters who were cats, then two of the disjuncts would be true, making the whole
disjunction true also. This is entirely consistent with the original sentence "Spot has a sister who
is acat’*

Just as = appears to be the natural connective to use with V, A is the natural connective
to use with 3. Using A as the main connective with V led to.an overly strong statement in the
example in the previous section; using => with 3 usually leads to a very weak statement indeed.
Consider the following representation: oS

 

Sax Sister(x,Spot) = Cat(x)

4 There is a variant ofthe existential quantifier, usually written 3! or 3!, that means "There exists exactly one ...”. The
same meaning can be expressed using equality statements, as we show in Section 7.1.
