194

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

 

Equality can be viewed as a predicate symbol with a predefined meaning, namely, that it
is fixed t6 refer to the identity relation. The identity relation is the set of all pairs of objects in

~~" which both elements of each parr ate the same object:

{ {Spot, Spot),

(Rebecca. Rebecca),

(Felix, Felix),

(Richard the Lionheart, Richard the Lionheart),

(King John, King John).

(Henry II, Henry Il),

oJ
Thus, to see if Farher(John) =Henry is true in a particular interpretation, we first look in the
functional relation for Father and find the entry

 

(ing John, Henry II),
ot

Then, because Henry refers to Henry II, the equality statement is true because (Henry II, Henry nD
is in the equality relation.

The equality symbol can be used to describe the properties of a given function, as we did
above for the Father symbol. It can also be used with negation to insist that two terms are not
the same object. To say that Spot has at least two sisters, we would write

3x,y Sister(Spot.x) A Sister(Spot.y) A a(x=y)
Ifwe simply wrote
3x, Sister(Spot.x) A Sister(Spot.y)

that would not assert the existence of two distinct sisters, because nothing says that x and y have
to be different. Consider the expansion of the existential statement into a disjunction: it will
include as a disjunct
.» V (Sister(Spot Rebecca) A Sister(Spot,Rebecca)) V

which occurs when Rebecca is substituted for both x and y. If Rebecca is indeed Spot's sister,
then the existential will be satisfied because this disjunct will be true. The addition of (x=)
makes the disjunct false, because Rebecca = Rebecca is necessarily true. The notation xy is
sometimes used as an abbreviation for >(x=y).

7.2__ EXTENSIONS AND NOTATIONAL VARIATIONS

In this section we look at three types of alternatives to first-order logic. First, we look at an
extension called higher-order logic. Second, we consider some abbreviations that add no new
power to first-order logic but do make the resulting sentences more concise. Third, we look at
variations on our notation for first-order logic.

 
