SECTION 66 Programming Arithmetic and Logic Operations 197

Logic Operations

‘The basic computer has three machine instructions that perform logic opera-
tions: AND, CMA, and CLA. TheLDA instruction may be considered as alogic
operation that transfers a logic operand into the AC. In Sec. 4-5 we listed 16
different logic operations. All 16 logic operations can be implemented by
software means because any logic function can be implemented using the AND
and complement operations. For example, the OR operation is not available as
a machine instruction in the basic computer. From DeMorgan's theorem we
recognize the relation x + y = (x’y’)’. The second expression contains only
AND and complement operations. A program that forms the OR operation of
two logic operands A and B is as follows:

LDAA Load first operand A

cua Complement to get 2

STATMP Store inatemporary location
LDAB Load second operand B

cua Complement to get B
AND TMP AND with AtogetAAB
cua Complement again to get avB

The other logic operations can be implemented by software in a similar
fashion.

Shift Operations

The circular-shift operations are machine instructions in the basic computer.
The othershifts of interest are thelogical shifts and arithmetic shifts. These two
shifts can be programmed with a small number of instructions.

The logical shift requires that zeros be added to the extreme positions.
This is easily accomplished by clearing E and circulating the AC and E. Thus
for a logical shift-right operation we need the two instructions

CLE

CIR

For a logical shift-left operation we need the two instructions

CLE
cIL

The arithmetic shifts depend on the type of representation of negative
numbers, For the basic computer we have adopted the signed-2's complement
representation. The rules for arithmetic shifts are listed in Sec. 46. For an
arithmetic right-shift it is necessary that the sign bit in the leftmost position
remain unchanged. But the sign bit itself is shifted into the high-order bit
