186

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

 

+ “Evil King John ruled England in 1200."
Objects: John, England, 1200; Relation: ruled; Properties: evil, king.

First-order logic has been so important to mathematics, philosophy, and artificial intelligence
precisely because those fields—and indeed, much of everyday human existence—can be usefully
thought of as dealing with objects and the relations between them. We are: not claiming that the
world really is made up of objects and relations, just that dividing up the world that way helps us
reason about it. First-order logic can also express facts about all of the objects in thd universe
This, together with the implication connective from propositional logic, enables one to represéi
general laws or rules, such as the statement "Squares neighboring the wumpus are smelly."

Although first-order logic commits to the existence of objects and relations, it does not
make an ontological commitment to such things as categories, time, and events, which also seem
to show up in most facts about the world. Strangely enough, this reluctance to tackle categories,
time, and events has not hurt the popularity of first-order logic; in fact it has Contributed Yo its
success. Important as these things are, there are just too many different ways to deal with them,
and a logic that committed to a single treatment would only have limited appeal. By remaining
neutral, first-order logic gives its users the freedom to describe these things in a way that is
appropriate for the domain. This freedom of choice is a general characteristic of first-order logic.
In the previous example we listed King as a property of people, but we could just as well have
made King a relation between people and countries, or a function from countries to people (in a
world in which each country has only one king),

There are many different representation schemes in use in AI, some of which we will
discuss in later chapters. Some are theoretically equivalent to first-order logic and some are not.
But first-order logic is universal in the sense that it can express anything that can be programmed.
We choose to study knowledge representation and reasoning using first-order logic because it
is by far the most studied and best understood scheme yet devised. Generally speaking, other
proposals involving additional capabilities are still hotly debated and only partially understood.
Other proposals that are a subset of first-order logic are useful only in limited domains. Despite
its limitations, first-order logic will be around for a long time.

 

 

 

7.1 SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS

TERMS

CONSTANT SYMBOLS

In propositional logic every expression is a sentence, which represents a fact. First-order logic

has sentences, but it also has terms, which represent objects. Constant symbols, variables,-and

function symbols are used to build terms, and quantifiers and predicate symbols are used to build

sentences. Figure 7.1 gives a complete grammar of first-order logic, using Backus-Naur form

(see page 854 if you are not familiar with this notation). A more detailed explanation of each
element, describing both syntax and semantics, follows:

~ Constant symbols: 4, B, C, John ...

An interpretation must specify which object in the world is referred to by each constant

symbol. Each constant symbol names exactly one object, but not all objects need to

have names, and some can have several names. Thus, the symbol John, in one particular
