198

CHAPTER Six Programming the Basic Computer

position of the number. The program forthearithmeticright-shiftrequires that
we set E to the same value as the sign bit and circulate right, thus:

CLE /Clear E too

SPA /Skip if AC is positive; E remains 0
CME /ACis negative; set Eto 1

CIR /Circulate Band AC

Forarithmetic shifteft itis necessary that the added bitin the least significant
position be 0. This is easily done by clearing E prior to the circulate-left
operation The sign bit must not change during this shift With a circulate
instruction, the sign bit moves into E. It is then necessary to compare the sign
bit with the value of E after the operation. If the two values are equal, the
arithmetic shift has been correctly implemented. If they are not equal, an
overflow occurs. An overflow indicates that the unshifted number was too
large. When multiplied by 2 (by means of the shift), the number so obtained
exceeds the capacity of the AC.

6-7__ Subroutines

Frequently, the same piece of code mustbe written overagainin many different
parts of a program. Instead of repeating the code every time itis needed, there
is an obvious advantage if the common instructions are written only once. A
set of common instructions that can be used ina program many times is called
a subroutine. Each time that a subroutine is used in the main part of the
program, a branch is executed to the beginning of the subroutine. After the
subroutine has been executed, a branch is made back to the main program.

‘A subroutine consists of a self-contained sequence of instructions that
carries out a given task. A branch can be made to the subroutine from any part
of the main program. This poses the problem of how the subroutine knows
which location to return to, since many different locations in the main program
may make branches to the same subroutine. It is therefore necessary to store
the return address somewhere in the computer for the subroutine to know
where to return Because branching to a subroutine and returning to the main
program is such a common operation, all computers provide special instruc-
tions to facilitate subroutine entry and return.

In the basic computer, the link between the main program and a sub-
routineis the BSA instruction (branchandsave return address). To explain how
this instruction is used, let us write a subroutine that shifts the content of the
accumulator four times to the left. Shifting a word four times is a useful
operation for processing binary coded decimal numbers or alphanumeric char-
acters. Such an operation could have been included as a machine instruction
in the computer. Since itis not included, asubroutine is formed to accomplish
this task. The program of Table 6-16 starts by loading the value of X into the
