200

(CHAPTER Six Programming the Basic Computer

location SH4 because this is an indirect address instruction What is found in
location SH4 is the return address 102 which was previously stored there by
the BSA instruction. The computer returns to execute the instruction in loca-
tion 102. The main program continues by storing the shifted number into
location X. A new number is then loaded into the AC from location Y, and
another branch is made to the subroutine. This time location SH4 will contain
the return address 105 since thisis now the location of the next instruction after
BSA. The new operand is shifted and the subroutine returns to the main
program at location 105.

From this example we see that the first memory location of each sub-
routine serves as a link between the main program and the subroutine. The
procedure for branching to a subroutine and returning to the main program
is referred to as a subroutine linkage. The BSA instruction performs an opera-
tion commonly called subroutine call. The last instruction of the subroutine
performs an operation commonly called subroutine return.

The procedure used in the basic computer for subroutine linkage is
commonly found in computers with only one processor register. Many com-
puters have multiple processor registers and some of them are assigned the
name index registers. In such computers, an index register is usually employed
to implement the subroutine linkage. A branch-to-subroutine instruction
stores the return address in an index register. A return-from-subroutine in-
struction is effected by branching to the address presently stored in the index
register.

Subroutine Parameters and Data Linkage
When asubroutineis called, the main program must transfer the data it wishes
the subroutine to work with. In the previous example, the data were trans-
ferred through the accumulator. The operand was loaded into the AC prior to
the branch. The subroutine shifted the number and left it there to be accepted
by the main program. In general, it is necessary for the subroutine to have
access to data from the calling program and to return results to that program.
The accumulator can be used for a single input parameter and a single output
parameter. In computers with multiple processor registers, more parameters
can be transferred this way. Another way to transfer data to a subroutine is
throughthe memory. Data are often placed in memory locations following the
call. They can also be placed in a block of storage. The first address of the block
isthen placed in thememorylocation following the call. In any case, the return
address always gives the link information for transferring data between the
main program and the subroutine.

‘As an illustration, consider a subroutine that performs the logic OR
operation. Two operands must be transferred to the subroutine and the sub-
routine must retum the result of the operation. The accumulator can be used
