128 —cuarren Ave Basic Computer Organization and Design

rogram
‘counter (PC)

code afterit is read from memory. The computer needs processor registers for
manipulating data and a register for holding a memory address. These require-
ments dictate the register configuration shown in Fig. 5-3. The registers arealso
listed in Table 5-1 together with a brief description of their function and the
number of bits that they contain.

The memory unit has a capacity of 4096 words and each word contains
16 bits. Twelve bits of an instruction word are needed to specify the address
of an operand. This leaves three bits for the operation part of the instruction
and a bit to specify a direct or indirect address. The data register (DR) holds
the operand read from memory. The accumulator (AC) register is a general-
purpose processing register. The instruction read from memory is placed inthe
instruction register (IR). The temporary register (TR) is used for holding tem-
porary data during the processing.

TABLE 5-1 List of Registers for the Basic Computer

 

Register Number

symbol of bits Register name Function

DR 16 Data register Holds memory operand

AR 12 Address register Holds address for memory
AC 16 Accumulator Processor register

IR 16 Instruction register Holds instruction code

PC 12 Program counter Holds address of instruction
TR 16 Temporary register Holds temporary data
INPR 8 Input register Holds input character
OUTR 8 Output register Holds output character

The memory address register (AR) has 12 bits since this is the width of
a memory address. The program counter (PC) also has 12 bits and it holds the
address of the next instruction to be read from memory after the current
instructionis executed. The PC goes through a counting sequence and causes
the computer to read sequential instructions previously stored in memory.
Instruction words are read and executed in sequence unless a branch instruc-
tion is encountered. A branch instruction calls for a transfer to a nonconsecu-
tive instruction in the program. The address part of a branch instruction is
transferred to PC to become the address of the next instruction. To read an
instruction, the content of PC istaken as the address formemory and amemory
read cycleiis initiated, PC is then incremented by one, so it holds the address
of the next instruction in sequence.

Two registers are used for input and output. The input register (INPR)
receives an &-bit character from an input device. The output register (OUTR)
holds an 8-bit character for an output device.
