714

Chapter 26 Maximum Flow

26.1-4
Let f be a flow in a network, and let a be a real number. The scalar flow product,
denoted af’, is a function from V x V to R defined by

(af)(u,v) =a- fur).

Prove that the flows in a network form a convex set. That is, show that if f, and fo
are flows, then so is af; + (1 —@) f2 for all w in the range 0 < @ <1.

261-5
State the maximum-flow problem as a linear-programming problem.

26.1-6

Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately, dislike each other. The prob-
lem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school together, but in fact
each one refuses to walk on any block that the other child has stepped on that day.
The children have no problem with their paths crossing at a corner. Fortunately
both the professor’s house and the school are on corners, but beyond that he is not
sure if it is going to be possible to send both of his children to the same school.
The professor has a map of his town. Show how to formulate the problem of de-
termining whether both his children can go to the same school as a maximum-flow
problem.

26.1-7

Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a flow network has vertex capacities.
That is each vertex v has a limit /(v) on how much flow can pass though v. Show
how to transform a flow network G = (V, E) with vertex capacities into an equiv-
alent flow network G’ = (V’, E’) without vertex capacities, such that a maximum
flow in G’ has the same value as a maximum flow in G. How many vertices and
edges does G’ have?

 

26.2 The Ford-Fulkerson method

This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the maximum-flow
problem. We call it a “method” rather than an “algorithm” because it encompasses
several implementations with differing running times. The Ford-Fulkerson method
depends on three important ideas that transcend the method and are relevant to
many flow algorithms and problems: residual networks, augmenting paths, and
cuts. These ideas are essential to the important max-flow min-cut theorem (The-
orem 26.6), which characterizes the value of a maximum flow in terms of cuts of
