Section 7.1.

 

QUANTIFIERS

Syntax and Semantics 189

Atomic sentences

Now that we have terms for referring to objects, and predicate symbols for referring to relations,

we can put them together to make atomic sentences that state" facts. An atomic sentence is

formed from a predicate symbol followed by a parenthesized list of terms. For example,
Brother(Richard, John)

states, under the interpretation given before, that Richard the Lionheart is the brother of King
John.? Atomic sentences can have arguments that are complex terms:

Married(FatherOf (Richard), MotherOf John))

states that Richard the Lionheart’s father is married to King John's mother (again, under a suitable
interpretation). An atomic sentence is true ifthe relatign referred to by the predicate symbol
holds between the objects referred to by the arguments,“The relation holds just in case the tuple
of objects is in the relation) The truth ofa sentence therefore depends on both the interpretation
and the world. :

J

Complex sentences

We can use logical connectives to construct more complex sentences, just as in propositional
calculus. The semantics of sentences formed using logical connectives is identical to that in the
propositional case. For example:

Brother(Richard, John) A Brother(John, Richard) is true just when John is the brother of
Richard and Richard is the brother of John.

Older(John,30) V Younger(John,30) is true just when John is older than 30 or John is
younger than 30.

Older(John,30) = —Younger(John,30) states that if John is older than 30, then he is not
younger than 30.

>Brother(Robin, John) is true just when Robin is not the brother of John.

Quantifiers

Once we have a logic that allows objects, it is only natural to want to express properties of entire
collections of objects, rather than having to enumerate the objects by name. Quantifiers let us
do this. First-order logic contains two standard quantifiers, called universal and existential.

Universal quantification (V)

Recall the difficulty we had in Chapter 6 with the problem of expressing general rules in propo-
sitional logic. Rules such as "All cats are mammals" are the bread and butter of first-order logic.

  

2 We will usually follow the argument ordering convention that P(s, y) is interpreted as “xis a P ofy.”

3. Although these last two sentences may seem like tautologies, they are not. There are interpretations of Younger and
Older in which they are false

 
