190

Chapter 7. First-Order Logic

 

VARIABLE

GROUND TERM

To express this particular rule, we will use unary predicates Cat and Mammal, thus, "Spot is a
cat" is represented by Car(Spor)and "Spot is a mammal" by Mammal(Spot).In English, what
we want to say is that for any object.x, ifx is a cat then x is a mammal. First-order logic lets us
do this as follows: ~~ a

Vx Cat(x) => Mammal(x)’

V is usually pronounced "For all ...”, Remember that the upside-down A stands for "all" You
can think of a sentence Vx P, where P is any logical expression, as being equivalent to the
conjunction (ie., the A) of all the sentences obtained by substituting the name of an object for
the variable x wherever it appears in P. The preceding sentence is therefore equivalent to

Cat(Spot)=> Mammal(Spot)A
Cat(Rebecca) => Mammal(Rebecca) A
Cat(Felix)= Mammal(Felix)A
Cat(Richard) = Mamumal(Richard) A
Cat(John)= Mammal(John) A

Thus, it is true if and only if all these sentences are true, that is, if P is true for all objects x in the
universe. Hence V is called a universal quantifier.

We use the convention that all variables start with a lowercase letter, and that all constant,
predicate, and function symbols are capitalized. A variable is a term all by itself, and as such can
also serve as the argument of a function, for example, ChildOf(x).A term with no variables is
called a ground term.

It is worth looking carefully at the conjunction of sentences given before. If Spot, Rebecca,
and Felix are known to be cats, then the first three conjuncts allow us to conclude that they are
mammals. But what about the next two conjuncts, which appear to make claims about King John
and Richard the Lionheart? Is that part of the meaning of "all cats are mammals"? In fact, these
conjuncts are true, but make no claim whatsoever about the mammalian qualifications of John
and Richard. This is because Cat(Richard) and Cat(John)are (presumably) false. Looking at
the truth table for => (Figure 6.9), we see that the whole sentence is true whenever the left-hand
side of the implication is false—regardless of the truth of the right-hand side. Thus, by asserting
the universally quantified sentence, which is equivalent to asserting a whole list of individual
implication sentences, we end up asserting the right-hand side of the rulejust for those individuals
for whom the left-hand side is true, and saying nothing at all about those individuals for whom
the left-hand side is false. Thus, the truth-table entries for = turn out to be perfect for writing
general rules with universal quantifiers.

It is tempting to think that the presence of the condition Cat(x) on the left-hand side of the
implication means that somehow the universal quantifier ranges only over cats. This is perhaps
helpful but not technically correct. Again, the universal quantification makes a statement about
everything. but it does not make any claim about whether non-cats are mammals or not. On the
other hand, if we tried to express “all cats are mammals" using the sentence

Vx Cat(x) A Mammal(x)
