The Science of Biology

Concept Outline

1.1 Biology is the science of life.

Properties of Life. Biology is the science that studies
living organisms and how they interact with one another and
their environment.

1.2 Scientists form generalizations from observations.

‘The Nature of Science. Science employs both deductive
reasoning and inductive reasoning.

How Science Is Done. Scientists construct hypotheses
from systematically collected objective data. They then
perform experiments designed to disprove the hypotheses.

1.3 Darwin’s theory of evolution illustrates how science
works.

Darwin’s Theory of Evolution. On a round-the-world
voyage Darwin made observations that eventually led him to
formulate the hypothesis of evolution by natural selection.
Darwin’s Evidence. The fossil and geographic patterns of
life he observed convinced Darwin that a process of evolution
had occurred.

Inventing the Theory of Natural Selection. The
Malthus idea that populations cannot grow unchecked led
Darwin, and another naturalist named Wallace, to propose
the hypothesis of natural selection.

Evolution After Darwin: More Evidence. In the century
since Darwin, a mass of experimental evidence has supported
his theory of evolution, now accepted by practically all prac-
ticing biologists.

1.4 This book is organized to help you learn biology.

Core Principles of Biology. The first half of this text is
devoted to general principles that apply to all organisms, the
second half to an examination of particular organisms.

 

FIGURE 1.1

A replica of the Beagle, off the southern coast of South
America. The famous English naturalist, Charles Darwin,
set forth on H.MLS. Beagle in 1831, at the age of 22.

ou are about to embark on a journey—a journey of

discovery about the nature of life. Nearly 180 years
ago, a young English naturalist named Charles Darwin set
sail on a similar journey on board H.M‘S. Beagle (figure
1.1 shows a replica of the Beagle). What Darwin learned on
his five-year voyage led directly to his development of the
theory of evolution by natural selection, a theory that has
become the core of the science of biology. Darwin’s voyage
seems a fitting place to begin our exploration of biology,
the scientific study of living organisms and how they have
evolved. Before we begin, however, let’s take a moment to
think about what biology is and why it’s important.
