 

Eye muscle

FIGURE 50.18

Skeletal muscles have different
proportions of fast-twitch and slow-
twitch fibers. The muscles that move the
eye contain mostly fast-twitch fibers,
whereas the deep muscle of the leg (the

Contraction strength ———>-

 

(lateral rectus)

Calf muscle

(gastrocnemius)
Deep muscle of leg
(soleus)

Lo

 

soleus) contains mostly slow-twitch fibers.
The calf muscle (gastrocnemius) is

 

Time (msec) ——>-

 

 

intermediate in its composition.

Muscle Metabolism during Rest and Exercise

Skeletal muscles at rest obtain most of their energy from
the aerobic respiration of fatty acids. During exercise, mus-
cle glycogen and blood glucose are also used as energy
sources. The energy obtained by cell respiration is used to
make ATP, which is needed for (1) the movement of the
cross-bridges during muscle contraction and (2) the pump-
ing of Ca** into the sarcoplasmic reticulum for muscle re-
laxation. ATP can be obtained by skeletal muscles quickly
by combining ADP with phosphate derived from creatine
phosphate. This compound was produced previously in the
resting muscle by combining creatine with phosphate de-
rived from the ATP generated in cell respiration.

Skeletal muscles respire anaerobically for the first 45 to
90 seconds of moderate-to-heavy exercise, because the car-
diopulmonary system requires this amount of time to suffi-
ciently increase the oxygen supply to the exercising mus-
cles. If exercise is moderate, aerobic respiration contributes
the major portion of the skeletal muscle energy require-
ments following the first 2 minutes of exercise.

Whether exercise is light, moderate, or intense for a
given person depends upon that person’s maximal capacity
for aerobic exercise. The maximum rate of oxygen con-
sumption in the body (by aerobic respiration) is called the
maximal oxygen uptake, or the aerobic capacity. The inten-
sity of exercise can also be defined by the lactate threshold.
This is the percentage of the maximal oxygen uptake at
which a significant rise in blood lactate levels occurs as a
result of anaerobic respiration. For average, healthy people,
for example, a significant amount of blood lactate appears
when exercise is performed at about 50 to 70% of the maxi-
mal oxygen uptake.

Muscle Fatigue and Physical Training

Muscle fatigue refers to the use-dependant decrease in the
ability of a muscle to generate force. The reasons for fa-

tigue are not entirely understood. In most cases, however,
muscle fatigue is correlated with the production of lactic
acid by the exercising muscles. Lactic acid is produced by
the anaerobic respiration of glucose, and glucose is ob-
tained from muscle glycogen and from the blood. Lactate
production and muscle fatigue are therefore also related to
the depletion of muscle glycogen.

Because the depletion of muscle glycogen places a limit
on exercise, any adaptation that spares muscle glycogen will
improve physical endurance. Trained athletes have an in-
creased proportion of energy derived from the aerobic res-
piration of fatty acids, resulting in a slower depletion of
their muscle glycogen reserve. The greater the level of
physical training, the higher the proportion of energy de-
rived from the aerobic respiration of fatty acids. Because
the aerobic capacity of endurance-trained athletes is higher
than that of untrained people, athletes can perform more
exercise before lactic acid production and glycogen deple-
tion cause muscle fatigue.

Endurance training does not increase muscle size.
Muscle enlargement is produced only by frequent periods
of high-intensity exercise in which muscles work against
high resistance, as in weight lifting. As a result of resis-
tance training, type II (fast-twitch) muscle fibers become
thicker as a result of the increased size and number of
their myofibrils. Weight training, therefore, causes skele-
tal muscles to grow by hypertrophy (increased cell size)
rather than by cell division and an increased number of
cells.

 

Muscles contract through summation of the
contractions of their fibers, producing tension that may
result in shortening of the muscle. Slow-twitch skeletal
muscle fibers are adapted for aerobic respiration and
are slower to fatigue than fast-twitch fibers, which are
more adapted for the rapid generation of power.

 

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1011
