 

FIGURE 50.21

Animals that hop or leap use their rear legs to propel themselves through the air. The powerful leg muscles of this frog allow it to

explode from a crouched position to a takeoff in about 100 milliseconds.

Locomotion on Land

The three great groups of terrestrial animals—mollusks,
arthropods, and vertebrates—each move over land in dif-
ferent ways.

Mollusk locomotion is far less efficient than that of the
other groups. Snails, slugs, and other terrestrial mollusks
secrete a path of mucus that they glide along, pushing with
a muscular foot.

Only vertebrates and arthropods (insects, spiders, and
crustaceans) have developed a means of rapid surface loco-
motion. In both groups, the body is raised above the
ground and moved forward by pushing against the ground
with a series of jointed appendages, the legs.

Because legs must provide support as well as propulsion,
it is important that the sequence of their movements not
shove the body’s center of gravity outside of the legs’ zone
of support. If they do, the animal loses its balance and falls.
It is the necessity to maintain stability that determines the
sequence of leg movements, which are similar in verte-
brates and arthropods.

The apparent differences in the walking gaits of these
two groups reflects the differences in leg number. Verte-
brates are tetrapods (four limbs), while all arthropods have
six or more limbs. Although having many legs increases sta-
bility during locomotion, they also appear to reduce the
maximum speed that can be attained.

The basic walking pattern of all tetrapod vertebrates is
left hind leg (LH), left foreleg (LF), right hindleg (RH),
right foreleg (RF), and then the same sequence again and
again. Unlike insects, vertebrates can begin to walk with
any of the four legs, and not just the posterior pair. Both

1014 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

arthropods and vertebrates achieve faster gaits by overlap-
ping the leg movements of the left and right sides. For ex-
ample, a horse can convert a walk to a trot, by moving di-
agonally opposite legs simultaneously.

The highest running speeds of tetrapod vertebrates,
such as the gallop of a horse, are obtained with asymmetric
gaits. When galloping, a horse is never supported by more
than two legs, and occasionally is supported by none. This
reduces friction against the ground to an absolute mini-
mum, increasing speed. With their larger number of legs,
arthropods cannot have these speedy asymmetric gaits, be-
cause the movements of the legs would interfere with each
other.

Not all animals walk or run on land. Many insects, like
grasshoppers, leap using strong rear legs to propel them-
selves through the air. Vertebrates such as kangaroos, rab-
bits, and frogs are also effective leapers (figure 50.21).

Many invertebrates use peristaltic motion to slide over
the surface. Among vertebrates, this form of locomotion is
exhibited by snakes and caecilians (legless amphibians).
Most snakes employ serpentine locomotion, in which the
body is thrown into a series of sinuous curves. The move-
ments superficiall
but the similarit

resemble those of eel-like swimming,

 

 

y is more apparent than real. Propulsion is
not by a wave of contraction undulating the body, but by a
simultaneous lateral thrust in all segments of the body in
contact with the ground. To go forward, it is necessary that
the strongest muscular thrust push against the ground op-
posite the direction of movement. Because of this, thrust
tends to occur at the anterior (outside) end of the inward-
curving side of the loop of the snake’s body.
