Respiration in Birds

The avian respiratory system has a unique structure that af-
fords birds the most efficient respiration of all terrestrial
vertebrates. Unlike the blind-ended alveoli in the lungs of
mammals, the bird lung channels air through tiny air ves-
sels called parabronchi, where gas exchange occurs (figure
53.102). Air flows through the parabronchi in one direction
only; this is similar to the unidirectional flow of water
through a fish gill, but markedly different from the two-
way flow of air through the airways of other terrestrial ver-
tebrates. In other terrestrial vertebrates, the inhaled fresh
air is mixed with “old” oxygen-depleted air that was not ex-
haled from the previous breathing cycle. In birds, only
fresh air enters the parabronchi of the lung, and the old air
exits the lung by a different route.

The unidirectional flow of air through the parabronchi
of an avian lung is achieved through the action of air sacs,
which are unique to birds (figure 53.10). There are two
groups of air sacs, anterior and posterior. When they are
expanded during inspiration they take in air, and when they
are compressed during expiration they push air into and
through the lungs.

If we follow the path of air through the avian respiratory
system, we will see that respiration occurs in two cycles.

air inhaled in one cycle is not exhaled until the second
cycle. Upon inspiration, both anterior and posterior air sacs
expand and take in air. The inhaled air, however, only en-
ters the posterior air sacs; the anterior air sacs fill with air
from the lungs (figure 53.10c). Upon expiration, the air
forced out of the anterior air sacs is exhaled, but the air
forced out of the posterior air sacs enters the lungs. This
process is repeated in the second cycle, so that air flows
through the lungs in one direction and is exhaled at the end
of the second cycle.

The unidirectional flow of air also permits a second res-
piratory efficiency: the flow of blood through the avian
lung runs at a 90° angle to the air flow. This cross-current
flow is not as efficient as the 180° countercurrent flow in
fish gills, but it has the capacity to extract more oxygen
from the air than a mammalian lung can. Because of the
unidirectional air flow in the parabronchi and cross-current
blood flow, a sparrow can be active at an altitude of 6000
meters while a mouse, which has a similar body mass and
metabolic rate, cannot respire successfully at that elevation.

 

The avian respiration system is the most efficient
among terrestrial vertebrates because it has
unidirectional air flow and cross-current blood flow
through the lungs.

 

Each cycle has an inspiration and expiration phase—but the

Parabronchi of lung
<——

 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Anterior
air sacs
Posterior Vy
air sacs ~
Lt aa NY
x a
Trachea [inspiration Cycle 1 Expiration
— —
aed WY
x a NOY
es \ a
Inspiration’ Cycle 2 Expiration
©
FIGURE 53.10

How a bird breathes. (a) Cross section of lung of a domestic chicken
(75x). Air travels through tiny tunnels in the lungs, called parabronchi,
while blood circulates within the fine lattice at right angles to the air
flow. This cross-current flow makes the bird lung very efficient at
extracting oxygen. (}) Birds have a system of air sacs, divided into an
anterior group and posterior group, that extend between the internal
organs and into the bones. (c) Breathing occurs in two cycles. Cycle 1:
Inhaled air (Shown in red) is drawn from the trachea into the posterior
air sacs and then is exhaled into the lungs. Cyc/e 2: Air is drawn from the
lungs into the anterior air sacs and then is exhaled through the trachea.
Passage of air through the lungs is always in the same direction, from
posterior to anterior (right to left in this diagram).

   

Posterior
air sacs

)
Chapter 53. Respiration 1061
