Characteristics of Blood Vessels

Blood leaves the heart through vessels known as arter-
ies. These continually branch, forming a hollow “tree”
that enters each of the organs of the body. The finest,
microscopically-sized branches of the arterial trees are
the arterioles. Blood from the arterioles enters the cap-
illaries (from the Latin capillus, “a hair”), an elaborate
latticework of very narrow, thin-walled tubes. After tra-
versing the capillaries, the blood is collected into
venules; the venules lead to larger vessels called veins,
which carry blood back to the heart.

Arteries, arterioles, veins, and venules all have the
same basic structure (figure 52.7). The innermost layer is
an epithelial sheet called the endothelium. Covering the
endothelium is a thin layer of elastic fibers, a smooth
muscle layer, and a connective tissue layer. The walls of
these vessels are thus too thick to permit any exchange of
materials between the blood and the tissues outside the
vessels. The walls of capillaries, however, are made up of
only the endothelium, so molecules and ions can leave
the blood plasma by diffusion, by filtration through pores
in the capillary walls, and by transport through the en-
dothelial cells. Therefore, it is while blood is in the capil-
laries that gases and metabolites are exchanged with the

cells of the body.

Arteries and Arterioles

Arteries function in transporting blood away from the
heart. The larger arteries contain extra elastic fibers in
their walls, allowing them to recoil each time they receive a
volume of blood pumped by the heart. Smaller arteries and
arterioles are less elastic, but their disproportionately thick
smooth muscle layer enables them to resist bursting.

 
   
   
  

Connective
tissue

Smooth muscle

Elastic 7 ‘
layer 1\

Ye
Endothelial +=
cells

(b)
FIGURE 52.7

Endothelium

5 Endothelial
. cells
wo

The vast tree of arteries presents a frictional resistance
to blood flow. The narrower the vessel, the greater the fric-
tional resistance to flow. In fact, a vessel that is half the di-
ameter of another has 16 times the frictional resistance!
This is because the resistance to blood flow is inversely
proportional to the radius of the vessel. Therefore, within
the arterial tree, it is the small arteries and arterioles that
provide the greatest resistance to blood flow. Contraction
of the smooth muscle layer of the arterioles results in vaso-
constriction, which greatly increases resistance and de-
creases flow. Relaxation of the smooth muscle layer results
in vasodilation, decreasing resistance and increasing blood
flow to an organ (see figure 52.3).

In addition, blood flow through some organs is regu-
lated by rings of smooth muscle around arterioles near the
region where they empty into capillaries. These precapil-
lary sphincters (figure 52.8) can close off specific capillary
beds completely. For example, the closure of precapillary
sphincters in the skin contributes to the vasoconstriction
that limits heat loss in cold environments.

Exchange in the Capillaries

Each time the heart contracts, it must produce sufficient
pressure to pump blood against the resistance of the arter-
ial tree and into the capillaries. The vast number and exten-
sive branching of the capillaries ensure that every cell in the
body is within 100 \m of a capillary. On the average, capillar-
ies are about 1 mm long and 8 pm in diameter, only slightly
larger than a red blood cell (5 to 7 pm in diameter). Despite
the close fit, red blood cells can squeeze through capillaries
without difficulty.

Although each capillary is very narrow, there are so
many of them that the capillaries have the greatest total
cross-sectional area of any other type of vessel. Conse-

 
 
   
  
 
   

Connective tissue

Smooth muscle

Elastic layer
Endothelium

The structure of blood vessels. (a) Arteries and (c) veins have the same tissue layers. (b) Capillaries are composed of only a single layer of

endothelial cells. (not to scale)

1042 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
