The Human Forebrain

The human cerebrum is so large that it appears to en-
velop the rest of the brain (figure 54.27). It is split into
right and left cerebral hemispheres, which are connected
by a tract called the corpus callosum. The hemispheres are
further divided into the frontal, parietal, temporal, and oc-
cipital lobes.

Each hemisphere receives sensory input from the oppo-
site, or contralateral, side of the body and exerts motor
control primarily over that side. Therefore, a touch on the
right hand, for example, is relayed primarily to the left
hemisphere, which may then initiate movement of that
hand in response to the touch. Damage to one hemisphere
due to a stroke often results in a loss of sensation and paral-
ysis on the contralateral side of the body.

Cerebral Cortex

Much of the neural activity of the cerebrum occurs within a
layer of gray matter only a few millimeters thick on its
outer surface. This layer, called the cerebral cortex, is
densely packed with nerve cells. In humans, it contains over
10 billion nerve cells, amounting to roughly 10% of all the
neurons in the brain. The surface of the cerebral cortex is
highly convoluted; this is particularly true in the human
brain, where the convolutions increase the surface area of
the cortex threefold.

The activities of the cerebral cortex fall into one of
three general categories: motor, sensory, and associative.
The primary motor cortex lies along the
gyrus (convolution) on the posterior
border of the frontal lobe, just in front
of the central su/cus (crease) (figure
54.28). Each point on its surface is asso-
ciated with the movement of a different
part of the body (figure 54.29). Just be-
hind the central sulcus, on the anterior
edge of the parietal lobe, lies the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex. Each point
in this area receives input from sensory
neurons serving cutaneous and muscle
senses in a particular part of the body.
Large areas of the motor cortex and pri-
mary somatosensory cortex are devoted
to the fingers, lips, and tongue because
of the need for manual dexterity and
speech. The auditory cortex lies within
the temporal lobe, and different regions
of this cortex deal with different sound
frequencies. The visual cortex lies on
the occipital lobe, with different sites
processing information from different
positions on the retina, equivalent to

lobe

Motor speech area

(Broca's area)

Lateral sulcus

FIGURE 54.28

Motor areas involved with the control
of voluntary muscles

Frontal

Auditory area

Interpretation of sensory experiences,
memory of visual and auditory pattems

Thalamus Parietal lobe of

cerebral cortex

   
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 

Corpus callosum

Lateral ventricle Pineal gland

Occipital lobe
of cerebral
cortex

Frontal lobe
of cerebral
cortex

Optic recess
Cerebellum

Optic chiasm

Medulla oblongata

Pituitary gland Hypothalamus

FIGURE 54.27

A section through the human brain. In this sagittal section
showing one cerebral hemisphere, the corpus callosum, a fiber
tract connecting the two cerebral hemispheres, can be clearly
seen.

Central sulcus

Sensory areas involved with
cutaneous and other senses

   
 
 
 
  
  
   
   

Parietal lobe

General interpretativ
area (Wemicke's are

Occipital lot

Combining
visual images,
visual recogniti
of objects

Temporal lobe

Cerebellum

particular points in the visual fields of |The lobes of the cerebrum. Some of the known regions of specialization are indicated

the eyes. in this diagram.

1092 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
