Neurotransmitter Transporter

molecule

 

Synapse

Receptor protein Drug
molecule

1. Neurotransmitter is reabsorbed
at a normal synapse.

2. Drug molecules prevent
reabsorption and cause
overstimulation of the
postsynaptic membrane.

FIGURE 54.21

3. The number of receptors
decreases.

4, The synapse is less sensitive
when the drug is removed.

Drug addiction. (1) In a normal synapse, the neurotransmitter binds to a transporter molecule and is rapidly reabsorbed after it has acted.
(2) When a drug molecule binds to the transporters, reabsorption of the neurotransmitter is blocked, and the postsynaptic cell is over-
stimulated by the increased amount of neurotransmitter left in the synapse. (3) The central nervous system adjusts to the increased firing
by producing fewer receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. The result is addiction. (4) When the drug is removed, normal absorption of
the neurotransmitter resumes, and the decreased number of receptors creates a less-sensitive nerve pathway. Physiologically, the only way
a person can then maintain normal functioning is to continue to take the drug. Only if the drug is removed permanently will the nervous
system eventually adjust again and restore the original amount of receptors.

As a result, changes in level of activity occur in a wide vari-
ety of nerve pathways within the brain.

Addiction occurs when chronic exposure to nicotine in-
duces the nervous system to adapt physiologically. The
brain compensates for the many changes nicotine induces
by making other changes. Adjustments are made to the
numbers and sensitivities of many kinds of receptors within
the brain, restoring an appropriate balance of activity.

Now what happens if you stop smoking? Everything is
out of whack! The newly coordinated system requires nico-
tine to achieve an appropriate balance of nerve pathway ac-
tivities. This is addiction in any sensible use of the term.
The body’s physiological response is profound and un-
avoidable. There is no way to prevent addiction to nicotine
with willpower, any more than willpower can stop a bullet
when playing Russian roulette with a loaded gun. If you
smoke cigarettes for a prolonged period, you will become
addicted.

What do you do if you are addicted to smoking ciga-
rettes and you want to stop? When use of an addictive drug
like nicotine is stopped, the level of signaling will change to
levels far from normal. If the drug is not reintroduced, the
altered level of signaling will eventually induce the nerve
cells to once again make compensatory changes that restore
an appropriate balance of activities within the brain. Over
time, receptor numbers, their sensitivity, and patterns of
release of neurotransmitters all revert to normal, once

again producing normal levels of signaling along the path-
ways. There is no way to avoid the down side of addiction.
The pleasure pathways will not function at normal levels
until the number of receptors on the affected nerve cells
have time to readjust.

Many people attempt to quit smoking by using patches
containing nicotine; the idea is that providing gradually
lesser doses of nicotine allows the smoker to be weaned of
his or her craving for cigarettes. The patches do reduce the
craving for cigarettes—so long as you keep using the
patches! Actually, using such patches simply substitutes one
(admittedly less dangerous) nicotine source for another. If
you are going to quit smoking, there is no way to avoid the
necessity of eliminating the drug to which you are addicted.
Hard as it is to hear the bad news, there is no easy way out.
The only way to quit is to quit.

 

Acetylcholine stimulates the opening of chemically
regulated ion channels, causing a depolarization called
an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). Glycine
and GABA are inhibitory neurotransmitters that
produce hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic
membrane. There are also many other
neurotransmitters, including the biogenic amines:
dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. The effects
of different neurotransmitters are integrated through
summation of depolarizations and hyperpolarizations.

 

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1087
