 

Part

Regulating the Animal
Body

Are Pollutants Affecting the Sexual
Development of Florida’s Alligators?

Alligators are among the most interesting of animals for a
biologist to study. Their ecology is closely tied to the envi-
ronment, and their reptilian biology offers an interesting
contrast to that of mammals like ourselves. Studies of alliga-
tor development offer powerful general lessons well worthy

f our attention.

In no area of biology is this more true than in investiga-
tion of alligator sexual development. This importance is not
because sexual development in alligators is unusual. It is not.
As with all vertebrates, sexual development in alligator
males—particularly development of their external sexual or-

ans—is largely dependent on the androgen sex hormone
‘estosterone and its derivatives. In the alligator embryo,
hese steroid hormones are responsible for the differentia-
ion of the male internal duct system, as well as the forma-
ion of the external genitalia. After the alligator’s birth, an-
rogen hormones are essential for normal maturation and
growth of the juvenile male reproductive system, particu-
arly during puberty.

The strong dependence of a male alligator’s sexual de-
velopment on androgens is not unusual—mammals show
the same strong dependence. So why should researchers be
interested in alligators? In a nutshell, we humans don’t
pend our lives sloshing around in an aquatic environment,
nd alligators do. Florida alligators live in the many lakes
that pepper the state, and, living in these lakes, they are ex-
posed all their lives to whatever chemicals happen to be
dded to the lakewater by chemical spills, industrial wastes,
nd agricultural runoff.

The androgen-dependent sexual development of alliga-
tors provides a sensitive barometer to environmental pollu-
tion, because the androgen response can be blocked by a
lass of pollutant chemicals called endocrine disrupters.
When endocrine-disrupting pollutants contaminate Florida
lakes, their presence can be detected by its impact on the
exual development of the lakes’ resident alligators. Just as
the death of coal miners’ canaries warn of the buildup of
dangerous gas within the shaft of coal mines, so disruption

 

f the sexual development of alligators can warn us of dan-

 

Catching alligators is a job best done at night. Alligators in
Florida lakes, like the one shown here in the hands of Professor
Guillette, seem to be experiencing developmental abnormalities,
perhaps due to pollution of many of Florida’s lakes by endocrine-
disrupting chemicals.

One of the great joys of biological research is being able
to choose research that is fun to do. Few research project:
offer the particular joys of studying alligators. With State
Game Commission permits, researchers go to lakes in cen4
tral Florida, wait till after dark, then spend the night on the
lake in small boats hand-capturing the animals. As yo!
might guess, researchers mostly choose juvenile individuals.
The captured animals are confined in cloth bags until se:

 

can be determined, body measurements made, and blood
samples collected, and then released.

For over six years, Louis Guillette of the University of
Florida, Gainesville, and his students have been carrying)
out just this sort of research. Their goal has been to as4
sess the degree to which agricultural and other chemical:
have polluted the lakes of central Florida, using as their
gauge the disruption of normal sexual development i:
alligators.

To assess hormonal changes that might be expected t
inhibit male sexual development, Guillette’s team looked
at the relative ratio of androgens (which promote male
development) to estrogens (which promote female devel4
opment) in each captured alligator. Some male endocring
disrupters act like estrogens, while others decrease native
androgen levels. In either case, the ratio of estrogen t
androgen (the E/A ratio) increases, producing a more es4
trogenic environment and so retarding male sexual devel4
opment. Particularly after puberty, the growth of male al4
ligators’ external sexual organs is very dependent upon
high-androgen environment. Any pollutant that raises the
E/A ratio would be expected to markedly inhibit this de4

 

 

gerous chemicals in the environment around us.

velopment.

1071

 
