The Large Intestine

The large intestine, or colon, is much shorter than the
small intestine, occupying approximately the last meter of
the digestive tract; it is called “large” only because of its
larger diameter. The small intestine empties directly into
the large intestine at a junction where two vestigial struc-
tures, the cecum and the appendix, remain (figure 51.16).
No digestion takes place within the large intestine, and
only about 4% of the absorption of fluids by the intestine
occurs there. The large intestine is not as convoluted as the
small intestine, and its inner surface has no villi. Conse-
quently, the large intestine has less than one-thirtieth the
absorptive surface area of the small intestine. Although
sodium, vitamin K, and some products of bacterial metabo-
lism are absorbed across its wall, the primary function of
the large intestine is to concentrate waste material. Within
it, undigested material, primarily bacterial fragments and
cellulose, is compacted and stored. Many bacteria live and
reproduce within the large intestine, and the excess bacteria
are incorporated into the refuse material, called feces. Bacte-
rial fermentation produces gas within the colon at a rate of
about 500 milliliters per day. This rate increases greatly
after the consumption of beans or other vegetable matter
because the passage of undigested plant material (fiber) into
the large intestine provides substrates for fermentation.

   
   

Cecum

FIGURE 51.16

The human colon has evolved to process food with a rel-
atively high fiber content. Diets that are low in fiber, which
are common in the United States, result in a slower passage
of food through the colon. Low dietary fiber content is
thought to be associated with the level of colon cancer in
the United States, which is among the highest in the world.

Compacted feces, driven by peristaltic contractions of
the large intestine, pass from the large intestine into a short
tube called the rectum. From the rectum, the feces exit the
body through the anus. Two sphincters control passage
through the anus. The first is composed of smooth muscle
and opens involuntarily in response to pressure inside the
rectum. The second, composed of striated muscle, can be
controlled voluntarily by the brain, thus permitting a con-
scious decision to delay defecation.

In all vertebrates except most mammals, the reproduc-
tive and urinary tracts empty together with the digestive
tract into a common cavity, the cloaca. In some reptiles and
birds, additional water from either the feces or urine may
be absorbed in the cloaca before the products are expelled
from the body.

 

The large intestine concentrates wastes for excretion by
absorbing water. Some ions and vitamin K are also
absorbed by the large intestine.

 

Ascending portion
of large intestine

 

Last portion
of small intestine

 

‘Appendix

The junction of the small and large intestines in humans. The large intestine, or colon, starts with the cecum, which is relatively small

in humans compared with that in other mammals. A vesti

 

ial structure called the appendix extends from the cecum.

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1027
