Respiration in Mammals

The metabolic rate, and therefore the demand for oxygen,
is much greater in birds and mammals, which are endother-
mic and thus require a more efficient respiratory system.
The lungs of mammals are packed with millions of alve-
oli, tiny sacs clustered like grapes (figure 53.9). This pro-
vides each lung with an enormous surface area for gas ex-
change. Air is brought to the alveoli through a system of air
passages. Inhaled air is taken in through the mouth and
nose past the pharynx to the larynx (voice box), where it
passes through an opening in the vocal cords, the glottis,
into a tube supported by C-shaped rings of cartilage, the
trachea (windpipe). The trachea bifurcates into right and
left bronchi (singular, bronchus), which enter each lung and
further subdivide into bronchioles that deliver the air into

blind-ended sacs called alveoli. The alveoli are surrounded

      
     

by an extremely extensive capillary network. All gas ex-
change between the air and blood takes place across the
walls of the alveoli.

The branching of bronchioles and the vast number of
alveoli combine to increase the respiratory surface area (A
in Fick’s Law) far above that of amphibians or reptiles. In
humans, there are about 300 million alveoli in each of the
two lungs, and the total surface area available for diffusion
can be as much as 80 square meters, or about 42 times the
surface area of the body. Respiration in mammals will be
considered in more detail in a separate section later.

 

Mammalian lungs are composed of millions of alveoli
that provide a huge surface area for gas exchange. Air
enters and leaves these alveoli through the same system
of airways.

 

Blood io

‘y

Smooth muscle

Pulmonary arteriole

Pulmonary venule

  

Alveolar
sac
Capillary network
on surface
of alveolus Alveoli

FIGURE 53.9
‘The human respiratory system and the structure of the mammalian lung. The lungs of mammals have an enormous surface area
because of the millions of alveoli that cluster at the ends of the bronchioles. This provides for efficient gas exchange with the blood.

1060 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
