Kinds of Membrane Proteins

As we've seen, the plasma membrane is a complex assem-
bly of proteins enmeshed in a fluid array of phospholipid
molecules. This enormously flexible design permits a
broad range of interactions with the environment, some
directly involving membrane proteins (figure 6.7). Though
cells interact with their environment through their plasma
membranes in many ways, we will focus on six key classes
of membrane protein in this and the following chapter

(chapter 7).

1. Transporters. Membranes are very selective, al-
lowing only certain substances to enter or leave the
cell, either through channels or carriers. In some in-
stances, they take up molecules already present in the
cell in high concentration.

2. Enzymes. Cells carry out many chemical reactions
on the interior surface of the plasma membrane,
using enzymes attached to the membrane.

 

Outside

 

 

Plasma membrane

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Cell surface receptors. Membranes are exquisitely
sensitive to chemical messages, detecting them with re-
ceptor proteins on their surfaces that act as antennae.

4. Cell surface identity markers. Membranes carry
cell surface markers that identify them to other cells.
Most cell types carry their own ID tags, specific com-
binations of cell surface proteins characteristic of that
cell type.

5. Cell adhesion proteins. Cells use specific proteins
to glue themselves to one another. Some act like Vel-
cro, while others form a more permanent bond.

6. Attachments to the cytoskeleton. Surface pro-
teins that interact with other cells are often anchored

to the cytoskeleton by linking proteins.

 

The many proteins embedded within a membrane carry
out a host of functions, many of which are associated
with transport of materials or information across the
membrane.

 

 

 

 

 

Inside
oO
Cell surface receptor
‘
Cell surface identity Cell adhesion Attachment to the
marker cytoskeleton
Figure 6.7

Functions of plasma membrane proteins. Membrane proteins act as transporters, enzymes, cell surface receptors, and cell surface
markers, as well as aiding in cell-to-cell adhesion and securing the cytoskeleton.

Chapter 6 Membranes 109
