Esophagus

  
 
 
 
    
  

Stomach

Mucosa
Pyloric

sphincter Epithelium

Duodenum

FIGURE 51.11

Mucosa +

 

 

 

  
   

 

Gastric glands

 

The stomach and duodenum. Food enters the stomach from the esophagus. A band of smooth muscle called the pyloric sphincter
controls the entrance to the duodenum, the upper part of the small intestine. The epithelial walls of the stomach are dotted with gastric
pits, which contain gastric glands that secrete hydrochloric acid and the enzyme pepsinogen. The gastric glands consist of mucous cells,
chief cells that secrete pepsinogen, and parietal cells that secrete HCI. Gastric pits are the openings of the gastric glands.

The acidic solution within the stomach also kills most of
the bacteria that are ingested with the food. The few bacte-
ria that survive the stomach and enter the intestine intact
are able to grow and multiply there, particularly in the
large intestine. In fact, most vertebrates harbor thriving
colonies of bacteria within their intestines, and bacteria are
a major component of feces. As we will discuss later, bacte-
ria that live within the digestive tract of cows and other ru-
minants play a key role in the ability of these mammals to
digest cellulose.

Ulcers

Overproduction of gastric acid can occasionally eat a hole
through the wall of the stomach. Such gastric ulcers are
rare, however, because epithelial cells in the mucosa of the
stomach are protected somewhat by a layer of alkaline
mucus, and because those cells are rapidly replaced by cell
division if they become damaged (gastric epithelial cells
are replaced every 2 to 3 days). Over 90% of gastrointesti-
nal ulcers are duodenal ulcers. These may be produced when
excessive amounts of acidic chyme are delivered into the
duodenum, so that the acid cannot be properly neutralized
through the action of alkaline pancreatic juice (described
later). Susceptibility to ulcers is increased when the mu-
cosal barriers to self-digestion are weakened by an infec-
tion of the bacterium Helicobacter pylori. Indeed, modern

antibiotic treatments of this infection can reduce symp-
toms and often even cure the ulcer.

In addition to producing HCl, the parietal cells of the
stomach also secrete intrinsic factor, a polypeptide needed
for the intestinal absorption of vitamin By). Because this vi-
tamin is required for the production of red blood cells, per-
sons who lack sufficient intrinsic factor develop a type of
anemia (low red blood cell count) called pernicious anemia.

Leaving the Stomach

Chyme leaves the stomach through the pyloric sphincter (see
figure 51.11) to enter the small intestine. This is where all
terminal digestion of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins oc-
curs, and where the products of digestions—amino acids,
glucose, and so on—are absorbed into the blood. Only
some of the water in chyme and a few substances such as
aspirin and alcohol are absorbed through the wall of the
stomach.

 

Peristaltic waves of contraction propel food along the
esophagus to the stomach. Gastric juice contains strong
hydrochloric acid and the protein-digesting enzyme
pepsin, which begins the digestion of proteins into
shorter polypeptides. The acidic chyme is then
transferred through the pyloric sphincter to the small
intestine.

 

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1023
