The Nervous System

 

Concept Outline

54.1 The nervous system consists of neurons and
supporting cells.

Neuron Organization. Neurons and neuroglia are
organized into the central nervous system (the brain and
spinal cord) and the peripheral nervous system (sensory and
motor neurons).

54.2 Nerve impulses are produced on the axon
membrane.

The Resting Membrane Potential. The inside of the
membrane is electrically negative in comparison with the
outside.

Action Potentials. In response to a stimulus that
depolarizes the membrane, voltage-gated channels open,
producing a nerve impulse. One action potential stimulates
the production of the next along the axon.

54.3 Neurons form junctions called synapses with
other cells.

Structure of Synapses. Neurotransmitters diffuse across
to the postsynaptic cell and combine with receptor proteins.
Neurotransmitters and Their Functions. Some
neurotransmitters cause a depolarization in the postsynaptic
membrane; others produce inhibition by hyperpolarization.

54.4 The central nervous system consists of the brain
and spinal cord.

‘The Evolution of the Vertebrate Brain. Vertebrate
brains include a forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain.

‘The Human Forebrain. The cerebral cortex contains
areas specialized for different functions.

‘The Spinal Cord. Reflex responses and messages to and
from the brain are coordinated by the spinal cord.

54.5 The peripheral nervous system consists of sensory
and motor neurons.

Components of the Peripheral Nervous System. A
spinal nerve contains sensory and motor neurons.

The Autonomic Nervous System. Sympathetic motor
neurons arouse the body for fight or flight; parasympathetic
motor neurons have antagonistic actions.

 

FIGURE 54.1

A neuron in the retina of the eye (500%). This neuron has been
injected with a fluorescent dye, making its cell body and long
dendrites readily apparent.

Il animals except sponges use a network of nerve cells

to gather information about the body’s condition and
the external environment, to process and integrate that
information, and to issue commands to the body’s muscles
and glands. Just as telephone cables run from every com-
partment of a submarine to the conning tower, where the
captain controls the ship, so bundles of nerve cells called
neurons connect every part of an animal’s body to its
command and control center, the brain and spinal cord
(figure 54.1). The animal body is run just like a subma-
rine, with status information about what is happening in
organs and outside the body flowing into the command
center, which analyzes the data and issues commands to
glands and muscles.

1073
