 

©)

FIGURE 52.17
Atherosclerosis. (a) The coronary artery shows only minor blockage. (b) The artery exhibits severe atherosclerosis—much of the passage
is blocked by build-up on the interior walls of the artery. (¢) The coronary artery is essentially completely blocked.

neighboring cells. In 1998 the Nobel Prize for Medicine
was awarded for the discovery of this signal transmission
activity. How does NO regulate blood pressure? Nitric
oxide gas produced by the surface endothelial cells of blood
vessels passes inward through the cell layers of the vessel,
causing the smooth muscles that encase it to relax and the
blood vessel to dilate (become wider). For over a century,
heart patients have been prescribed nitroglycerin to relieve
chest pain, but only now has it become clear that nitroglyc-
erin acts by releasing nitric oxide gas.

Cardiovascular Diseases

Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death in
the United States; more than 42 million people have some
form of cardiovascular disease. Heart attacks are the main
cause of cardiovascular deaths in the United States, ac-
counting for about a fifth of all deaths. They result from an
insufficient supply of blood reaching one or more parts of
the heart muscle, which causes myocardial cells in those
parts to die. Heart attacks may be caused by a blood clot
forming somewhere in the coronary arteries (the arteries
that supply the heart muscle with blood) and blocking the
passage of blood through those vessels. They may also re-
sult if an artery is blocked by atherosclerosis (see below).
Recovery from a heart attack is possible if the portion of
the heart that was damaged is small enough that the other
blood vessels in the heart can enlarge their capacity and re-
supply the damaged tissues. Angina pectoris, which liter-
ally means “chest pain,” occurs for reasons similar to those
that cause heart attacks, but it is not as severe. The pain
may occur in the heart and often also in the left arm and
shoulder. Angina pectoris is a warning sign that the blood
supply to the heart is inadequate but still sufficient to avoid
myocardial cell death.

Strokes are caused by an interference with the blood
supply to the brain. They may occur when a blood vessel

 

 

bursts in the brain, or when blood flow in a cerebral artery
is blocked by a thrombus (blood clot) or by atherosclerosis.
The effects of a stroke depend on how severe the damage is
and where in the brain the stroke occurs.

Atherosclerosis is an accumulation within the arteries
of fatty materials, abnormal amounts of smooth muscle, de-
posits of cholesterol or fibrin, or various kinds of cellular
debris. These accumulations cause blood flow to be re-
duced (figure 52.17). The lumen (interior) of the artery
may be further reduced in size by a clot that forms as a re-
sult of the atherosclerosis. In the severest cases, the artery
may be blocked completely. Atherosclerosis is promoted by
genetic factors, smoking, hypertension (high blood pres-
sure), and high blood cholesterol levels. Diets low in cho-
lesterol and saturated fats (from which cholesterol can be
made) can help lower the level of blood cholesterol, and
therapy for hypertension can reduce that risk factor. Stop-
ping smoking, however, is the single most effective action a
smoker can take to reduce the risk of atherosclerosis.

Arteriosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries, occurs
when calcium is deposited in arterial walls. It tends to occur
when atherosclerosis is severe. Not only do such arteries
have restricted blood flow, but they also lack the ability to
expand as normal arteries do to accommodate the volume
of blood pumped out by the heart. This inflexibility forces
the heart to work harder.

 

Cardiac output depends on the rate of the heart and
how much blood is ejected per beat. Blood flow is
regulated by the degree of constriction of the arteries,
which affects the resistance to flow. Blood pressure is
influenced by blood volume. The volume of water
retained in the vascular system is regulated by
hormones that act on the kidneys and blood vessels.
Many cardiovascular diseases are associated with the
accumulation of fatty materials on the inner surfaces of
arteries.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1051
