Table 54.1 The Ionic Composition of Cytoplasm and

 

Extracellular Fluid (ECF)
Concentration Concentration Equilibrium
in Cytoplasm in ECF Potential
Ton (mM) (mM) Ratio (mV)
Nat 15 150 10:1 +60
Kk 150 5 130 -90
Ch 7 110 ibs alt -70

ving K+ into the cell, there is also a concentration gradient
established by the sodium-potassium pump that is driving
K+ out of the cell. At a point, these two forces balance each
other, and the voltage at which the influx of K* equals the
efflux of K+ is called the equilibrium potential (table
54.1). For potassium, the equilibrium potential is -90 mV.
At -80 mV, K* will diffuse out of the cell and at -100 mV
K* will diffuse into the cell.

If K* were the only cation involved, the resting mem-
brane potential of the cell would be -90 mV. However, the
membrane is also slightly permeable to Na*, and its equi-
librium potential is +60 mV. The effects of Na* leaking
into the cell make the resting membrane potential less neg-
ative. With a membrane potential less negative than -90
mV, K* diffuses into the cell, and the combined effect bring
the equilibrium potential for the resting cell to -70 mV.
The resting membrane potential of a neuron can be seen
using a voltmeter and a pair of electrodes, one outside and
one inside the cell (figure 54.8)

When a nerve or muscle cell is stimulated, sodium
channels become more permeable, and Na* rushes into the
cell, down its concentration gradient. This sudden influx
of positive charges reduces the negativity on the inside of
the cell and causes the cell to depolarize (move toward a po-
larity above that of the resting potential). After a slight
delay, potassium channels also become more permeable,
and K* flows out of the cell down its concentration gradi-
ent. Similarly, the membrane becomes more permeable to
CI, and CI flows into the cell. But the effects of Cl on the
membrane potential are far less than those of K*. The in-
side of the cell again becomes more negative and causes
the cell to byperpolarize (move its polarity below that of the
resting potential).

 

The resting plasma membrane maintains a potential
difference as a result of the uneven distribution of
charges, where the inside of the membrane is negatively
charged in comparison with the outside (-70 mV). The
magnitude, measured in millivolts, of this potential
difference primarily reflects the difference in K*
concentration.

 

Channel closed Channel open

Gate

 

FIGURE 54.7

Voltage-gated ion channels. In neurons and muscle cells, the
channels for Nat and K+ have gates that are closed at the resting
membrane potential but open when a threshold level of
depolarization is attained.

 

   

Extracellular
electrode

Intracellular
electrode

 

 

 

FIGURE 54.8

The establishment of the resting membrane potential. The
fixed anions (primarily proteins and nucleic acids) attract cations
from the extracellular fluid. If the membrane were only permeable
to K+, an equilibrium would be established and the membrane
potential would be -90 mV. A true resting membrane potential is
about —70 mV, because the membrane does allow a low rate of
Na+ diffusion into the cell. This is not quite sufficiently negative
to prevent the outward diffusion of K+, so the cell is not at
equilibrium and the action of the sodium-potassium pumps is
required to maintain stability.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1077
