The Control of Muscle Contraction
The Role of Ca** in Contraction

When a muscle is relaxed, its myosin heads are “cocked”
and ready, through the splitting of ATP, but are unable to
bind to actin. This is because the attachment sites for the
myosin heads on the actin are physically blocked by an-
other protein, known as tropomyosin, in the thin fila-
ments. Cross-bridges therefore cannot form in the relaxed
muscle, and the filaments cannot slide.

In order to contract a muscle, the tropomyosin must be
moved out of the way so that the myosin heads can bind to
actin. This requires the function of troponin, a regulatory
protein that binds to the tropomyosin. The troponin and
tropomyosin form a complex that is regulated by the cal-
cium ion (Ca**) concentration of the muscle cell cytoplasm.

When the Ca** concentration of the muscle cell cyto-
plasm is low, tropomyosin inhibits cross-bridge formation
and the muscle is relaxed (figure 50.14). When the Ca*
concentration is raised, Ca** binds to troponin. This causes
the troponin-tropomyosin complex to be shifted away from
the attachment sites for the myosin heads on the actin.
Cross-bridges can thus form, undergo power strokes, and
produce muscle contraction.

Where does the Ca** come from? Muscle fibers store
Ca** in a modified endoplasmic reticulum called a sar-
coplasmic reticulum, or SR (figure 50.15). When a muscle
fiber is stimulated to contract, an electrical impulse travels
into the muscle fiber down invaginations called the trans-
verse tubules (T tubules). This triggers the release of
Cat* from the SR. Ca** then diffuses into the myofibrils,
where it binds to troponin and causes contraction. The
contraction of muscles is regulated by nerve activity, and so
nerves must influence the distribution of Ca** in the muscle

fiber.

FIGURE 50.15

The relationship between the
myofibrils, transverse tubules,
and sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Impulses travel down the axon of a
motor neuron that synapses with a
muscle fiber. The impulses are
conducted along

the transverse tubules and stimulate
the release of Ca** from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum into the
cytoplasm. Ca** diffuses toward the

myofibrils and causes contraction. Nucleus

1008 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Transverse tubule (T tubules)

 

 

 

        
  
   

 

 

 

Myosin
head

    

Myosin

Tropomyosin

   

Binding sites for
cross-bridges blocked

Troponin

 

(@)

 

 

 

 

Biocrsetestod Al oo
cross-bridges exposed °

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 50.14

How calcium controls striated muscle contraction. (@) When
the muscle is at rest, a long filament of the protein tropomyosin
blocks the myosin-binding sites on the actin molecule. Because
myosin is unable to form cross-bridges with actin at these sites,
muscle contraction cannot occur. (/) When Ca** binds to another
protein, troponin, the Ca*+-troponin complex displaces
tropomyosin and exposes the myosin-binding sites on actin,
permitting cross-bridges to form and contraction to occur.

Sarcoplasmic
reticulum

Sarcolemma

Myofibril

Mitochondrion
