   
 
    

Eastern bluebird

FIGURE 50.22

  

Samoan
flying fox
(fruitbat)

Flight has evolved three times among the vertebrates. These three very different vertebrates all have lightened bones and forelimbs

transformed into wings.

Locomotion in Air

Flight has evolved among the animals four times: insects,
pterosaurs (extinct flying reptiles), birds, and bats. In all
four groups, active flying takes place in much the same way.
Propulsion is achieved by pushing down against the air
with wings. This provides enough lift to keep insects in the
air. Vertebrates, being larger, need greater lift, obtaining it
with wings that are convex in cross section. Because air
must travel farther over the top surface, it moves faster,
creating lift over the wing.

In birds and most insects, the raising and lowering of the
wings is achieved by the alternate contraction of extensor
muscles (elevators) and flexor muscles (depressors). Four
insect orders (containing flies, mosquitoes, wasps, bees, and
beetles), however, beat their wings at frequencies from 100
to more than 1000 times per second, faster than nerves can
carry successive impulses! In these insects, the flight mus-
cles are not attached to the wings at all but rather to the
stiff wall of the thorax, which is distorted in and out by
their contraction. The reason that these muscles can beat
so fast is that the contraction of one set stretches the other,
triggering its contraction in turn without waiting for the
arrival of a nerve impulse.

Among vertebrates (figure 50.22), flight first evolved
some 200 million years ago among flying reptiles called
pterosaurs. A very successful and diverse group, pterosaurs
ranged in size from individuals no bigger than sparrows to
pterodons the size of a fighter plane. For much of this time,
they shared the skies with birds, which most paleontologists
believe evolved from feathered dinosaurs about 150 million
years ago. How did they share their ecological world for 100
million years without competition driving one or the other
from the skies? No one knows for sure. Perhaps these early
birds were night fliers, while pterosaurs flew by day.

Such an arrangement for sharing resources is not as un-
likely as it might at first appear. Bats, flying mammals which
evolved after the pterosaurs disappeared with the dinosaurs,
are night fliers. By flying at night bats are able to shop in a
store with few other customers and a wealth of food: night-
flying insects. It has proven to be a very successful approach.
One-quarter of all mammal species are bats.

 

Locomotion in larger animals is almost always produced
by appendages that push against the surroundings in
some fashion, or by shoving the entire body forward by
an undulation.

 

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1015
