50.2 Skeletal muscles contract to produce movements at joints.

Types of Joints of the skeleton occur at joints, or articulations, where one

bone meets another. There are three main classes of joints:
The skeletal movements of the body are produced by con-
traction and shortening of muscles. Skeletal muscles are
generally attached by tendons to bones, so when the mus-
cles shorten, the attached bones move. These movements

1. Immovable joints include the sutures that join the
bones of the skull (figure 50.5). In a fetus, the skull
bones are not fully formed, and there are open areas
of dense connective tissue (“soft spots,” or fontanels)
between the bones. These areas allow the bones to
shift slightly as the fetus moves through the birth
canal during childbirth. Later, bone replaces most of
this connective tissue.

. Slightly movable joints include those in which the
bones are bridged by cartilage. The vertebral bones
of the spine are separated by pads of cartilage called
intervertebral discs (figure 50.5b). These cartilaginous

N

  
  
  
 

 

“= Fibrous joints allow some movement while acting as efficient
Set. connective shock absorbers.
tissue

w

. Freely movable joints include many types of joints
(a) Immovable joint and are also called synovial joints, because the articu-
lating ends of the bones are located within a synovial
capsule filled with a lubricating fluid. The ends of the
bones are capped with cartilage, and the synovial cap-
sule is strengthened by ligaments that hold the articu-
lating bones in place.

Synovial joints allow the bones to move in direc-
tions dictated by the structure of the joint. For exam-
ple, a joint in the finger allows only a hingelike move-
ment, while the joint between the thigh bone (femur)
and pelvis has a ball-and-socket structure that permits
a variety of different movements (figure 50.50).

Articular - oF
canage =
Body of

vertebra

 

Intervertebral
disk

 

 

Joints confer flexibility to a rigid skeleton, allowing a
range of motions determined by the type of joint.

 

(b) Slightly movable joints

  
 

 

 

 

Ligament

 

Fibrous —_
capsule :
Synovial
fluid

 

Synovial
membrane

 

 

(c) Freely movable joints

 

 

 

FIGURE 50.5
Three types of joints. (2) Immovable joints include the sutures of the skull; (b) slightly movable joints include the cartilaginous joints
between the vertebrae; and (¢) freely movable joints are the synovial joints, such as a finger joint and or a hip joint.

1002 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
