2

Circulation

Concept Outline

52.1 The circulatory systems of animals may be open
or closed.

Open and Closed Circulatory Systems. All vertebrates
have a closed circulation, while many invertebrate animals
have open circulatory systems.

52.2 A network of vessels transports blood through
the body.

The Blood Plasma. The blood plasma transports a
variety of solutes, including ions, metabolites, proteins, and
hormones.

The Blood Cells. The blood cells include erythrocytes,
which transport oxygen, leukocytes, which provide defenses
for the body, and platelets, which function in blood
clotting.

Characteristics of Blood Vessels. Blood leaves the heart
in arteries and returns in veins; in between, the blood passes
through capillaries, where all exchanges with tissues occur.
The Lymphatic System. The lymphatic system returns
interstitial fluid to the bloodstream.

52.3 The vertebrate heart has undergone progressive
evolutionary change.

The Fish Heart. The fish heart consists of a row of four
chambers that receives blood in the posterior end from the
body and pumps blood from the anterior end to the gills.
Amphibian and Reptile Circulation. Land vertebrates
have a double circulation, where blood from the lungs
returns to the heart to be pumped to the rest of the body.
Mammalian and Bird Hearts. Mammals and birds have
a complete separation between the two sides of the heart.

52.4 The cardiac cycle drives the cardiovascular system.

The Cardiac Cycle. The right and left sides of the heart
rest and receive blood at the same time, then pump the
blood into arteries at the same time.

Electrical Excitation and Contraction of the Heart.
The impulse begins in one area of the heart and is
conducted to the rest of the heart.

Blood Flow and Blood Pressure. Blood flow and blood
pressure depend on the diameter of the arterial vessels and
on the amount of blood pumped by the heart.

 

FIGURE 52.1

Red blood cells. This ruptured blood vessel, seen in a scanning
electron micrograph, is full of red blood cells, which move
through vessels transporting oxygen from one place to another in
the body.

Ex cell in the animal body must acquire the energy
it needs for living from other molecules in food. Like
residents of a city whose food is imported from farms in
the countryside, cells in the body need trucks to carry the
food, highways for the trucks to travel on, and a way to
cook the food when it arrives. In animals, the circulatory
system provides blood and blood vessels (the trucks and
highways), and is discussed in this chapter (figure 52.1).
The respiratory system provides the glucose (fuel) and
oxygen (fuel to cook the food), and will be discussed in the
following chapter.

1037
