Structure of Membrane Proteins

Tf proteins float on lipid bilayers like ships on the sea, how
do they manage to extend through the membrane to create
channels, and how can certain proteins be anchored into
particular positions on the cell membrane?

Anchoring Proteins in the Bilayer

Many membrane proteins are attached to the surface of the
membrane by special molecules that associate with phos-
pholipids and thereby anchor the protein to the membrane.
Like a ship tied up to a floating dock, these proteins are
free to move about on the surface of the membrane teth-
ered to a phospholipid.

In contrast, other proteins actually traverse the lipid bi-
layer. The part of the protein that extends through the
lipid bilayer, in contact with the nonpolar interior, consists
of one or more nonpolar helices or several B-pleated sheets
of nonpolar amino acids (figure 6.8). Because water avoids
nonpolar amino acids much as it does nonpolar lipid
chains, the nonpolar portions of the protein are held within
the interior of the lipid bilayer. Although the polar ends of
the protein protrude from both sides of the membrane, the
protein itself is locked into the membrane by its nonpolar
segments. Any movement of the protein out of the mem-
brane, in either direction, brings the nonpolar regions of
the protein into contact with water, which “shoves” the
protein back into the interior.

Extending Proteins across the Bilayer

Cells contain a variety of different transmembrane pro-
teins, which differ in the way they traverse the bilayer, de-
pending on their functions.

Anchors. A single nonpolar segment is adequate to an-
chor a protein in the membrane. Anchoring proteins of this
sort attach the spectrin network of the cytoskeleton to the
interior of the plasma membrane (figure 6.9). Many pro-
teins that function as receptors for extracellular signals are
also “single-pass” anchors that pass through the membrane
only once. The portion of the receptor that extends out
from the cell surface binds to specific hormones or other
molecules when the cell encounters them; the binding in-
duces changes at the other end of the protein, in the cell’s
interior. In this way, information outside the cell is trans-
lated into action within the cell. The mechanisms of cell
signaling will be addressed in detail in chapter 7.

Channels. Other proteins have several helical segments
that thread their way back and forth through the mem-
brane, forming a channel like the hole in a doughnut. For
example, bacteriorhodopsin is one of the key transmem-
brane proteins that carries out photosynthesis in bacteria. It
contains seven nonpolar helical segments that traverse the

110 Part II Biology of the Cell

   
   

Polar areas
of protein

  

Phospholipids

FIGURE 6.8

How nonpolar regions lock proteins into membranes. A
spiral helix of nonpolar amino acids (red) extends across the
nonpolar lipid interior, while polar (purple) portions of the
protein protrude out from the bilayer. The protein cannot move
in or out because such a movement would drag nonpolar
segments of the protein into contact with water.

membrane, forming a circular pore through which protons
pass during the light-driven pumping of protons (figure
6.10). Other transmembrane proteins do not create chan-
nels but rather act as carriers to transport molecules across
the membrane. All water-soluble molecules or ions that
enter or leave the cell are either transported by carriers or
pass through channels.

Pores. Some transmembrane proteins have extensive
nonpolar regions with secondary configurations of B-
pleated sheets instead of o helices. The B sheets form a
characteristic motif, folding back and forth in a circle so the
sheets come to be arranged like the staves of a barrel. This
so-called B barrel, open on both ends, is a common feature
of the porin class of proteins that are found within the
outer membrane of some bacteria (figure 6.11).

 

Transmembrane proteins are anchored into the bilayer
by their nonpolar segments. While anchor proteins may
pass through the bilayer only once, many channels and
pores are created by proteins that pass back and forth
through the bilayer repeatedly, creating a circular hole
in the bilayer.

 
