Respiration in Amphibians and
Reptiles

The lungs of amphibians are formed as saclike outpouch-
ings of the gut (figure 53.8). Although the internal surface
area of these sacs is increased by folds, much less surface
area is available for gas exchange in amphibian lungs than
in the lungs of other terrestrial vertebrates. Each amphib-
ian lung is connected to the rear of the oral cavity, or phar-
ynx, and the opening to each lung is controlled by a valve,
the glottis.

Amphibians do not breathe the same way other terres-
trial vertebrates do. Amphibians force air into their lungs
by creating a greater-than-atmospheric pressure (positive
pressure) in the air outside their lungs. They do this by fill-
ing their buccal cavity with air, closing their mouth and nos-
trils, and then elevating the floor of their oral cavity. This
pushes air into their lungs in the same way that a pressur-
ized tank of air is used to fill balloons. This is called posi-
tive pressure breathing; in humans, it would be analogous
to forcing air into a victim’s lungs by performing mouth-
to-mouth resuscitation.

All other terrestrial vertebrates breathe by expanding
their lungs and thereby creating a lower-than-atmospheric
pressure (a negative pressure) within the lungs. This is
called negative pressure breathing and is analogous to tak-
ing air into an accordion by pulling the accordion out to a
greater volume. In reptiles, birds, and mammals, this is ac-

complished by expanding the thoracic (chest) cavity
through muscular contractions, as will be described in a
later section.

The oxygenation of amphibian blood by the lungs is
supplemented by cutaneous respiration—the exchange of
gases across the skin, which is wet and well vascularized in
amphibians. Cutaneous respiration is actually more signifi-
cant than pulmonary (lung) ventilation in frogs during win-
ter, when their metabolisms are slow. Lung function be-
comes more important during the summer as the frog’s
metabolism increases. Although not common, some terres-
trial amphibians, such as plethodontid salamanders, rely on
cutaneous respiration exclusively.

Reptiles expand their rib cages by muscular contraction,
and thereby take air into their lungs through negative pres-
sure breathing. Their lungs have somewhat more surface
area than the lungs of amphibians and so are more efficient
at gas exchange. Terrestrial reptiles have dry, tough, scaly
skins that prevent desiccation, and so cannot have cuta-
neous respiration. Cutaneous respiration, however, has
been demonstrated in marine sea snakes.

 

Amphibians force air into their lungs by positive
pressure breathing, whereas reptiles and all other
terrestrial vertebrates take air into their lungs by
expanding their lungs when they increase rib cage
volume through muscular contractions. This creates a
subatmospheric pressure in the lungs.

 

 

Stomach

FIGURE 53.8

Amphibian lungs. Each lung of this frog is an outpouching of the gut and is filled with air by the creation of a positive pressure in the
buccal cavity. The amphibian lung lacks the structures present in the lungs of other terrestrial vertebrates that provide an enormous
surface area for gas exchange, and so are not as efficient as the lungs of other vertebrates.

Chapter 53 Respiration 1059
