Polar
hydrophilic
heads

Nonpolar
hydrophobic
tails

Polar
hydrophilic
heads

FIGURE 6.3

 

A phospholipid bilayer. The basic structure of every plasma membrane is a double layer of lipid, in which phospholipids aggregate to
form a bilayer with a nonpolar interior. The phospholipid tails do not align perfectly and the membrane is “fluid.” Individual phospholipid

molecules can move from one place to another in the membrane.

The Lipid Bilayer Is Fluid

A lipid bilayer is stable because water’s affinity for hydro-
gen bonding never stops. Just as surface tension holds a
soap bubble together, even though it is made of a liquid, so
the hydrogen bonding of water holds a membrane to-
gether. But while water continually drives phospholipid
molecules into this configuration, it does not locate specific
phospholipid molecules relative to their neighbors in the
bilayer. As a result, individual phospholipids and unan-
chored proteins are free to move about within the mem-
brane. This can be demonstrated vividly by fusing cells and
watching their proteins reassort (figure 6.4).

Phospholipid bilayers are fluid, with the viscosity of
olive oil (and like oil, their viscosity increases as the tem-
perature decreases). Some membranes are more fluid than
others, however. The tails of individual phospholipid mole-
cules are attracted to one another when they line up close
together. This causes the membrane to become less fluid,
because aligned molecules must pull apart from one an-
other before they can move about in the membrane. The
greater the degree of alignment, the less fluid the mem-
brane. Some phospholipid tails do not align well because
they contain one or more double bonds between carbon
atoms, introducing kinks in the tail. Membranes containing
such phospholipids are more fluid than membranes that
lack them. Most membranes also contain steroid lipids like
cholesterol, which can either increase or decrease mem-
brane fluidity, depending on temperature.

Mouse cell

\D Fusion of o°%

cells 2 2
—»> 9

2% io ai "J
,o. 9 6 e._?
T= .@ "> =?
Intermixed membrane
proteins
& 4 Human cell

FIGURE 6.4

Proteins move about in membranes. Protein movement within
membranes can be demonstrated easily by labeling the plasma
membrane proteins of a mouse cell with fluorescent antibodies

and then fusing that cell with a human cell. At first, all of the
mouse proteins are located on the mouse side of the fused cell and
all of the human proteins are located on the human side of the
fused cell. However, within an hour, the labeled and unlabeled
proteins are intermixed throughout the hybrid cell’s plasma
membrane.

 

The lipid bilayer is liquid like a soap bubble, rather than
solid like a rubber balloon.

 

Chapter 6 Membranes 105
