54.1

Neuron Organization

An animal must be able to respond to environmental stim-
uli. A fly escapes a swat; the antennae of a crayfish detect
food and the crayfish moves toward it. To do this, it must
have sensory receptors that can detect the stimulus and
motor effectors that can respond to it. In most invertebrate
phyla and in all vertebrate classes, sensory receptors and
motor effectors are linked by way of the nervous system. As
described in chapter 49, the nervous system consists of neu-
rons and supporting cells. Sensory (or afferent) neurons
carry impulses from sensory receptors to the central ner-
vous system (CNS); motor (or efferent) neurons carry im-
pulses from the CNS to effectors—muscles and glands (fig-
ure 54.2).

In addition to sensory and motor neurons, a third type of
neuron is present in the nervous systems of most inverte-
brates and all vertebrates: association neurons (or in-
terneurons). These neurons are located in the brain and
spinal cord of vertebrates, together called the central ner-
vous system (CNS), where they help provide more com-
plex reflexes and higher associative functions, including
learning and memory. Sensory neurons carry impulses into
the CNS, and motor neurons carry impulses away from the
CNS. Together, sensory and motor neurons constitute the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) of vertebrates. Motor
neurons that stimulate skeletal muscles to contract are so-
matic motor neurons, and those that regulate the activity
of the smooth muscles, cardiac muscle, and glands are auto-
nomic motor neurons. The autonomic motor neurons are

further subdivided into the sympathetic and parasympa-

{ Cell body

Sensoryneuron |

aoa
{ ———_

Direction of Axon
conduction

 

 

Dendrites 24

 

 

Motor neuron

1074 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

  

The nervous system consists of neurons and supporting cells.

 

 

Nervous system

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Central Peripheral
nervous nervous
system system
. Spinal Sensory Motor
Ero cord pathways pathways
Voluntary] [Autonomic
(somatic) nervous
nervous system | | system
Sympathetic | [Parasympathetic
division division
FIGURE 54.3

The divisions of the vertebrate nervous system. The major
divisions are the central and peripheral nervous systems.

thetic systems, which act to counterbalance each other (fig-
ure 54.3).

Despite their varied appearances, most neurons have the
same functional architecture (figure 54.4). The cell body is
an enlarged region containing the nucleus. Extending from
the cell body are one or more cytoplasmic extensions called
dendrites. Motor and association neurons possess a profu-
sion of highly branched dendrites, enabling those cells to

FIGURE 54.2
Three types of
neurons. Sensory
neurons carry
information about the
environment to the
brain and spinal cord.
Association neurons are

Cell body

Association found in the brain and
{ neuron spinal cord and often
} %, provide links between
‘Axon | sensory and motor
neurons. Motor nemrons
Cell

carry impulses or
“commands” to
muscles and glands
(effectors).

 

Dendrites
