Actions of Skeletal Muscles

Skeletal muscles produce movement of the skeleton when
they contract. Usually, the two ends of a skeletal muscle
are attached to different bones (although in some cases,
one or both ends may be connected to some other kind of
structure, such as skin). The attachments to bone are
made by means of dense connective tissue straps called
tendons. Tendons have elastic properties that allow “give-
and-take” during muscle contraction. One attachment of
the muscle, the origin, remains relatively stationary dur-
ing a contraction. The other end of the muscle, the in-
sertion, is attached to the bone that moves when the
muscle contracts. For example, contraction of the biceps
muscle in the upper arm causes the forearm (the insertion
of the muscle) to move toward the shoulder (the origin of
the muscle).

Muscles that cause the same action at a joint are syner-
gists. For example, the various muscles of the quadriceps
group in humans are synergists: they all act to extend the
knee joint. Muscles that produce opposing actions are an-
tagonists. For example, muscles that flex a joint are antag-
onist to muscles that extend that joint (figure 50.6). In hu-
mans, when the hamstring muscles contract, they cause
flexion of the knee joint (figure 50.6). Therefore, the
quadriceps and hamstrings are antagonists to each other. In
general, the muscles that antagonize a given movement are
relaxed when that movement is performed. Thus, when the
hamstrings flex the knee joint, the quadriceps muscles
relax.

Isotonic and Isometric Contractions

In order for muscle fibers to shorten when they contract,
they must generate a force that is greater than the opposing
forces that act to prevent movement of the muscle’s inser-
tion. When you lift a weight by contracting muscles in your
biceps, for example, the force produced by the muscle is
greater than the force of gravity on the object you are lift-
ing. In this case, the muscle and all of its fibers shorten in
length. This type of contraction is referred to as isotonic
contraction, because the force of contraction remains rela-
tively constant throughout the shortening process (iso =
same; tonic = strength).

Preceding an isotonic contraction, the muscle begins
to contract but the tension is absorbed by the tendons
and other elastic tissue associated with the muscle. The
muscle does not change in length and so this is called
isometric (literally, “same length”) contraction. Isomet-
ric contractions occur as a phase of normal muscle con-
traction but also exist to provide tautness and stability to

the body.

    

wut

 

Exoskeleton

 

1,
i,
\
Flexor b. Extensor \
muscles . muscles vk
contract

contract \

 

(@)

Extensors
(quadriceps)

Flexors
(hamstring)

 

u

   

(b)

FIGURE 50.6

Flexor and extensor muscles of the leg. (a) Antagonistic
muscles control the movement of an animal with an exoskeleton,
such as the jumping of a grasshopper. When the smaller flexor
tibia muscle contracts it pulls the lower leg in toward the upper
leg. Contraction of the extensor tibia muscles straightens out the
leg and sends the insect into the air. () Similarly, antagonistic
muscles can act on an endoskeleton. In humans, the hamstrings, a
group of three muscles, produce flexion of the knee joint, whereas
the quadriceps, a group of four muscles, produce extension.

 

Synergistic muscles have the same action, whereas
antagonistic muscles have opposite actions. Both muscle
groups are involved in locomotion. Isotonic contractions
involve the shortening of muscle, while isometric
contractions do not alter the length of the muscle.

 

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1003
