Respiration

Concept Outline

53.1 Respiration involves the diffusion of gases.

Fick’s Law of Diffusion. The rate of diffusion across a
membrane depends on the surface area of the membrane,
the concentration gradients, and the distance across the
membrane.

How Animals Maximize the Rate of Diffusion. The
diffusion rate increases when surface area or concentration
gradient increases.

53.2 Gills are used for respiration by aquatic
vertebrates.

‘The Gill as a Respiratory Structure. Water is forced
past the gill surface, and blood flows through the gills.

53.3 Lungs are used for respiration by terrestrial
vertebrates.

Respiration in Air-Breathing Animals. In insects, oxygen
diffuses directly from the air into body cells; in vertebrates,
oxygen diffuses into blood and then into body cells.
Respiration in Amphibians and Reptiles... Amphibians
force air into their lungs, whereas reptiles, birds, and
mammals draw air in by expanding their rib cage.
Respiration in Mammals. In mammals, gas exchange
occurs across millions of tiny air sacs called alveoli.
Respiration in Birds. In birds, air flows through the lung
unidirectionally.

53.4 Mammalian breathing is a dynamic process.

Structures and Mechanisms of Breathing. The rib
cage and lung volumes are expanded during inspiration by
the contraction of the diaphragm and other muscles.
Mechanisms That Regulate Breathing. The respiratory
control center in the brain is influenced by reflexes triggered
by the blood levels of carbon dioxide and blood pH.

53.5 Blood transports oxygen and carbon dioxide.

Hemoglobin and Oxygen Transport. Hemoglobin, a
molecule within the red blood cells, loads with oxygen in
the lungs and unloads its oxygen in the tissue capillaries.
Carbon Dioxide and Nitric Oxide Transport. Carbon
dioxide is converted into carbonic acid in erythrocytes and
is transported as bicarbonate.

 

FIGURE 53.1

Elephant seals are respiratory champions. Diving to depths
greater than those of all other marine animals, including sperm
whales and sea turtles, elephant seals can hold their breath for
over two hours, descend and ascend rapidly in the water, and
endure repeated dives without suffering any apparent respiratory
distress.

Animals pry energy out of food molecules using the bio-
chemical process called cellular respiration. While the term
cellular respiration pertains to the use of oxygen and pro-
duction of carbon dioxide at the cellular level, the general
term respiration describes the uptake of oxygen from the
environment and the disposal of carbon dioxide into the
environment at the body system level. Respiration at the
body system level involves a host of processes not found at
the cellular level, like the mechanics of breathing and the
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the capillaries.
‘These processes, one of the principal physiological chal-
lenges facing all animals (figure 53.1), are the subject of this
chapter.

1053
