54.2 Nerve impulses are produced on the axon membrane.

The Resting Membrane Potential

Neurons communicate through changes in electrical prop-
erties of the plasma membrane that travel from one cell to
another. The architecture of the neuron aids the spread of
these electrical signals called nerve impulses. To under-
stand how these signals are generated and transmitted
within the nervous system, we must first examine some of
the electrical properties of plasma membranes.

The battery in a car or a flashlight separates electrical
charges between its two poles. There is said to be a potential
difference, or voltage, between the poles, with one pole
being positive and the other negative. Similarly, a potential
difference exists across every cell’s plasma membrane. The
side of the membrane exposed to the cytoplasm is the nega-
tive pole, and the side exposed to the extracellular fluid is
the positive pole. This potential difference is called the
membrane potential.

The inside of the cell is more negatively charged in rela-
tion to the outside because of three factors: (1) Large mole-
cules like proteins and nucleic acids that are negatively
charged are more abundant inside the cell and cannot dif-
fuse out. These molecules are called fixed anions. (2) The
sodium-potassium pump brings only two potassium ions
(K*) into the cell for every three sodium ions (Na‘*) it
pumps out (figure 54.6). In addition to contributing to the
electrical potential, this also establishes concentration gra-
dients for Na* and K+. (3) Ion channels allow more K* to
diffuse out of the cell than Na* to diffuse into the cell. Na*
and K* channels in the plasma membrane have gates, por-
tions of the channel protein that open or close the chan-
nel’s pore. In the axons of neurons and in muscle fibers, the

  
  

Sodium-potassium
pump

FIGURE 54.6

gates are closed or open depending on the membrane po-
tential. Such channels are therefore known as voltage-gated
ion channels (figure 54.7).

In most cells, the permeability of ions through the mem-
brane is constant, and the net negativity on the inside of
the cell remains constant. The plasma membranes of mus-
cle and neurons, however, are excitable because the perme-
ability of their ion channels can be altered by various stim-
uli. When a neuron is not being stimulated, it maintains a
resting membrane potential. A cell is very small, and so its
membrane potential is very small. The electrical potential
of a car battery is typically 12 volts, but a cell’s resting
membrane potential is about —70 millivolts (-70 mV or
0.07 volts). The negative sign indicates that the inside of
the cell is negative with respect to the outside.

We know that the resting membrane potential is -70
mV because of an unequal distribution of electrical charges
across the membrane. But why —70 mV rather than -50
mV or —10 mV? To understand this, we need to remember
that there are two forces acting on the ions involved in es-
tablishing the resting membrane potential: (1) ions are at-
tracted to ions or molecules of opposite charge; and (2)
ions respond to concentration gradients by moving from an
area of high concentration to an area of lower concentra-
tion.

The positively charged ions, called cations, outside the
cell are attracted to the negatively charged fixed anions in-
side the cell. However, the resting plasma membrane is
more permeable to K* than to other cations, so K* enters
the cell. Other cations enter the cell, but the leakage of K*
into the cell has the dominant effect on the resting mem-
brane potential. In addition to the electrical gradient dri-

we

The sodium-potassium pump. This pump transports three Na‘ to the outside of the cell and simultaneously transports two K* to the
inside of the cell. This is an active transport carrier requiring the breakdown of ATP.

1076 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
