   
  
 
  
   

Superior
vena cava

Aortic

semilunar
valve
Pulmonary
semilunar valve

Right atrium

Tricuspid valve

Inferior
vena cava

(a)
FIGURE 52.14

Aorta capillaries

 

Pulmonary
artery

Pulmonary spiral
veins capillaries

Left atrium

Bicuspid
mitral valve

Left ventricle

Right ventricle

   
 
   

Systemic

Pulmonary
artery

Respiratory 4

Vena
cava

Aorta

Systemic
capillaries

(b)

The heart and circulation of mammals and birds. (@) The path of blood through the four-chambered heart. (6) The right side of the
heart receives deoxygenated blood and pumps it to the lungs; the left side of the heart receives oxygenated blood and pumps it to the body.
In this way, the pulmonary and systemic circulations are kept completely separate. RA = right atrium; LA = left atrium; RV = right

ventricle; LV = left ventricle.

Mammalian and Bird Hearts

Mammals, birds, and crocodiles have a four-chambered
heart with two separate atria and two separate ventricles
(figure 52.14). The right atrium receives deoxygenated
blood from the body and delivers it to the right ventricle,
which pumps the blood to the lungs. The left atrium re-
ceives oxygenated blood from the lungs and delivers it to
the left ventricle, which pumps the oxygenated blood to
the rest of the body. This completely double circulation
is powered by a two-cycle pump. Both atria fill with
blood and simultaneously contract, emptying their blood
into the ventricles. Both ventricles contract at the same
time, pushing blood simultaneously into the pulmonary
and systemic circulations. The increased efficiency of the
double circulatory system in mammals and birds is
thought to have been important in the evolution of en-
dothermy (warm-bloodedness), because a more efficient
circulation is necessary to support the high metabolic
rate required.

Because the overall circulatory system is closed, the
same volume of blood must move through the pulmonary
circulation as through the much larger systemic circulation
with each heartbeat. Therefore, the right and left ventricles
must pump the same amount of blood each time they con-
tract. If the output of one ventricle did not match that of

the other, fluid would accumulate and pressure would in-
crease in one of the circuits. The result would be increased
filtration out of the capillaries and edema (as occurs in con-
gestive heart failure, for example). Although the volume of
blood pumped by the two ventricles is the same, the pres-
sure they generate is not. The left ventricle, which pumps
blood through the higher-resistance systemic pathway, is
more muscular and generates more pressure than does the
right ventricle.

Throughout the evolutionary history of the vertebrate
heart, the sinus venosus has served as a pacemaker, the site
where the impulses that initiate the heartbeat originate. Al-
though it constitutes a major chamber in the fish heart, it is
reduced in size in amphibians and further reduced in rep-
tiles. In mammals and birds, the sinus venosus is no longer
evident as a separate chamber, but its disappearance is not
really complete. Some of its tissue remains in the wall of
the right atrium, near the point where the systemic veins
empty into the atrium. This tissue, which is called the
sinoatrial (SA) node, is still the site where each heartbeat
originates.

 

The oxygenated blood from the lungs returns to the left
atrium and is pumped out the left ventricle. The
deoxygenated blood from the body returns to the right
atrium and out the right ventricle to the lungs.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1047
