51.4 Accessory organs, neural stimulation, and endocrine secretions assist in

digestion.
Accessory Organs

Secretions of the Pancreas

The pancreas (figure 51.19), a large
gland situated near the junction of the
stomach and the small intestine, is
one of the accessory organs that con-
tribute secretions to the digestive
tract. Pancreatic fluid is secreted into
the duodenum through the pancreatic
duct; thus, the pancreas functions as
an exocrine organ. This fluid contains
a host of enzymes, including trypsin
and chymotrypsin, which digest pro-
teins; pancreatic amylase, which di-
gests starch; and lipase, which digests
fat. These enzymes are released into
the duodenum primarily as inactive
zymogens and are then activated by
the brush border enzymes of the in-
testine. Pancreatic enzymes digest
proteins into smaller polypeptides,
polysaccharides into shorter chains of
sugars, and fat into free fatty acids and
other products. The digestion of
these molecules is then completed by

   
    
 
     

Pancreatic islet
(of Langerhans)

   

From liver

Gallbladder

o-cell

Common
bile duct

 

Pancreas

Pancreatic
duct

Duodenum

FIGURE 51.19

The pancreas and bile duct empty into the duodenum. The pancreas secretes pancreatic
juice into the pancreatic duct. The pancreatic islets of Langerhans secrete hormones into the
blood; a-cells secrete glucagon and B-cells secrete insulin.

the brush border enzymes.

Pancreatic fluid also contains bi-
carbonate, which neutralizes the HCl from the stomach
and gives the chyme in the duodenum a slightly alkaline
pH. The digestive enzymes and bicarbonate are produced
by clusters of secretory cells known as acini.

In addition to its exocrine role in digestion, the pancreas
also functions as an endocrine gland, secreting several hor-
mones into the blood that control the blood levels of glu-
cose and other nutrients. These hormones are produced in
the islets of Langerhans, clusters of endocrine cells scat-
tered throughout the pancreas. The two most important
pancreatic hormones, insulin and glucagon, are discussed
later in this chapter.

The Liver and Gallbladder

The liver is the largest internal organ of the body (see fig-
ure 51.4). In an adult human, the liver weighs about 1.5
kilograms and is the size of a football. The main exocrine
secretion of the liver is bile, a fluid mixture consisting of
bile pigments and bile salts that is delivered into the duode-
num during the digestion of a meal. The bile pigments do
not participate in digestion; they are waste products result-
ing from the liver’s destruction of old red blood cells and

1030 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

ultimately are eliminated with the feces. If the excretion of
bile pigments by the liver is blocked, the pigments can ac-
cumulate in the blood and cause a yellow staining of the
tissues known as jaundice.

In contrast, the bile salts play a very important role in
the digestion of fats. Because fats are insoluble in water,
they enter the intestine as drops within the watery chyme.
The bile salts, which are partly lipid-soluble and partly
water-soluble, work like detergents, dispersing the large
drops of fat into a fine suspension of smaller droplets. This
emulsification process produces a greater surface area of fat
upon which the lipase enzymes can act, and thus allows the
digestion of fat to proceed more rapidly.

After it is produced in the liver, bile is stored and con-
centrated in the gallbladder. The arrival of fatty food in
the duodenum triggers a neural and endocrine reflex (dis-
cussed later) that stimulates the gallbladder to contract,
causing bile to be transported through the common bile
duct and injected into the duodenum. If the bile duct is
blocked by a gallstone (formed from a hardened precipi-
tate of cholesterol), contraction of the gallbladder will
cause pain generally felt under the right scapula (shoul-
der blade).
