Nerves Stimulate Contraction.

Muscles are stimulated to contract by motor neurons. The
particular motor neurons that stimulate skeletal muscles, as
opposed to cardiac and smooth muscles, are called somatic
motor neurons. The axon (see figure 49.12) of a somatic
motor neuron extends from the neuron cell body and
branches to make functional connections, or synapses, with a
number of muscle fibers. (Synapses are discussed in more
detail in chapter 54.) One axon can stimulate many muscle
fibers, and in some animals a muscle fiber may be inner-
vated by more than one motor neuron. However, in hu-
mans each muscle fiber only has a single synapse with a
branch of one axon.

When a somatic motor neuron produces electrochemi-
cal impulses, it stimulates contraction of the muscle fibers
it innervates (makes synapses with) through the following
events:

1. The motor neuron, at its synapse with the muscle
fibers, releases a chemical known as a meurotransmit-
ter. The specific neurotransmitter released by so-
matic motor neurons is acetylcholine (ACh). ACh
acts on the muscle fiber membrane to stimulate the
muscle fiber to produce its own electrochemical
impulses.

2. The impulses spread along the membrane of the
muscle fiber and are carried into the muscle fibers
through the T tubules.

3. The T tubules conduct the impulses toward the sar-
coplasmic reticulum, which then release Ca**. As de-
scribed earlier, the Ca** binds to troponin, which ex-
poses the cross-bridge binding sites on the actin
myofilaments, stimulating muscle contraction.

When impulses from the nerve stop, the nerve stops re-
leasing ACh. This stops the production of impulses in the
muscle fiber. When the T tubules no longer produce im-
pulses, Ca** is brought back into the SR by active trans-
port. Troponin is no longer bound to Ca**, so tropomyosin
returns to its inhibitory position, allowing the muscle to
relax.

The involvement of Ca** in muscle contraction is called,
excitation-contraction coupling because it is the release
of Ca** that links the excitation of the muscle fiber by the
motor neuron to the contraction of the muscle.

Motor Units and Recruitment

A single muscle fiber responds in an all-or-none fashion
to stimulation. The response of an entire muscle depends
upon the number of individual fibers involved. The set of
muscle fibers innervated by all axonal branches of a given
motor neuron is defined as a motor unit (figure 50.16).
Every time the motor neuron produces impulses, all mus-
cle fibers in that motor unit contract together. The divi-
sion of the muscle into motor units allows the muscle’s
strength of contraction to be finely graded, a requirement

   
 

Motor unit

{

(a) Tapping toe

(b) Running

FIGURE 50.16

The number and size of motor units. (@) Weak, precise muscle
contractions use smaller and fewer motor units. (b) Larger and
stronger movements require additional motor units that are
larger.

for coordinated movements of the skeleton. Muscles that
require a finer degree of control have smaller motor units
(fewer muscle fibers per neuron) than muscles that re-
quire less precise control but must exert more force. For
example, there are only a few muscle fibers per motor
neuron in the muscles that move the eyes, while there are
several hundred per motor neuron in the large muscles of
the legs.

Most muscles contain motor units in a variety of sizes,
which can be selectively activated by the nervous system.
The weakest contractions of a muscle involve the activa-
tion of a few small motor units. If a slightly stronger con-
traction is necessary, additional small motor units are also
activated. The initial increments to the total force gener-
ated by the muscle are therefore relatively small. As ever
greater forces are required, more and larger motor units
are brought into action, and the force increments become
larger. The nervous system’s use of increased numbers and
sizes of motor units to produce a stronger contraction is
termed recruitment.

 

The cross-bridges are prevented from binding to actin
by tropomyosin in a relaxed muscle. In order for a
muscle to contract, Ca** must be released from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum, where it is stored, so that it can
bind to troponin and cause the tropomyosin to shift its
position in the thin filaments. Muscle contraction is
stimulated by neurons. Varying sizes and numbers of
motor units are used to produce different types of
muscle contractions.

 

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1009
