51.2 Food is ingested, swallowed, and transported to the stomach.

The Mouth and Teeth

Specializations of the digestive systems in different kinds of
vertebrates reflect differences in the way these animals live.
Fishes have a large pharynx with gill slits, while air-breathing
vertebrates have a greatly reduced pharynx. Many verte-
brates have teeth (figure 51.6), and chewing (mastication)
breaks up food into small particles and mixes it with fluid se-
cretions. Birds, which lack teeth, break up food in their two-
chambered stomachs (figure 51.7). In one of these chambers,
the gizzard, small pebbles ingested by the bird are churned
together with the food by muscular action. This churning
grinds up the seeds and other hard plant material into
smaller chunks that can be digested more easily.

Vertebrate Teeth

Carnivorous mammals have pointed teeth that lack flat
grinding surfaces. Such teeth are adapted for cutting and
shearing. Carnivores often tear off pieces of their prey but
have little need to chew them, because digestive enzymes
can act directly on animal cells. (Recall how a cat or dog
gulps down its food.) By contrast, grass-eating herbivores,
such as cows and horses, must pulverize the cellulose cell
walls of plant tissue before digesting it. These animals have
large, flat teeth with complex ridges well-suited to grinding.

Human teeth are specialized for eating both plant and
animal food. Viewed simply, humans are carnivores in the
front of the mouth and herbivores in the back (figure 51.8).
The four front teeth in the upper and lower jaws are sharp,
chisel-shaped incisors used for biting. On each side of the
incisors are sharp, pointed teeth called cuspids (sometimes
referred to as “canine” teeth), which are used for tearing
food. Behind the canines are two premolars and three mo-
lars, all with flattened, ridged surfaces for grinding and
crushing food. Children have only 20 teeth, but these de-
ciduous teeth are lost during childhood and are replaced by
32 adult teeth.

The Mouth

Inside the mouth, the tongue mixes food with a mucous so-
lution, saliva. In humans, three pairs of salivary glands se-
crete saliva into the mouth through ducts in the mouth’s
mucosal lining. Saliva moistens and lubricates the food so
that it is easier to swallow and does not abrade the tissue it
passes on its way through the esophagus. Saliva also con-
tains the hydrolytic enzyme salivary amylase, which initi-
ates the breakdown of the polysaccharide starch into the
disaccharide maltose. This digestion is usually minimal in
humans, however, because most people don’t chew their
food very long.

The secretions of the salivary glands are controlled by
the nervous system, which in humans maintains a constant

1020 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Canines

   

ed

——

Molars

Incisors

Premolars

aa

FIGURE 51.6

Diagram of generalized vertebrate dentition. Different
vertebrates will have specific variations from this generalized
pattern, depending on whether the vertebrate is an herbivore,
carnivore, or omnivore.

Esophagus

  
     

Stomach

Gizzard

 

FIGURE 51.7

Birds store food in the crop and grind it up in the gizzard.
Birds lack teeth but have a muscular chamber called the gizzard
that works to break down food. Birds swallow gritty objects or
pebbles that lodge in the gizzard and pulverize food before it
passes into the small intestine.

flow of about half a milliliter per minute when the mouth is
empty of food. This continuous secretion keeps the mouth
moist. The presence of food in the mouth triggers an in-
creased rate of secretion, as taste-sensitive neurons in the
mouth send impulses to the brain, which responds by stim-
ulating the salivary glands. The most potent stimuli are
