52.2 Anetwork of vessels transports blood through the body.
The Blood Plasma

Blood is composed of a fluid plasma and several different
kinds of cells that circulate within that fluid (figure 52.5).
Blood platelets, although included in figure 52.5, are not
complete cells; rather, they are fragments of cells that re-
side in the bone marrow. Blood plasma is the matrix in
which blood cells and platelets are suspended. Interstitial
(extracellular) fluids originate from the fluid present in
plasma.
Plasma contains the following solutes:

 

Blood cell Life span in blood

 

 

1. Metabolites, wastes, and hormones. Dissolved Immune defenses
within the plasma are all of the metabolites used by
cells, including glucose, amino acids, and vitamins.

 

Also dissolved in the plasma are hormones that regu-
late cellular activities, wastes such as nitrogen com-
pounds, and CO) produced by metabolizing cells.
CO) is carried in the blood as bicarbonate because
free carbon dioxide would decrease blood pH.
2.Ions. Like the water of the seas in which life arose,
blood plasma is a dilute salt solution. The predomi-
nant plasma ions are sodium, chloride, and bicarbon-
ate ions. In addition, there are trace amounts of other

Unknown Defense against
parasites

 

ions such as calcium, magnesium, copper, potassium, , Inflammatory
and zine. The composition of the plasma, therefore, a eed
is similar to seawater, but plasma has a lower total ion
concentration than that of present-day seawater.

3. Proteins. The liver produces most of the plasma
proteins, including albumin, which comprises most . Immune
of the plasma protein; the alpha (a) and beta (6) ) surveillance
globulins, which serve as carriers of lipids and steroid , (precursor of

hormones; and fibrinogen, which is required for blood easel necro phede)
clotting. Following an injury of a blood vessel,

 

 

platelets release clotting factors (proteins) into the
blood. In the presence of these clotting factors, fi-
brinogen is converted into insoluble threads of fibrin. Antibody production
Fibrin then aggregates to form the clot. Blood plasma Unknown (precursor of
which has had fibrinogen removed is called serum. Besmaicel)

B - lymphocyte

 

Plasma, the liquid portion of the blood, contains

 

 

different types of proteins, ions, metabolites, wastes,

and hormones. This liquid, and fluids derived from it, ee an Cellular immune

provide the extracellular environment of most the cells noe response

of the body.

T- lymphocyte
2
” hd

FIGURE 52.5 . - Blood clotting
Types of blood cells. Erythrocytes are red blood cells, platelets
are fragments of a bone marrow cell, and all the other cells are Platelets

 

 

 

different types of leukocytes, or white blood cells.

1040 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
