cause language disorders known as aphasias. For example, if
Wernicke’s area is damaged, the person’s speech is rapid
and fluid but lacks meaning; words are tossed together as in
a “word salad.”

While the dominant hemisphere for language is adept at
sequential reasoning, like that needed to formulate a sen-
tence, the nondominant hemisphere (the right hemisphere
in most people) is adept at spatial reasoning, the type of
reasoning needed to assemble a puzzle or draw a picture. It
is also the hemisphere primarily involved in musical abil-
ity—a person with damage to Broca’s speech area in the left
hemisphere may not be able to speak but may retain the
ability to sing! Damage to the nondominant hemisphere
may lead to an inability to appreciate spatial relationships
and may impair musical activities such as singing. Even
more specifically, damage to the inferior temporal cortex in
that hemisphere eliminates the capacity to recall faces.
Reading, writing, and oral comprehension remain normal,
and patients with this disability can still recognize acquain-
tances by their voices. The nondominant hemisphere is
also important for the consolidation of memories of non-
verbal experiences.

Memory and Learning. One of the great mysteries of
the brain is the basis of memory and learning. There is no
one part of the brain in which all aspects of a memory ap-
pear to reside. Specific cortical sites cannot be identified
for particular memories because relatively extensive cortical
damage does not selectively remove memories. Although
memory is impaired if portions of the brain, particularly
the temporal lobes, are removed, it is not lost entirely.
Many memories persist in spite of the damage, and the
ability to access them gradually recovers with time. There-
fore, investigators who have tried to probe the physical
mechanisms underlying memory often have felt that they
were grasping at a shadow. Although we still do not have a
complete understanding of these mechanisms, we have
learned a good deal about the basic processes in which
memories are formed.

There appear to be fundamental differences between
short-term and long-term memory. Short-term memory is
transient, lasting only a few moments. Such memories can
readily be erased by the application of an electrical shock,
leaving previously stored long-term memories intact. This
result suggests that short-term memories are stored electri-
cally in the form of a transient neural excitation. Long-
term memory, in contrast, appears to involve structural
changes in certain neural connections within the brain.
Two parts of the temporal lobes, the hippocampus and the
amygdala, are involved in both short-term memory and its
consolidation into long-term memory. Damage to these
structures impairs the ability to process recent events into
long-term memories.

Synapses that are used intensively for a short period of
time display more effective synaptic transmission upon sub-
sequent use. This phenomenon is called long-term potenti-
ation (LTP). During LTP, the presynaptic neuron may re-
lease increased amounts of neurotransmitter with each
action potential, and the postsynaptic neuron may become
increasingly sensitive to the neurotransmitter. It is believed
that these changes in synaptic transmission may be respon-
sible for some aspects of memory storage.

Mechanism of Alzheimer’s Disease Still a Mystery

In the past, little was known about Alzheimer’s disease, a
condition in which the memory and thought processes of
the brain become dysfunctional. Drug companies are eager
to develop new products for the treatment of Alzheimer’s,
but they have little concrete evidence to go on. Scientists
disagree about the biological nature of the disease and its
cause. Two hypotheses have been proposed: one that nerve
cells in the brain are killed from the outside in, and the
other that the cells are killed from the inside out.

In the first hypothesis, external proteins called B-amy-
loid peptides kill nerve cells. A mistake in protein process-
ing produces an abnormal form of the peptide, which then
forms aggregates, or plaques. The plaques begin to fill in
the brain and then damage and kill nerve cells. However,
these amyloid plaques have been found in autopsies of peo-
ple that did not have Alzheimer’s disease.

The second hypothesis maintains that the nerve cells are
killed by an abnormal form of an internal protein. This
protein, called tau (t), normally functions to maintain pro-
tein transport microtubules. Abnormal forms of t assemble
into helical segments that form tangles, which interfere
with the normal functioning of the nerve cells. Researchers
continue to study whether tangles and plaques are causes or
effects of Alzheimer’s disease.

Progress has been made in identifying genes that in-
crease the likelihood of developing Alzheimer’s and genes
that, when mutated, can cause Alzheimer’s disease. How-
ever, the genes may not reveal much about Alzheimer’s as
they do not show up in most Alzheimer’s patients, and they
cause symptoms that start much earlier than when most
Alzheimer’s patients show symptoms.

 

The cerebrum is composed of two cerebral
hemispheres. Each hemisphere consists of the gray
matter of the cerebral cortex overlying white matter
and islands of gray matter (nuclei) called the basal
ganglia. These areas are involved in the integration of
sensory information, control of body movements, and
such associative functions as learning and memory.

 

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1095
