Chapter 49

Summary

BIOLOGY|

 

Questions

49.1 The bodies of vertebrates are organized into functional systems.

www.mhhe.com/raven6ch/resource28.mhtml

Media Resources

 

¢ The vertebrate body is organized into cells, tissues,
organs, and organ systems, which are specialized for
different functions.

¢ The four primary tissues of the vertebrate adult
body—epithelial, connective, muscle, and nerve—are
derived from three embryonic germ layers.

49.2 Epithelial tissue forms membranes and glands.

1. What isa tissue? What is an
organ? What is an organ system?

 

* Art Activity:
‘Mammalian body
cavities

 

* Epithelial membranes cover all body surfaces.

¢ Stratified membranes, particularly the keratinized ep-
ithelium of the epidermis, provides protection,
whereas simple membranes are more adapted for se-
cretion and transport.

¢ Exocrine glands secrete into ducts that conduct the
secretion to the surface of an epithelial membrane;
endocrine glands secrete hormones into the blood.

2. What are the different types of
epithelial membranes, and how

do they differ in structure and
function?

3. What are the two types of
glands, and how do they differ in
structure and function?

49.3 Connective tissues contain abundant extracellular material.

+ Epithelial tissue
+ Epithelial glands

 

* Connective tissues are characterized by abundant ex-
tracellular matrix, which is composed of fibrous pro-
teins and a gel-like ground substance in connective
tissue proper.

* Loose connective tissues contain many cell types such
as adipose cells and mast cells; dense regular connec-
tive tissues form tendons and ligaments.

* Special connective tissues include cartilage, bone, and
blood. Nutrients can diffuse through the cartilage
matrix but not through the calcified matrix of bone,
which contains canaliculi for that purpose.

4, What feature do all connective
tissues share? What are the dif-
ferent categories of connective
tissue? Give an example of each.
5. What is the structure of a liga-
ment? How do cartilage and

bone differ? Why is blood con-
sidered to be a connective tissue?

49.4 Muscle tissue provides for movement, and nerve tissue provides for control.

= * Connective tissue

 

* Smooth muscles are composed of spindle-shaped cells
and are found in the organs of the internal environ-
ment and in the walls of blood vessels.

© Skeletal and cardiac muscles are striated; skeletal
muscles, however, are under voluntary control
whereas cardiac muscle is involuntary.

* Neurons consist of a cell body with one or more den-
drites and one axon. Neuron cell bodies form ganglia,
and their axons form nerves in the peripheral nervous
system.

¢ Neuroglia are supporting cells with various functions
including insulating axons to accelerate an electrical
impulse.

6. From what embryonic tissue is
muscle derived? What two con-
tractile proteins are abundant in
muscle? What are the three cate-
gories of muscle tissue? Which
two are striated?

7. Why are skeletal muscle fibers
multinucleated? What is the

functional significance of interca-
lated discs in heart muscle?

998 = Part XIII Animal Form and Function Be BioCourse.com

* Tissues

* Nerve tissue

* Nervous tissue
© Muscle tissue
