Vertebrate Digestive Systems

In humans and other vertebrates, the digestive system con-
sists of a tubular gastrointestinal tract and accessory diges-
tive organs (figure 51.4). The initial components of the
gastrointestinal tract are the mouth and the pharynx, which
is the common passage of the oral and nasal cavities. The
pharynx leads to the esophagus, a muscular tube that deliv-
ers food to the stomach, where some preliminary digestion
occurs. From the stomach, food passes to the first part of
the small intestine, where a battery of digestive enzymes
continues the digestive process. The products of digestion
then pass across the wall of the small intestine into the
bloodstream. The small intestine empties what remains
into the large intestine, where water and minerals are ab-
sorbed. In most vertebrates other than mammals, the waste
products emerge from the large intestine into a cavity
called the cloaca (see figure 51.3), which also receives the
products of the urinary and reproductive systems. In mam-
mals, the urogenital products are separated from the fecal
material in the large intestine; the fecal material enters the
rectum and is expelled through the anus.

In general, carnivores have shorter intestines for their
size than do herbivores. A short intestine is adequate for a
carnivore, but herbivores ingest a large amount of plant
cellulose, which resists digestion. These animals have a
long, convoluted small intestine. In addition, mammals
called ruminants (such as cows) that consume grass and
other vegetation have stomachs with multiple chambers,
where bacteria aid in the digestion of cellulose. Other her-
bivores, including rabbits and horses, digest cellulose (with
the aid of bacteria) in a blind pouch called the cecum lo-
cated at the beginning of the large intestine.

The accessory digestive organs (described in detail later in
the chapter) include the liver, which produces bile (a green
solution that emulsifies fat), the gallbladder, which stores
and concentrates the bile, and the pancreas. The pancreas
produces pancreatic juice, which contains digestive enzymes
and bicarbonate. Both bile and pancreatic juice are secreted
into the first region of the small intestine and aid digestion.

The tubular gastrointestinal tract of a vertebrate has a
characteristic layered structure (figure 51.5). The innermost
layer is the mucosa, an epithelium that lines the interior of
the tract (the lumen). The next major tissue layer, made of
connective tissue, is called the submucosa. Just outside the
submucosa is the muscularis, which consists of a double
layer of smooth muscles. The muscles in the inner layer
have a circular orientation, and those in the outer layer are
arranged longitudinally. Another connective tissue layer, the
serosa, covers the external surface of the tract. Nerves, in-
tertwined in regions called plexuses, are located in the sub-
mucosa and help regulate the gastrointestinal activities.

 

The vertebrate digestive system consists of a tubular
gastrointestinal tract, which is modified in different
animals, composed of a series of tissue layers.

 

a Salivary gland

4 Pharynx
ma
+ salivary gland

 

Liver Stomach

Gallbladder

  
 

Pancreas

Small
intestine
Cecum ————— :
__ aa pa Colon
Appendix h
Rectum
Anus
FIGURE 51.4

The human digestive system. Humans, like all placental
mammals, lack a cloaca and have a separate exit from the digestive
tract through the rectum and anus.

Blood vessel

Gland outside
gastrointestinal
tract

Mucosa

Lumen

Submucosa
Myenteric

plexus Circular layer
Muscularis
Submucosal Longitudinal layer
plexus :
Gland in Connective tissue layer
submucosa Serosa
FIGURE 51.5

The layers of the gastrointestinal tract. The mucosa contains a
lining epithelium; the submucosa is composed of connective
tissue (as is the serosa), and the muscularis consists of smooth
muscles.

 

 

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1019
