Mechanisms That
Regulate Breathing

Each breath is initiated by neurons in
a respiratory control center located in the
medulla oblongata, a part of the brain
stem (see chapter 54). These neurons
send impulses to the diaphragm and
external intercostal muscles, stimulat-
ing them to contract, and contractions
of these muscles expand the chest cav-
ity, causing inspiration. When these
neurons stop producing impulses, the
inspiratory muscles relax and expira-
tion occurs. Although the muscles of
breathing are skeletal muscles, they are
usually controlled automatically. This
control can be voluntarily overridden,
however, as in hypoventilation (breath
holding) or hyperventilation.

A proper rate and depth of breath-
ing is required to maintain the blood
oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in
the normal range. Thus, although the
automatic breathing cycle is driven by
neurons in the brain stem, these neu-
rons must be responsive to changes in
blood Po, and Pco, in order to main-
tain homeostasis. You can demonstrate
this mechanism by simply holding your

 

Medulla oblongata

 

Chemosensitive
neurons

Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)

Blood-CSF barrier

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 53.13
The effect of blood CO; on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Changes in the pH of the CSF
are detected by chemosensitive neurons in the brain that help regulate breathing.

breath. Your blood carbon dioxide im-

mediately rises and your blood oxygen

falls. After a short time, the urge to breathe induced by the
changes in blood gases becomes overpowering. This is due
primarily to the rise in blood carbon dioxide, as indicated
by arise in Pop, rather than to the fall in oxygen levels.

A rise in Peo) causes an increased production of car-
bonic acid (H2CO3), which is formed from carbon dioxide
and water and acts to lower the blood pH (carbonic acid
dissociates into HCO; and Ht, thereby increasing blood
H* concentration). A fall in blood pH stimulates neurons in
the aortic and carotid bodies, which are sensory struc-
tures known as peripheral chemoreceptors in the aorta and the
carotid artery. These receptors send impulses to the respi-
ratory control center in the medulla oblongata, which then
stimulates increased breathing. The brain also contains
chemoreceptors, but they cannot be stimulated by blood
Ht because the blood is unable to enter the brain. After a
brief delay, however, the increased blood Peo? also causes
a decrease in the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
bathing the brain. This stimulates the central chemore-
ceptors in the brain (figure 53.13).

The peripheral chemoreceptors are responsible for the
immediate stimulation of breathing when the blood Pco,
rises, but this immediate stimulation only accounts for
about 30% of increased ventilation. The central chemore-

1064 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

ceptors are responsible for the sustained increase in ventila-
tion if Pco, remains elevated. The increased respiratory
rate then acts to eliminate the extra CO), bringing the
blood pH back to normal (figure 53.14).

A person cannot voluntarily hyperventilate for too long.
The decrease in plasma Pco, and increase in pH of plasma
and CSF caused by hyperventilation extinguish the reflex
drive to breathe. They also lead to constriction of cerebral
blood vessels, causing dizziness. People can hold their
breath longer if they hyperventilate first, because it takes
longer for the CO} levels to build back up, not because hy-
perventilation increases the Po, of the blood. Actually, in
people with normal lungs, Po, becomes a significant stimu-
lus for breathing only at high altitudes, where the Po, is
low. Low Po, can also stimulate breathing in patients with
emphysema, where the lungs are so damaged that blood
CO) can never be adequately eliminated.

 

Breathing serves to keep the blood gases and pH in the
normal range and is under the reflex control of
peripheral and central chemoreceptors. These
chemoreceptors sense the pH of the blood and
cerebrospinal fluid, and they regulate the respiratory
control center in the medulla oblongata of the brain.

 
