the lungs or gills, oxygen attaches to hemo-
globin molecules within the erythrocytes
and is transported to the cells for aerobic
respiration. Carbon dioxide, a by-product of
cell respiration, is carried by the blood to
the lungs or gills for elimination.

b. Nutritive. The digestive system is responsi-
ble for the breakdown of food into mole-
cules so that nutrients can be absorbed
through the intestinal wall and into the
blood vessels of the circulatory system. The
blood then carries these absorbed products
of digestion through the liver and to the
cells of the body.

c. Excretory. Metabolic wastes, excessive water
and ions, and other molecules in the fluid
portion of blood are filtered through the
capillaries of the kidneys and excreted in
urine.

2. Regulation. The cardiovascular system transports

regulatory hormones and participates in temperature

regulation.

a. Hormone transport. The blood carries hormones
from the endocrine glands, where they are se-
creted, to the distant target organs they regulate.

b. Temperature regulation. In warm-blooded verte-
brates, or endotherms, a constant body tempera-
ture is maintained regardless of the ambient tem-
perature. This is accomplished in part by blood
vessels located just under the epidermis. When the
ambient temperature is cold, the superficial vessels
constrict to divert the warm blood to deeper ves-
sels. When the ambient temperature is warm, the
superficial vessels dilate so that the warmth of the
blood can be lost by radiation (figure 52.3).

Some vertebrates also retain heat in a cold envi-
ronment by using a countercurrent heat ex-
change (also see chapter 53). In this process, a ves-
sel carrying warm blood from deep within the body
passes next to a vessel carrying cold blood from the
surface of the body (figure 52.4). The warm blood
going out heats the cold blood returning from the
body surface, so that this blood is no longer cold
when it reaches the interior of the body.

3. Protection. The circulatory system protects against

injury and foreign microbes or toxins introduced into

the body.

a. Blood clotting. The clotting mechanism protects
against blood loss when vessels are damaged. This
clotting mechanism involves both proteins from
the blood plasma and cell fragments called
platelets (discussed in the next section).

b. Immune defense. The blood contains white blood
cells, or leukocytes, that provide immunity against
many disease-causing agents. Some white blood
cells are phagocytic, some produce antibodies, and
some act by other mechanisms to protect the body.

(a) Vasoconstriction

FIGURE 52.3

Regulation of heat loss. The amount of heat lost at the body’s surface can

be regulated by controlling the flow of blood to the surface. (a) Constriction
of surface blood vessels limits flow and heat loss; (4) dilation of these vessels

increases flow and heat loss.

 

| HY

 

vi _ Heat loss
\

r
| across
i
|| epidermis

Br iter i

tf
fF
Gl

yf
KE

0 Vasodilation

      
 

Core body

temperature, “Warm blood /
36°C”

 

5c
Temperature
of environment

Capillary
bed

 

FIGURE 52.4

Countercurrent heat exchange. Many marine animals, such as
this killer whale, limit heat loss in cold water using countercurrent
heat exchange. The warm blood pumped from within the body in
arteries loses heat to the cold blood returning from the skin in
veins. This warms the venous blood so that the core body
temperature can remain constant in cold water and cools the
arterial blood so that less heat is lost when the arterial blood
reaches the tip of the extremity.

 

Circulatory systems may be open or closed. All
vertebrates have a closed circulatory system, in which
blood circulates away from the heart in arteries and
back to the heart in veins. The circulatory system serves
a variety of functions, including transportation,
regulation, and protection.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1039
