53.4 Mammalian breathing is a dynamic process.

Structures and Mechanisms of
Breathing

In mammals, inspired air travels through the trachea,
bronchi, and bronchioles to reach the alveoli, where gas ex-
change occurs. Each alveolus is composed of an epithelium
only one cell thick, and is surrounded by blood capillaries
with walls that are also only one cell layer thick. There are
about 30 billion capillaries in both lungs, or about 100 cap-
illaries per alveolus. Thus, an alveolus can be visualized as a
microscopic air bubble whose entire surface is bathed by
blood. Because the alveolar air and the capillary blood are
separated by only two cell layers, the distance between the
air and blood is only 0.5 to 1.5 micrometers, allowing for
the rapid exchange of gases by diffusion by decreasing d in
Fick’s Law.

The blood leaving the lungs, as a result of this gas ex-
change, normally contains a partial oxygen pressure (Po)
of about 100 millimeters of mercury. As previously dis-
cussed, the Po, is a measure of the concentration of dis-
solved oxygen—you can think of it as indicating the plasma
oxygen. Because the Po, of the blood leaving the lungs is
close to the Po, of the air in the alveoli (about 105 mm
Hg), the lungs do a very effective, but not perfect, job of
oxygenating the blood. After gas exchange in the systemic
capillaries, the blood that returns to the right side of the
heart is depleted in oxygen, with a Po, of about 40 millime-
ters of mercury. These changes in the Po, of the blood, as
well as the changes in plasma carbon dioxide (indicated as
the Pco,), are shown in figure 53.11.

The outside of each lung is covered by a thin membrane
called the visceral pleural membrane. A second, parietal
pleural membrane lines the inner wall of the thoracic cav-
ity. The space between these two membranes, the pleural
cavity, is normally very small and filled with fluid. This
fluid links the two membranes in the same way a thin film
of water can hold two plates of glass together, effectively
coupling the lungs to the thoracic cavity. The pleural
membranes package each lung separately—if one collapses
due to a perforation of the membranes, the other lung can
still function.

Mechanics of Breathing

As in all other terrestrial vertebrates except amphibians, air
is drawn into the lungs by the creation of a negative, or
subatmospheric, pressure. In accordance with Boyle’s Law,
when the volume of a given quantity of gas increases its
pressure decreases. This occurs because the volume of the
thorax is increased during inspiration (inhalation), and the
lungs likewise expand because of the adherence of the vis-
ceral and parietal pleural membranes. When the pressure
within the lungs is lower than the atmospheric pressure, air
enters the lungs.

1062 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Inspired air Expired air

Ve

Alveolar air
Po, = 105 mm Hg
Poo, = 40 mm Hg

    
  

    
    
   
 
 

Alveolus

Pulmonary
vein

Systemic
veins

Systemic
arteries

Po, = 40 mm Hg
Poo, = 46 mm Hg

Po, = 100 mm Hg
Poo, = 40 mm Hg

Peripheral
tissues

FIGURE 53.11

Gas exchange in the blood capillaries of the lungs and
systemic circulation. As a result of gas exchange in the lungs, the
systemic arteries carry oxygenated blood with a relatively low
carbon dioxide concentration. After the oxygen is unloaded to the
tissues, the blood in the systemic veins has a lowered oxygen
content and an increased carbon dioxide concentration.

The thoracic volume is increased through contraction
of two sets of muscles: the external intercostals and the di-
apbragm. During inspiration, contraction of the external
intercostal muscles between the ribs raises the ribs and
expands the rib cage. Contraction of the diaphragm, a
convex sheet of striated muscle separating the thoracic
cavity from the abdominal cavity, causes the diaphragm
to lower and assume a more flattened shape. This ex-
pands the volume of the thorax and lungs while it in-
creases the pressure on the abdomen (causing the belly to
protrude). You can force a deeper inspiration by con-
tracting other muscles that insert on the sternum or rib
cage and expand the thoracic cavity and lungs to a greater
extent (figure 53.122).

The thorax and lungs have a degree of elasticity—they
tend to resist distension and they recoil when the distend-
