Inspiration

Sternocleidomastoid \

muscles contract
(for forced inspiration) 7/—-¥

      

External
intercostal
muscles
contract
Diaphragm
contracts
FIGURE 53.12

Expiration

   

External
intercostal
muscles relax

 

4 sveerina muscles

] contract (for forced
|) expiration)

Diaphragm
relaxes

How a human breathes. (a) Inspiration. The diaphragm contracts and the walls of the chest cavity expand, increasing the volume of the
chest cavity and lungs. As a result of the larger volume, air is drawn into the lungs. (}) Expiration. The diaphragm and chest walls return to
their normal positions as a result of elastic recoil, reducing the volume of the chest cavity and forcing air out of the lungs through the
trachea. Note that inspiration can be forced by contracting accessory respiratory muscles (such as the sternocleidomastoid), and expiration

can be forced by contracting abdominal muscles.

ing force subsides. Expansion of the thorax and lungs dur-
ing inspiration places these structures under elastic tension.
It is the relaxation of the external intercostal muscles and
diaphragm that produces unforced expiration, because it
relieves that elastic tension and allows the thorax and lungs
to recoil. You can force a greater expiration by contracting
your abdominal muscles and thereby pressing the abdomi-
nal organs up against the diaphragm (figure 53.120).

Breathing Measurements

A variety of terms are used to describe the volume changes
of the lung during breathing. At rest, each breath moves a
tidal volume of about 500 milliliters of air into and out of
the lungs. About 150 milliliters of the tidal volume is con-
tained in the tubular passages (trachea, bronchi, and bron-
chioles), where no gas exchange occurs. The air in this
anatomical dead space mixes with fresh air during inspiration.
This is one of the reasons why respiration in mammals is
not as efficient as in birds, where air flow through the lungs
is one-way.

The maximum amount of air that can be expired after a
forceful, maximum inspiration is called the vital capacity.
‘This measurement, which averages 4.6 liters in young men
and 3.1 liters in young women, can be clinically important,
because an abnormally low vital capacity may indicate dam-

age to the alveoli in various pulmonary disorders. For ex-
ample, in emphysema, a potentially fatal condition usually
caused by cigarette smoking, vital capacity is reduced as the
alveoli are progressively destroyed.

A person normally breathes at a rate and depth that
properly oxygenate the blood and remove carbon dioxide,
keeping the blood Po, and Pco, within a normal range. If
breathing is insufficient to maintain normal blood gas mea-
surements (a rise in the blood Pco, is the best indicator),
the person is hypoventilating. If breathing is excessive for
a particular metabolic rate, so that the blood P¢o, is abnor-
mally lowered, the person is said to be hyperventilating.
Perhaps surprisingly, the increased breathing that occurs
during moderate exercise is not necessarily hyperventila-
tion, because the faster breathing is matched to the faster
metabolic rate, and blood gas measurements remain nor-
mal. The next section describes how breathing is regulated
to keep pace with metabolism.

 

Humans inspire by contracting muscles that insert on
the rib cage and by contracting the diaphragm.
Expiration is produced primarily by muscle relaxation
and elastic recoil. As a result, the blood oxygen and
carbon dioxide levels are maintained in a normal range
through adjustments in the depth and rate of breathing.

 

Chapter 53. Respiration 1063
