acidic solutions; lemon juice, for example, can increase the
rate of salivation eightfold. The sight, sound, or smell of
food can stimulate salivation markedly in dogs, but in hu-
mans, these stimuli are much less effective than thinking or
talking about food.

When food is ready to be swallowed, the tongue moves
it to the back of the mouth. In mammals, the process of
swallowing begins when the soft palate elevates, pushing
against the back wall of the pharynx (figure 51.9). Elevation
of the soft palate seals off the nasal cavity and prevents food
from entering it. Pressure against the pharynx triggers an
automatic, involuntary response called a reflex. In this re-
flex, pressure on the pharynx stimulates neurons within its
walls, which send impulses to the swallowing center in the
brain. In response, electrical impulses in motor neurons
stimulate muscles to contract and raise the /arynx (voice
box). This pushes the glottis, the opening from the larynx
into the trachea (windpipe), against a flap of tissue called
the epigiottis. These actions keep food out of the respiratory
tract, directing it instead into the esophagus.

 

In many vertebrates ingested food is fragmented
through the tearing or grinding action of specialized
teeth. In birds, this is accomplished through the
grinding action of pebbles in the gizzard. Food mixed
with saliva is swallowed and enters the esophagus.

 

    
    
 

Hard palate
Tongue

‘ Soft palate 3
a Pharynx

ie, | Epiglottis x
a Glottis

Larynx
Trachea

Esophagus

FIGURE 51.9

 

(a)

Cusp

Enamel] ————

  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  

Gingiva
Dentin
Pulp cavity with
nerves and vessels

Periodontal
ligaments

Root canal
Cementum

Bone

©)

FIGURE 51.8
Human teeth. (2) The front six teeth on the upper and lower jaws
are cuspids and incisors. The remaining teeth, running along the
sides of the mouth, are grinders called premolars and molars.
Hence, humans have carnivore-like teeth in the front of their
mouth and herbivore-like teeth in the back. (b) Each tooth is alive,
with a central pulp containing nerves and blood vessels. The
actual chewing surface is a hard enamel layered over the softer
dentin, which forms the body of the tooth.

  

The human pharynx, palate, and larynx. Food that enters the pharynx is prevented from entering the nasal cavity by elevation of the soft
palate, and is prevented from entering the larynx and trachea (the airways of the respiratory system) by elevation of the larynx against the

epiglottis.

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1021
