Types of Muscle Fibers
Muscle Fiber Twitches

An isolated skeletal muscle can be studied by stimulating it
artificially with electric shocks. If a muscle is stimulated
with a single electric shock, it will quickly contract and
relax in a response called a twitch. Increasing the stimulus
voltage increases the strength of the twitch up to a maxi-
mum. If a second electric shock is delivered immediately
after the first, it will produce a second twitch that may par-
tially “ride piggyback” on the first. This cumulative re-
sponse is called summation (figure 50.17).

If the stimulator is set to deliver an increasing frequency
of electric shocks automatically, the relaxation time be-
tween successive twitches will get shorter and shorter, as
the strength of contraction increases. Finally, at a particular
frequency of stimulation, there is no visible relaxation be-
tween successive twitches. Contraction is smooth and sus-
tained, as it is during normal muscle contraction in the
body. This smooth, sustained contraction is called tetanus.
(The term tetanus should not be confused with the disease
of the same name, which is accompanied by a painful state
of muscle contracture, or tetany.)

Skeletal muscle fibers can be divided on the basis of
their contraction speed into slow-twitch, or type I,
fibers, and fast-twitch, or type II, fibers. The muscles
that move the eyes, for example, have a high proportion
of fast-twitch fibers and reach maximum tension in about
7.3 milliseconds; the soleus muscle in the leg, by con-
trast, has a high proportion of slow-twitch fibers and re-
quires about 100 milliseconds to reach maximum tension

(figure 50.18).

Muscles like the soleus must be able to sustain a con-
traction for a long period of time without fatigue. The
resistance to fatigue demonstrated by these muscles is
aided by other characteristics of slow-twitch (type I)
fibers that endow them with a high capacity for aerobic
respiration. Slow-twitch fibers have a rich capillary sup-
ply, numerous mitochondria and aerobic respiratory en-
zymes, and a high concentration of myoglobin pigment.
Myoglobin is a red pigment, similar to the hemoglobin in
red blood cells, but its higher affinity for oxygen im-
proves the delivery of oxygen to the slow-twitch fibers.
Because of their high myoglobin content, slow-twitch
fibers are also called red fibers.

The thicker, fast-twitch (type II) fibers have fewer capil-
laries and mitochondria than slow-twitch fibers and not as
much myoglobin; hence, these fibers are also called white

fibers. Fast-twitch fibers are adapted to respire anaerobi-

cally by using a large store of glycogen and high concentra-
tions of glycolytic enzymes. Fast-twitch fibers are adapted
for the rapid generation of power and can grow thicker and
stronger in response to weight training. The “dark meat”
and “white meat” found in meat such as chicken and turkey
consists of muscles with primarily red and white fibers,
respectively.

In addition to the type I (slow-twitch) and type II (fast-
twitch) fibers, human muscles also have an intermediate
form of fibers that are fast-twitch but also have a high ox-
idative capacity, and so are more resistant to fatigue. En-
durance training increases the proportion of these fibers in
muscles.

 

 

     
 
 
  

 

 

 

Complete
tetanus
Incomplete
| tetanus
Summation
a ; m
5 Twitches
5
DE
ag
22
ag
28
ae Stimuli + 4 tt PAR ttt.
Time ——>
FIGURE 50.17

Muscle twitches summate to produce a sustained, tetanized contraction. This pattern is produced when the muscle is stimulated
electrically or naturally by neurons. Tetanus, a smooth, sustained contraction, is the normal type of muscle contraction in the body.

1010 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

 
