FIGURE 51.20
‘The actions of insulin and glucagon.
After a meal, an increased secretion of
insulin by the B cells of the pancreatic

Eating carbohydrate-tich meal

 

Metabolism

 

 

 

Fasting or exercise

 

 

islets promotes the deposition of glycogen
and fat. During fasting or exercising, an
increased glucagon secretion by the ©. cells
of the pancreatic islets and a decreased
insulin secretion promote the breakdown
(through hydrolysis reactions) of glycogen
and fat.

t insulin secretion

Increasing blood glucose

TTC ey

} Glucagon secretion

 

 

 

Formation of
glycogen and fat

 

 

 

Regulatory Functions of the Liver

Because the hepatic portal vein carries blood from the
stomach and intestine directly to the liver, the liver is in a
position to chemically modify the substances absorbed in
the gastrointestinal tract before they reach the rest of the
body. For example, ingested alcohol and other drugs are
taken into liver cells and metabolized; this is why the liver
is often damaged as a result of alcohol and drug abuse. The
liver also removes toxins, pesticides, carcinogens, and other
poisons, converting them into less toxic forms. An impor-
tant example of this is the liver’s conversion of the toxic
ammonia produced by intestinal bacteria into urea, a com-
pound that can be contained safely and carried by the blood
at higher concentrations.

Similarly, the liver regulates the levels of many com-
pounds produced within the body. Steroid hormones, for
instance, are converted into less active and more water-
soluble forms by the liver. These molecules are then in-
cluded in the bile and eliminated from the body in the
feces, or carried by the blood to the kidneys and excreted in
the urine.

The liver also produces most of the proteins found in
blood plasma. The total concentration of plasma proteins is
significant because it must be kept within normal limits in
order to maintain osmotic balance between blood and in-
terstitial (tissue) fluid. If the concentration of plasma pro-
teins drops too low, as can happen as a result of liver dis-
ease such as cirrhosis, fluid accumulates in the tissues, a
condition called edema.

Regulation of Blood Glucose Concentration

The neurons in the brain obtain their energy primarily
from the aerobic respiration of glucose obtained from the
blood plasma. It is therefore extremely important that the

Decreasing blood glucose

 

Titec toty

+ Insulin secretion
‘4 Glucagon secretion

Breakdown of
glycogen and fat

 

 

 

 

 

blood glucose concentration not fall too low, as might hap-
pen during fasting or prolonged exercise. It is also impor-
tant that the blood glucose concentration not stay at too
high a level, as it does in people with uncorrected diabetes
mellitus, because this can lead to tissue damage.

After a carbohydrate-rich meal, the liver and skeletal
muscles remove excess glucose from the blood and store it
as the polysaccharide glycogen. This process is stimulated
by the hormone insulin, secreted by the B (deta) cells in the
islets of Langerhans of the pancreas. When blood glucose
levels decrease, as they do between meals, during periods of
fasting, and during exercise, the liver secretes glucose into
the blood. This glucose is obtained in part from the break-
down of liver glycogen to glucose-6-phosphate, a process
called glycogenolysis. The phosphate group is then re-
moved, and free glucose is secreted into the blood. Skeletal
muscles lack the enzyme needed to remove the phosphate
group, and so, even though they have glycogen stores, they
cannot secrete glucose into the blood. The breakdown of
liver glycogen is stimulated by another hormone, glucagon,
which is secreted by the @ (alpha) cells of the islets of
Langerhans in the pancreas (figure 51.20).

If fasting or exercise continues, the liver begins to con-
vert other molecules, such as amino acids and lactic acid,
into glucose. This process is called gluconeogenesis (“new
formation of glucose”). The amino acids used for gluco-
neogenesis are obtained from muscle protein, which ex-
plains the severe muscle wasting that occurs during pro-
longed fasting.

 

The pancreas secretes digestive enzymes and
bicarbonate into the pancreatic duct. The liver
produces bile, which is stored and concentrated in the
gallbladder. The liver and the pancreatic hormones
regulate blood glucose concentration.

 

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1031
