 

 

P wave in ECG

FIGURE 52.16

The path of electrical excitation in the heart. A wave of
depolarization begins at the sinoatrial (SA) node. After passing
over the atria and causing them to contract (forming the P wave
on the ECG), the depolarization reaches the atrioventricular (AV)
node, from which it passes to the ventricles along the septum by
the bundle of His. Finer Purkinje fibers carry the depolarization
into the right and left ventricular muscles (forming the QRS wave
on the ECG). The T wave on the ECG corresponds to the
repolarization of the ventricles.

Electrical Excitation and
Contraction of the Heart

As in other types of muscle, contraction of heart muscle is
stimulated by membrane depolarization, a reversal of the
electrical polarity that normally exists across the plasma
membrane (see chapter 50). In skeletal muscles, the ner-
vous system initiates depolarization. However, in the heart,
the depolarization is triggered by the sinoatrial (SA) node
(figure 52.16), the small cluster of cardiac muscle cells de-
rived from the sinus venosus. The SA node acts as a pace-
maker for the rest of the heart by producing depolarization
impulses spontaneously at a particular rate. Each depolar-
ization initiated within this pacemaker region passes
quickly from one cardiac muscle cell to another in a wave
that envelops the right and left atria nearly simultaneously.
The spread of depolarization is possible because the cardiac
muscle cells are electrically coupled by gap junctions.

After a delay of almost 0.1 second, the wave of depolar-
ization spreads to the ventricles. The reason for this delay
is that connective tissue separates the atria from the ventri-
cles, and connective tissue cannot transmit depolarization.
The depolarization would not pass to the ventricles at all,
were it not for a group of specialized cardiac muscle cells
known as the atrioventricular (AV) node. The cells in the
AV node transmit the depolarization slowly, causing the
delay. This delay permits the atria to finish contracting and
emptying their blood into the ventricles before the ventri-
cles contract.

 

 

Bundle of His
Ll

Purkinje fibers

T
QRS wave in ECG

 

R «1 sec ________, R

ECG

 

 

QRS wave

 

From the AV node, the wave of depolarization is con-
ducted rapidly over both ventricles by a network of fibers
called the atrioventricular bundle or bundle of His. It is
then transmitted by Purkinje fibers, which directly stimu-
late the myocardial cells of the ventricles. The rapid con-
duction of the depolarization along the bundle of His and
the Purkinje fibers causes the almost simultaneous contrac-
tion of the left and right ventricles. The rate can be in-
creased or decreased by neural regulation or increased by
the hormone epinephrine.

The spread of electrical activity through the heart cre-
ates currents that can be recorded from the surface of the
body with electrodes placed on the limbs and chest. The
recording, called an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG),
shows how the cells of the heart depolarize and repolarize
during the cardiac cycle (sce figure 52.16). As was explained
in chapter 50, depolarization causes contraction of a muscle
(including the heart), while repolarization causes relaxation.
The first peak in the recording, P, is produced by the depo-
larization of the atria, and thus is associated with atrial sys-
tole. The second, larger peak, QRS, is produced by ventric-
ular depolarization; during this time, the ventricles contract
(ventricular systole) and eject blood into the arteries. The
last peak, T, is produced by ventricular repolarization; at
this time the ventricles begin diastole.

 

The SA node in the right atrium initiates waves of
depolarization that stimulate first the atria and then the
ventricles to contract.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1049
