receive information from many differ- Cell
ent sources simultaneously. Some neu-
rons have extensions from the den-
drites called dendritic spines that
increase the surface area available to
receive stimuli. The surface of the cell
body integrates the information arriv-
ing at its dendrites. If the resulting
membrane excitation is sufficient, it
triggers impulses that are conducted
away from the cell body along an
axon. Each neuron has a single axon
leaving its cell body, although an axon
may produce small terminal branches
to stimulate a number of cells. An axon
can be quite long: the axons control-
ling the muscles in your feet are more
than a meter long, and the axons that
extend from the skull to the pelvis in a
giraffe are about three meters long!
Neurons are supported both struc-
turally and functionally by support
ing cells, which are called neurogli
These cells are ten times more nu-

FIGURE 54.4

   

 

Myelin
sheath

Nucleus

Dendrites

 
 

 

Node of
Ranvier

  
 

Schwann

~ cell
2 — Axon

Structure of a typical neuron. Extending from the cell
body are many dendrites, which receive information and
+ carry it to the cell body. A single axon transmits impulses
away from the cell body. Many axons are encased by a

merous than neurons and serve a va- myelin sheath, whose multiple membrane layers facilitate a WN
riety of functions, including supply- more rapid conduction of impulses. The sheath is i
ing the neurons with nutrients, — interrupted at regular intervals by small gaps called nodes }

removing wastes from neurons, guid-
ing axon migration, and providing
immune functions. Two of the most
important kinds of neuroglia in verte-
brates are Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes, which
produce myelin sheaths that surround the axons of
many neurons. Schwann cells produce myelin in the
PNS, while oligodendrocytes produce myelin in the
CNS. During development, these cells wrap themselves
around each axon several times to form the myelin
sheath, an insulating covering consisting of multiple lay-
ers of membrane (figure 54.5). Axons that have myelin
sheaths are said to be myelinated, and those that don’t
are unmyelinated. In the CNS, myelinated axons form
the white matter, and the unmyelinated dendrites and
cell bodies form the gray matter. In the PNS, both
myelinated and unmyelinated axons are bundled to-
gether, much like wires in a cable, to form nerves.

The myelin sheath is interrupted at intervals of 1 to 2
mm by small gaps known as nodes of Ranvier (see figure
544). The role of the myelin sheath in impulse conduction
will be discussed later in this chapter.

 

Neurons and neuroglia make up the central and
peripheral nervous systems in vertebrates. Sensory,
motor, and association neurons play different roles in
the nervous system, and the neuroglia aid their
function, in part by producing myelin sheaths.

 

FIGURE 54.5

The formation of the
myelin sheath around
a peripheral axon.
The myelin sheath is
formed by successive
wrappings of Schwann
cell membranes,
leaving most of the
Schwann cell
cytoplasm outside the
myelin.

Chapter 54

of Ranvier. In the peripheral nervous system, myelin ty
sheaths are formed by supporting Schwann cells.

Schwann

cell Ser"

(CF |

Nucleus —_

~2
Schwann -—
cel —__

JS

Axon

 

|
ce

 

 

 

Myelin sheath

The Nervous System 1075
