51.5 All animals require food energy and essential nutrients.

Food Energy and Energy
Expenditure

The ingestion of food serves two primary functions: it pro-
vides a source of energy, and it provides raw materials the
animal is unable to manufacture for itself. Even an animal
that is completely at rest requires energy to support its
metabolism; the minimum rate of energy consumption
under defined resting conditions is called the basal meta-
bolic rate (BMR). The BMR is relatively constant for a
given individual, depending primarily on the person’s age,
sex, and body size.

Exercise raises the metabolic rate above the basal levels,
so the amount of energy that the body consumes per day is
determined not only by the BMR but also by the level of
physical activity. If food energy taken in is greater than the
energy consumed per day, the excess energy will be stored
in glycogen and fat. Because glycogen reserves are limited,
however, continued ingestion of excess food energy results
primarily in the accumulation of fat. The intake of food en-
ergy is measured in kilocalories (1 kilocalorie = 1000 calo-
ries; nutritionists use Calorie with a capital C instead of
kilocalorie). The measurement of kilocalories in food is de-
termined by the amount of heat generated when the food is
“burned,” either literally, or when the caloric content of
food is measured using a calorimeter, or in the body when
the food is digested. Caloric intake can be altered by the
choice of diet, and the amount of energy expended in exer-
cise can be changed by the choice of lifestyle. The daily en-
ergy expenditures (metabolic rates) of people vary between
1300 and 5000 kilocalories per day, depending on the per-
son’s BMR and level of physical activity. If the food kilo-
calories ingested exceed the metabolic rate for a sustained
period, the person will accumulate an amount of fat that is
deleterious to health, a condition called obesity. In the
United States, about 30% of middle-aged women and 15%
of middle-aged men are classified as obese, which means
they weigh at least 20% more than the average weight for
their height.

Regulation of Food Intake

Scientists have for years suspected that adipose tissue se-
cretes a hormonal satiety factor (a circulating chemical that
decreases appetite), because genetically obese mice lose
weight when their circulatory systems are surgically
joined with those of normal mice. Apparently, some
weight-loss hormone was passing into the obese mice!
The satiety factor secreted by adipose tissue has recently
been identified. It is the product of a gene first observed
in a strain of mice known as ob/ob (ob stands for “obese”;
the double symbols indicate that the mice are homozy-
gous for this gene—they inherit it from both parents).
The ob gene has been cloned in mice, and more recently

1034 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

  

FIGURE 51.22

Injection of the hormone leptin causes genetically obese
mice to lose weight. These two mice are identical twins, both
members of a mutant strain of obese mice. The mouse on the
right has been injected with the hormone leptin. It lost 30% of its
body weight in just two weeks, with no apparent side effects.

in humans, and has been found to be expressed (that is, to
produce mRNA) only in adipocytes. The protein product
of this gene, the presumed satiety factor, is called leptin.
The ob mice produce a mutated and ineffective form of
leptin, and it is this defect that causes their obesity. When
injected with normal leptin, they stop eating and lose
weight (figure 51.22).

More recent studies in humans show that the activity of
the ob gene and the blood concentrations of leptin are actu-
ally higher in obese than in lean people, and that the leptin
produced by obese people appears to be normal. It has
therefore been suggested that most cases of human obesity
may result from a reduced sensitivity to the actions of lep-
tin in the brain rather than from reduced leptin production
by adipose cells. Aggressive research is ongoing, as might
be expected from the possible medical and commercial ap-
plications of these findings.

In the United States, serious eating disorders have be-
come much more common since the mid-1970s. The most
common of these disorders are anorexia nervosa, a condition
in which the afflicted individuals literally starve themselves,
and bulimia, in which individuals gorge themselves and
then vomit, so that their weight stays constant. Ninety to
95% of those suffering from these disorders are female; re-
searchers estimate that 2 to 5% of the adolescent girls and
young women in the United States have eating disorders.

 

‘The amount of caloric energy expended by the body
depends on the basal metabolic rate and the additional
calories consumed by exercise. Obesity results if the
ingested food energy exceeds the energy expenditure by
the body over a prolonged period.

 
