54.3 Neurons form junctions called synapses with other cells.

Structure of Synapses

An action potential passing down an axon eventually
reaches the end of the axon and all of its branches. These

branches may form junctions with the dendrites of other

 

 
   
   
 
 
  
   
   
 

neurons, with muscle cells, or with gland cells. Such inter- ‘Axon Mitochondria
cellular junctions are called synapses. The neuron whose terminal
axon transmits action potentials to the synapse is the presy-
naptic cell, while the cell on the other side of the synapse is
the postsynaptic cell. Although the presynaptic and postsy- Synaptic
naptic cells may appear to touch when the synapse is seen vesicle
under a light microscope, examination with an electron mi- .
croscope reveals that most synapses have a synaptic cleft, a / Synaptic
narrow space that separates these two cells (figure 54.13). Postsynaptic

The end of the presynaptic axon is swollen and contains eg
numerous synaptic vesicles, which are each packed with
chemicals called neurotransmitters. When action poten- FIGURE 54.13
tials arrive at the end of the axon, they stimulate the open- A synaptic cleft. An electron micrograph showing a
ing of voltage-gated Ca** channels, causing a rapid inward neuromuscular synapse.
diffusion of Ca**. This serves as the stimulus for the fusion
of the synaptic vesicles membrane with
the plasma membrane of the axon, so
that the contents of the vesicles can be
released by exocytosis (figure 54.14).
The higher the frequency of action po- Terminal branch
tentials in the presynaptic axon, the of axon
more vesicles will release their contents , 5

: Action potential

of neurotransmitters. The neurotrans-
mitters diffuse rapidly to the other side
of the cleft and bind to receptor pro- Mitochondrion
teins in the membrane of the postsynap- Synaptic vesicles
tic cell. There are different types of neu-
rotransmitters, and different ones act in Synaptic cleft

different ways. We will next consider the
action of a few of the important neuro-
transmitter chemicals.

Sarcolemma

The presynaptic axon is separated
from the postsynaptic cell by a
narrow synaptic cleft.
Neurotransmitters diffuse across it
to transmit a nerve impulse.

FIGURE 54.14

The release of neurotransmitter. Action
potentials arriving at the end of an axon
trigger the uptake of Ca*+, which causes
synaptic vesicles to fuse with the plasma
membrane and release their neurotransmitters
(acetylcholine [ACH] in this case), which Muscle cell
diffuse across the synaptic gap and bind to (fiber)
receptors in the postsynaptic membrane.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1081
