Absorption in the Small Intestine

The amino acids and monosaccharides resulting from the di-
gestion of proteins and carbohydrates, respectively, are
transported across the brush border into the epithelial cells
that line the intestine (figure 51.15). They then move to the
other side of the epithelial cells, and from there are trans-
ported across the membrane and into the blood capillaries
within the villi. The blood carries these products of digestion
from the intestine to the liver via the hepatic portal vein.
The term portal here refers to a special arrangement of ves-
sels, seen only in a couple of instances, where one organ (the
liver, in this case) is located “downstream” from another
organ (the intestine). As a result, the second organ receives
blood-borne molecules from the first. Because of the hepatic
portal vein, the liver is the first organ to receive most of the
products of digestion. This arrangement is important for the
functions of the liver, as will be described in a later section.
The products of fat digestion are absorbed by a different
mechanism (figure 51.154). Fats (triglycerides) are hy-
drolyzed into fatty acids and monoglycerides, which are ab-
sorbed into the intestinal epithelial cells and reassembled
into triglycerides. The triglycerides then combine with
proteins to form small particles called chylomicrons. In-

Protein Carbohydrate

Lumen
of
‘small a,
intestine

     

Mono-
2 amino nh

@
FIGURE 51.15

saccharides

stead of entering the hepatic portal circulation, the chy-
lomicrons are absorbed into lymphatic capillaries (see
chapter 52), which empty their contents into the blood in
veins near the neck. Chylomicrons can make the blood
plasma appear cloudy if a sample of blood is drawn after a
fatty meal.

The amount of fluid passing through the small intes-
tine in a day is startlingly large: approximately 9 liters.
However, almost all of this fluid is absorbed into the body
rather than eliminated in the feces. About 8.5 liters are
absorbed in the small intestine and an additional 350 mil-
liliters in the large intestine. Only about 50 grams of solid
and 100 milliliters of liquid leave the body as feces. The
normal fluid absorption efficiency of the human digestive
tract thus approaches 99%, which is very high indeed.

 

Digestion occurs primarily in the duodenum, which
receives the pancreatic juice enzymes. The small
intestine provides a large surface area for absorption.
Glucose and amino acids from food are absorbed
through the small intestine and enter the blood via the
hepatic portal vein, going to the liver. Fat from food
enters the lymphatic system.

 

Bile salts

Emulsification
droplets

 

a? > > A. |) Free fatty acids,

a4 monoglycerides.

Fat o°
(triglycerides)

   

Lymphatic capillary

(b)

Absorption of the products of digestion. (a) Monosaccharides and amino acids are transported into blood capillaries. (b) Fatty acids and
monoglycerides within the intestinal lumen are absorbed and converted within the intestinal epithelial cells into triglycerides. These are
then coated with proteins to form tiny structures called chylomicrons, which enter lymphatic capillaries.

1026 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
