 

E/A ratio

Griffin Woodruff Jessup Apopke Okeechobee Orange

(@) Lake

 

 

Monroe 01

 

+ © Older juveniles (3-7 years old)

f © Younger juveniles (under 3 years old)
a i a

02 03 04 05 06 07 08

Penis tip length (mm)
awroraorv.8 ©

 

 

(6) E/A ratio

 

 

 

 

Alligator sexual development inhibited by contamination. (a) Ratio of estrogen/androgen (F/A) plasma concentrations in large juvenile
alligators 3-7 years old. A relatively larger ratio in males is atypical and indicates an estrogenic hormonal environment, as opposed to the
expected androgenic hormonal environment. (}) Sexual development in male alligators, measured by penis length as a function of E/A
ratio. In small juveniles under 3 years old, there is no apparent influence. In older juveniles 3-7 years old, there is a pronounced effect,

higher E/A ratios retarding sexual development.

The Experiment

Guillette’s team first looked at animals in two lakes and then
expanded the research to look at animals from several other
lakes. Alligators were initially collected from Lake
Woodruff National Wildlife Refuge and from Lake Apopka.
Lake Woodruff is a relatively pristine lake with no agricul-
tural or industrial runoff. Lake Apopka, on the other hand,
is a large eutrophic lake exposed to various agricultural and
municipal contaminants. In 1980, the lake experienced a sul-
furic acid spill from a chemical company, and has a history
of pesticide contamination by DDT.

Clear comparisons of alligators collected from different
lakes required that animals be captured as nearly as possible
at the same time, to minimize possible variation due to pho-
toperiod, temperature, and nutrition. This experimental re-
quirement led to truly prodigious feats of alligator catching
by the research team. On a single night in 1994, 40 male al-
ligators were hand-captured from Lake Woodruff. The fol-
lowing night, 54 males were captured from Lake Apopka. In
a broader study of seven lakes carried out the following year,
528 animals were captured during a 17-day period.

The external genitalia and total body length were mea-
sured on captured animals. Body-length is a good indicator
of the age of the alligator. Alligators reach puberty at about
3 years of age, and this must be taken into account when
making comparisons.

Blood samples were taken from each animal in order to
determine the plasma levels of estrogen and testosterone.
Investigators measured plasma concentrations of estradiol-
178 and testosterone. By comparing the ratio of the two val-
ues, the researchers estimated the E/A ratio, and thus if the
internal environment was androgenic or estrogenic.

The Results

In most of the seven lakes studied, female alligators showed

 

a much higher E/A ratio than males (graph a above), a nor-
mal result. The exceptions are Lake Griffin and Lake
Apopka, the most polluted of the lakes. The larger E/A ratio
observed in male alligators caught from these two lakes indi-
cates an estrogenic hormonal environment in these animals
rather than the normal androgenic one.

Does this estrogenic environment have an impact on ju-
venile sexual development? Yes. Researchers observed that
postpuberty juvenile males from Lake Apopka and Lake
Griffith (where E/A ratios were elevated) exhibited stunted
reproductive organs compared to those found in Lake
Woodruff and other lakes (graph ) above).

Prepuberty males did not show this effect, exhibiting the
same size external reproductive organs whatever the E/A
ratio. This is as you would expect, as organ growth occurs
primarily after puberty, in response to androgen hormones
released from the testes.

A primary contaminant found in alligators’ eggs in Lake
Apopka is p,p'-DDE, a major metabolite of DDT. p,p'-DDE
has been shown to bind to androgen receptors, and func-
tions as an antiandrogen. The presence of p,p'-DDE reduces
the androgen effect in cells, creating a more estrogenic envi-
ronment.

The researchers also measured levels of plasma testos-
terone. The plasma levels of testosterone were signifi-
cantly reduced in alligators from Lake Apopka compared
to the control animals removed from Lake Woodruff.
These reduced levels of plasma testosterone from the Lake
Apopka alligators also act to reduce the E/A ratio, and so
to produce the observed abnormalities in reproductive
structures.

To explore this experiment further, go to the Vir-
tual Lab at www.mhhe.com/raven6/lab14.mhtml
