Membranes

Concept Outline

6.1 Biological membranes are fluid layers of lipid.

‘The Phospholipid Bilayer. Cells are encased by
membranes composed of a bilayer of phospholipid.

‘The Lipid Bilayer Is Fluid. Because individual
phospholipid molecules do not bind to one another, the lipid
bilayer of membranes is a fluid.

6.2 Proteins embedded within the plasma membrane
determine its character.

The Fluid Mosaic Model. A varied collection of proteins
float within the lipid bilayer.

Examining Cell Membranes. Visualizing a plasma
membrane requires a powerful electron microscope.

Kinds of Membrane Proteins. The proteins in a
membrane function in support, transport, recognition, and
reactions.

Structure of Membrane Proteins. Membrane proteins are
anchored into the lipid bilayer by their nonpolar regions.

6.3 Passive transport across membranes moves down
the concentration gradient.
Diffusion. Random molecular motion results in a net
movement of molecules to regions of lower concentration.
Facilitated Diffusion. Passive movement across a
membrane is often through specific carrier proteins.
Osmosis. Polar solutes interact with water and can affect
the movement of water across semipermeable membranes.

6.4 Bulk transport utilizes endocytosis.

Bulk Passage Into and Out of the Cell. To transport large
particles, membranes form vesicles.

6.5 Active transport across membranes is powered by
energy from ATP.
Active Transport. Cells transport molecules up a
concentration gradient using ATP-powered carrier proteins.
Coupled Transport. Active transport of ions drives coupled
uptake of other molecules up their concentration gradients.

 

FIGURE 6.1

Membranes within a human cell. Sheets of endoplasmic
reticulum weave through the cell interior. The large oval is a
mitochondrion, itself filled with extensive internal membranes.

mong a cell’s most important activities are its interac-

tions with the environment, a give and take that never
ceases. Without it, life could not persist. While living cells
and eukaryotic organelles (figure 6.1) are encased within a
lipid membrane through which few water-soluble sub-
stances can pass, the membrane contains protein passage-
ways that permit specific substances to move in and out of
the cell and allow the cell to exchange information with its
environment. We call this delicate skin of protein mole-
cules embedded in a thin sheet of lipid a plasma mem-
brane. This chapter will examine the structure and func-
tion of this remarkable membrane.

103
