Language and Other Functions

Arousal and Sleep.
contains a diffuse collection of neu-

The brain stem

rons referred to as the reticular forma-
tion. One part of this formation, the
reticular activating system, controls
consciousness and alertness. All of the
sensory pathways feed into this sys-
tem, which monitors the information
coming into the brain and identifies
important stimuli. When the reticular
activating system has been stimulated
to arousal, it increases the level of ac-
tivity in many parts of the brain.
Neural pathways from the reticular
formation to the cortex and other
brain regions are depressed by anes-
thetics and barbiturates.

The reticular activating system
controls both sleep and the waking
state. It is easier to sleep in a dark
room than in a lighted one because
there are fewer visual stimuli to stimu-
late the reticular activating system. In
addition, activity in this system is re-
duced by serotonin, a neurotransmit-
ter we previously discussed. Serotonin
causes the level of brain activity to
fall, bringing on sleep.

Sleep is not the loss of conscious-
ness. Rather, it is an active process
whose multiple states can be revealed
by recording the electrical activity of
the brain in an electroencephalogram (EEG). In a re-
laxed but awake individual whose eyes are shut, the EEG
consists primarily of large, slow waves that occur at a fre-
quency of 8 to 13 hertz (cycles per second). These waves
are referred to as alpha waves. In an alert subject whose
eyes are open, the EEG waves are more rapid (beta waves
are seen at frequencies of 13 to 30 hertz) and is more de-
synchronized because multiple sensory inputs are being
received, processed, and translated into motor activities.

Theta waves (4 to 7 hertz) and delta waves (0.5 to 4 hertz)
are seen in various stages of sleep. The first change seen in
the EEG with the onset of drowsiness is a slowing and re-
duction in the overall amplitude of the waves. This slow-
wave sleep has several stages but is generally characterized
by decreases in arousability, skeletal muscle tone, heart
rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate. During REM
sleep (named for the rapid eye movements that occur dur-
ing this stage), the EEG resembles that of a relaxed, awake
individual, and the heart rate, blood pressure, and respira-
tory rate are all increased. Paradoxically, individuals in
REM sleep are difficult to arouse and are more likely to

FIGURE 54.30

 

1094 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

rattan
MORDS

GENERATING
ri

 

Different brain regions control various activities. This illustration shows how the brain
reacts in human subjects asked to listen to a spoken word, to read that same word silently,
to repeat the word out loud, and then to speak a word related to the first. Regions of white,
red, and yellow show the greatest activity. Compare this with figure 54.28 to see how
regions of the brain are mapped.

awaken spontaneously. Dreaming occurs during REM
sleep, and the rapid eye movements resemble the tracking
movements made by the eyes when awake, suggesting that
dreamers “watch” their dreams.

Language and Spatial Recognition. Although the two
cerebral hemispheres seem structurally similar, they are re-
sponsible for different activities. The most thoroughly in-
vestigated example of this lateralization of function is lan-
guage. The left hemisphere is the “dominant” hemisphere
for language—the hemisphere in which most neural pro-
cessing related to language is performed—in 90% of right-
handed people and nearly two-thirds of left-handed people.
There are two language areas in the dominant hemisphere.
Wernicke’s area (see figure 54.28), located in the parietal
lobe between the primary auditory and visual areas, is im-
portant for language comprehension and the formulation
of thoughts into speech (figure 54.30). Broca’s area, found
near the part of the motor cortex controlling the face, is re-
sponsible for the generation of motor output needed for
language communication. Damage to these brain areas can
