To lungs |
To lungs

Pulmonary
vein

Right atrium

Septum .

i Left atrium
Conus Sinus venosus
arteriosus

Ventricle

@
FIGURE 52.13

   
  
  
 

Respiratory
capillaries

  

Systemic
capillaries

() Body

The heart and circulation of an amphibian. (a) The frog heart has two atria but only one ventricle, which pumps blood both to the
lungs and to the body. (0) Despite the potential for mixing, the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloods (red and blue, respectively) mix very
little as they are pumped to the body and lungs. The slight mixing is shown in purple. RA = right atrium; LA = left atrium; V = ventricle.

Amphibian and Reptile Circulation

The advent of lungs involved a major change in the pattern
of circulation. After blood is pumped by the heart through
the pulmonary arteries to the lungs, it does not go directly to
the tissues of the body but is instead returned via the pu/-
monary veins to the heart. This results in two circulations:
one between heart and lungs, called the pulmonary circu-
lation, and one between the heart and the rest of the body,
called the systemic circulation.

If no changes had occurred in the structure of the heart,
the oxygenated blood from the lungs would be mixed in the
heart with the deoxygenated blood returning from the rest
of the body. Consequently, the heart would pump a mixture
of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood rather than fully
oxygenated blood. The amphibian heart has two structural
features that help reduce this mixing (figure 52.13). First,
the atrium is divided into two chambers: the right atrium
receives deoxygenated blood from the systemic circulation,
and the left atrium receives oxygenated blood from the
lungs. These two stores of blood therefore do not mix in the
atria, and little mixing occurs when the contents of each
atrium enter the single, common ventricle, due to internal
channels created by recesses in the ventricular wall. The
conus arteriosus is partially separated by a dividing wall
which directs deoxygenated blood into the pulmonary arter-
ies to the lungs and oxygenated blood into the aorta, the
major artery of the systemic circulation to the body.

1046 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Because there is only one ventricle in an amphibian
heart, the separation of the pulmonary and systemic cir-
culations is incomplete. Amphibians in water, however,
can obtain additional oxygen by diffusion through their
skin. This process, called cutaneous respiration, helps
to supplement the oxygenation of the blood in these
vertebrates.

Among reptiles, additional modifications have re-
duced the mixing of blood in the heart still further. In
addition to having two separate atria, reptiles have a sep-
tum that partially subdivides the ventricle. This results
in an even greater separation of oxygenated and deoxy-
genated blood within the heart. The separation is com-
plete in one order of reptiles, the crocodiles, which have
two separate ventricles divided by a complete septum.
Crocodiles therefore have a completely divided pul-
monary and systemic circulation. Another change in the
circulation of reptiles is that the conus arteriosus has be-
come incorporated into the trunks of the large arteries
leaving the heart.

 

Amphibians and reptiles have two circulations,
pulmonary and systemic, that deliver blood to the lungs
and rest of the body, respectively. The oxygenated

blood from the lungs is kept relatively separate from
the deoxygenated blood from the rest of the body by
incomplete divisions within the heart.

 
