uueeio4

moqia
uuny

yun
diy

F

FIGURE 54.29

 

Ba g =
bgek g& & & 2
Motor tips
- Tongue
Jaw
Pharyny

The primary somatosensory cortex (lefi) and the primary motor cortex (right). Each of these regions of the cerebral cortex is
associated with a different region of the body, as indicated in this stylized map. The areas of the body are drawn in proportion to the
amount of cortex dedicated to their sensation or control. For example, the hands have large areas of sensory and motor control, while the
pharynx has a considerable area of motor control but little area devoted to the sensations of the pharynx.

The portion of the cerebral cortex that is not occupied
by these motor and sensory cortices is referred to as associa-
tion cortex. The site of higher mental activities, the associa-
tion cortex reaches its greatest extent in primates, especially
humans, where it makes up 95% of the surface of the cere-
bral cortex.

Basal Ganglia

Buried deep within the white matter of the cerebrum are
several collections of cell bodies and dendrites that produce
islands of gray matter. These aggregates of neuron cell
bodies, which are collectively termed the basal ganglia, re-
ceive sensory information from ascending tracts and motor
commands from the cerebral cortex and cerebellum. Out-
puts from the basal ganglia are sent down the spinal cord,
where they participate in the control of body movements.
Damage to specific regions of the basal ganglia can produce
the resting tremor of muscles that is characteristic of peo-
ple with Parkinson’s disease.

Thalamus and Hypothalamus

The thalamus is a primary site of sensory integration in the
brain. Visual, auditory, and somatosensory information is

sent to the thalamus, where the sensory tracts synapse with
association neurons. The sensory information is then re-
layed via the thalamus to the occipital, temporal, and pari-
etal lobes of the cerebral cortex, respectively. The transfer
of each of these types of sensory information is handled by
specific aggregations of neuron cell bodies within the thala-
mus.

The hypothalamus integrates the visceral activities. It
helps regulate body temperature, hunger and satiety, thirst,
and—along with the limbic system—various emotional
states. The hypothalamus also controls the pituitary gland,
which in turn regulates many of the other endocrine glands
of the body. By means of its interconnections with the
cerebral cortex and with control centers in the brain stem
(a term used to refer collectively to the midbrain, pons, and
medulla oblongata), the hypothalamus helps coordinate the
neural and hormonal responses to many internal stimuli
and emotions.

The hippocampus and amygdala are, together with the hy-
pothalamus, the major components of the limbic system.
This is an evolutionarily ancient group of linked structures
deep within the cerebrum that are responsible for emo-
tional responses. The hippocampus is also believed to be
important in the formation and recall of memories, a topic
we will discuss later.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1093
