53.3 Lungs are used for respiration by terrestrial vertebrates.

Respiration in Air-
Breathing Animals

Despite the high efficiency of gills as respira-
tory organs in aquatic environments, gills
were replaced in terrestrial animals for two
principal reasons:

1. Air is less buoyant than water. The
fine membranous lamellae of gills lack
structural strength and rely on water
for their support. A fish out of water,
although awash in oxygen (water con-
tains only 5 to 10 mL O,/L, compared
with air with 210 mL O,/L), soon suf-
focates because its gills collapse into a
mass of tissue. This collapse greatly re-
duces the diffusion surface area of the
gills. Unlike gills, internal air passages
can remain open, because the body it-
self provides the necessary structural
support.

2. Water diffuses into air through
evaporation. Atmospheric air is
rarely saturated with water vapor, ex-
cept immediately after a rainstorm.
Consequently, terrestrial organisms
that are surrounded by air constantly
lose water to the atmosphere. Gills
would provide an enormous surface
area for water loss.

Two main types of respiratory organs are
used by terrestrial animals, and both sacri-
fice respiratory efficiency to some extent in
exchange for reduced evaporation. The first
are the tracheae of insects (see chapter 46
and figure 53.2d). Tracheae comprise an ex-
tensive series of air-filled passages connect-
ing the surface of an insect to all portions of its body.
Oxygen diffuses from these passages directly into cells,
without the intervention of a circulatory system. Piping
air directly from the external environment to the cells
works very well in insects because their small bodies give
them a high surface area-to-volume ratio. Insects prevent
excessive water loss by closing the external openings of
the tracheae whenever their internal CO) levels fall below
a certain point.

The other main type of terrestrial respiratory organ is
the lung (figure 53.7). A lung minimizes evaporation by
moving air through a branched tubular passage; the air
becomes saturated with water vapor before reaching the
portion of the lung where a thin, wet membrane permits
gas exchange. The lungs of all terrestrial vertebrates ex-

1058 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

FIGURE 53.7
Human lungs. This chest X ray (dorsal view) was color-enhanced to show the lungs
clearly. The heart is the pear-shaped object behind the vertical white column that is
the esophagus.

 

cept birds use a uniform pool of air that is in contact
with the gas exchange surface. Unlike the one-way flow of
water that is so effective in the respiratory function of
gills, air moves in and out by way of the same airway pas-
sages, a two-way flow system. Let us now examine the
structure and function of lungs in the four classes of ter-
restrial vertebrates.

 

Air is piped directly to the body cells of insects, but the
cells of terrestrial vertebrates obtain oxygen from the
blood. The blood obtains its oxygen from a uniform
pool of air by diffusion across the wet membranes of the
lungs, which are filled with air in the process of
ventilation.

 
