53.5 Blood transports oxygen and carbon dioxide.

Hemoglobin and
Oxygen Transport

Heme group

When oxygen diffuses from the
alveoli into the blood, its journey
is just beginning. The circulatory
system delivers oxygen to tissues
for respiration and carries away
carbon dioxide. The transport of
oxygen and carbon dioxide by
the blood is itself an interesting
and physiologically important
process.

The amount of oxygen that
can be dissolved in the blood
plasma depends directly on the
Po, of the air in the alveoli, as
we explained earlier. When the
lungs are functioning normally,
the blood plasma leaving the
lungs has almost as much dis-
solved oxygen as is theoretically possible, given the Po,
of the air. Because of oxygen’s low solubility in water,
however, blood plasma can contain a maximum of only
about 3 milliliters O) per liter. Yet whole blood carries
almost 200 milliliters Oy per liter! Most of the oxygen is
bound to molecules of hemoglobin inside the red blood
cells.

Hemoglobin is a protein composed of four polypeptide
chains and four organic compounds called heme groups. At
the center of each heme group is an atom of iron, which
can bind to a molecule of oxygen (figure 53.15). Thus, each
hemoglobin molecule can carry up to four molecules of
oxygen. Hemoglobin loads up with oxygen in the lungs,
forming oxyhemoglobin. This molecule has a bright red,
tomato juice color. As blood passes through capillaries in
the rest of the body, some of the oxyhemoglobin releases
oxygen and becomes deoxyhemoglobin. Deoxyhemoglo-
bin has a dark red color (the color of blood that is collected
from the veins of blood donors), but it imparts a bluish
tinge to tissues. Because of these color changes, vessels that
carry oxygenated blood are always shown in artwork with a
red color, and vessels that carry oxygen-depleted blood are
indicated with a blue color.

Hemoglobin is an ancient protein that is not only the
oxygen-carrying molecule in all vertebrates, but is also
used as an oxygen carrier by many invertebrates, includ-
ing annelids, mollusks, echinoderms, flatworms, and even
some protists. Many other invertebrates, however, em-
ploy different oxygen carriers, such as hemocyanin. In he-
mocyanin, the oxygen-binding atom is copper instead of
iron. Hemocyanin is not found in blood cells, but is in-
stead dissolved in the circulating fluid (hemolymph) of
invertebrates.

FIGURE 53.15

1066 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Beta (8) chains

  

 

Alpha (a) chains

Hemoglobin consists of four polypeptide chains—two alpha () chains and two beta (8)
chains. Each chain is associated with a heme group, and each heme group has a central iron atom,
which can bind to a molecule of O).

Oxygen Transport

The Po, of the air within alveoli at sea level is approxi-
mately 105 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), which is less
than the Po, of the atmosphere because of the mixing of
freshly inspired air with “old” air in the anatomical dead
space of the respiratory system. The Po, of the blood leav-
ing the alveoli is slightly less than this, about 100 mm Hg,
because the blood plasma is not completely saturated with
oxygen due to slight inefficiencies in lung function. At a
blood Po, of 100 mm Hg, approximately 97% of the he-
moglobin within red blood cells is in the form of oxyhe-
moglobin—indicated as a percent oxyhemoglobin satura-
tion of 97%.

As the blood travels through the systemic blood capillar-
ies, oxygen leaves the blood and diffuses into the tissues.
Consequently, the blood that leaves the tissue in the veins
has a Po, that is decreased (in a resting person) to about 40
mm Hg. At this lower Po,, the percent saturation of hemo-
globin is only 75%. A graphic representation of these
changes is called an oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (fig-
ure 53.16). In a person at rest, therefore, 22% (97% minus
75%) of the oxyhemoglobin has released its oxygen to the
tissues. Put another way, roughly one-fifth of the oxygen is
unloaded in the tissues, leaving four-fifths of the oxygen in
the blood as a reserve.

This large reserve of oxygen serves an important func-
tion. It enables the blood to supply the body’s oxygen
needs during exercise as well as at rest. During exercise,
the muscles’ accelerated metabolism uses more oxygen
from the capillary blood and thus decreases the venous
blood Po. For example, the Po, of the venous blood
could drop to 20 mm Hg; in this case, the percent satura-
tion of hemoglobin will be only 35% (see figure 53.16).
