Inventing the Theory
of Natural Selection

It is one thing to observe the results of evolution, but
quite another to understand how it happens. Darwin’s
great achievement lies in his formulation of the hypothe-
sis that evolution occurs because of natural selection.

Darwin and Malthus

Of key importance to the development of Darwin’s in-
sight was his study of Thomas Malthus’s Essay on the
Principle of Population (1798). In his book, Malthus
pointed out that populations of plants and animals (in-
cluding human beings) tend to increase geometrically,
while the ability of humans to increase their food supply
increases only arithmetically. A geometric progression is
one in which the elements increase by a constant factor;
for example, in the progression 2, 6, 18, 54, . . . , each
number is three times the preceding one. An arithmetic
progression, in contrast, is one in which the elements in-
crease by a constant difference; in the progression 2, 6, 10,
14, . . . , each number is four greater than the preced-
ing one (figure 1.9).

Because populations increase geometrically, virtually
any kind of animal or plant, if it could reproduce un-
checked, would cover the entire surface of the world
within a surprisingly short time. Instead, populations of
species remain fairly constant year after year, because
death limits population numbers. Malthus’s conclusion
provided the key ingredient that was necessary for Dar-
win to develop the hypothesis that evolution occurs by
natural selection.

Sparked by Malthus’s ideas, Darwin saw that although
every organism has the potential to produce more off-
spring than can survive, only a limited number actually
do survive and produce further offspring. Combining
this observation with what he had seen on the voyage of
the Beagle, as well as with his own experiences in breed-
ing domestic animals, Darwin made an important associ-
ation (figure 1.10): Those individuals that possess supe-
rior physical, behavioral, or other attributes are more
likely to survive than those that are not so well endowed.
By surviving, they gain the opportunity to pass on their
favorable characteristics to their offspring. As the fre-
quency of these characteristics increases in the popula-
tion, the nature of the population as a whole will gradu-
ally change. Darwin called this process selection. The
driving force he identified has often been referred to as
survival of the fittest.

 

 
  
 
  
   
 
    

54

  

Geometric
progression

Arithmetic
progression

 

 

FIGURE 1.9

Geometric and arithmetic progressions. A geometric progression
increases by a constant factor (e.g., X 2 or X 3 or X 4), while an
arithmetic progression increases by a constant difference (e.g.,
units of 1 or 2 or 3) . Malthus contended that the human growth
curve was geometric, but the human food production curve was
only arithmetic. Can you see the problems this difference would
cause?

(Grrl ete elma AePteoe cereals having
any advantage, however slight, over
others, would have the best chance of
surviving and procieating their kind? On
the other hand, we may feel sure that any
variation in the least degree injurious
would be rigidly destroyed. This
presewation of favorable variations, J
call Natural Selection.”

FIGURE 1.10
An excerpt from Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species.

Chapter 1 The Science of Biology 13
