Neurotransmitters and Drug Addiction

When a cell of your body is exposed to a stimulus that pro-
duces a chemically mediated signal for a prolonged period,
it tends to lose its ability to respond to the stimulus with its
original intensity. (You are familiar with this loss of sensi-
tivity—when you sit in a chair, how long are you aware of
the chair?) Nerve cells are particularly prone to this loss of
sensitivity. If receptor proteins within synapses are exposed
to high levels of neurotransmitter molecules for prolonged
periods, that nerve cell often responds by inserting fewer
receptor proteins into the membrane. This feedback is a
normal function in all neurons, one of several mechanisms
that have evolved to make the cell more efficient, in this
case, adjusting the number of “tools” (receptor proteins) in
the membrane “workshop” to suit the workload.

Cocaine. The drug cocaine causes abnormally large
amounts of neurotransmitter to remain in the synapses for
long periods of time. Cocaine affects nerve cells in the
brain’s pleasure pathways (the so-called limbic system).
These cells transmit pleasure messages using the neuro-
transmitter dopamine. Using radioactively labeled cocaine
molecules, investigators found that cocaine binds tightly to
the transporter proteins in synaptic clefts. These proteins
normally remove the neurotransmitter dopamine after it
has acted. Like a game of musical chairs in which all the
chairs become occupied, there are no unoccupied carrier
proteins available to the dopamine molecules, so the
dopamine stays in the cleft, firing the receptors again and
again. As new signals arrive, more and more dopamine is
added, firing the pleasure pathway more and more often
(figure 54.20).

When receptor proteins on limbic system nerve cells
are exposed to high levels of dopamine neurotransmitter
molecules for prolonged periods of time, the nerve cells
“turn down the volume” of the signal by lowering the
number of receptor proteins on their surfaces. They re-
spond to the greater number of neurotransmitter mole-
cules by simply reducing the number of targets available
for these molecules to hit. The cocaine user is now ad-
dicted (figure 54.21). With so few receptors, the user
needs the drug to maintain even normal levels of limbic
activity.

Is Nicotine an Addictive Drug? Investigators attempt-
ing to explore the habit-forming nature of nicotine used
what had been learned about cocaine to carry out what
seemed a reasonable experiment—they introduced radioac-
tively labeled nicotine into the brain and looked to see what
sort of carrier protein it attached itself to. To their great
surprise, the nicotine ignored proteins in the synaptic clefts
and instead bound directly to a specific receptor on the
postsynaptic cell! This was totally unexpected, as nicotine
does not normally occur in the brain—why should it have a
receptor there?

1086 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

Transporter

Dopamine

   

Cocaine

 

 

 

FIGURE 54.20

How cocaine alters events at the synapse. When cocaine binds
to the dopamine transporters, the neurotransmitter survives
longer in the synapse and continues to stimulate the postsynaptic
cell. Cocaine thus acts to intensify pleasurable sensations.

Intensive research followed, and researchers soon
learned that the “nicotine receptors” were a class of recep-
tors that normally served to bind the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine. There are other types of ACh receptors that
don’t respond to nicotine. It was just an accident of nature
that nicotine, an obscure chemical from a tobacco plant,
was also able to bind to them. What, then, is the normal
function of these receptors? The target of considerable re-
search, these receptors turned out to be one of the brain’s
most important tools. The brain uses them to coordinate
the activities of many other kinds of receptors, acting to
“fine tune” the sensitivity of a wide variety of behaviors.

When neurobiologists compare the nerve cells in the
brains of smokers to those of nonsmokers, they find
changes in both the number of nicotine receptors and in
the levels of RNA used to make the receptors. They have
found that the brain adjusts to prolonged exposure to nico-
tine by “turning down the volume” in two ways: (1) by
making fewer receptor proteins to which nicotine can bind;
and (2) by altering the pattern of activation of the nicotine
receptors (that is, their sensitivity to neurotransmitter).

It is this second adjustment that is responsible for the
profound effect smoking has on the brain’s activities. By
overriding the normal system used by the brain to coordi-
nate its many activities, nicotine alters the pattern of re-
lease into synaptic clefts of many neurotransmitters, includ-
ing acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, and many others.

 
