The Structure of Bone

Red marrow
in spongy bone

Bone, the building material of the ver-
tebrate skeleton, is a special form of
connective tissue (see chapter 49). In
bone, an organic extracellular matrix
containing collagen fibers is impreg-
nated with small, needle-shaped crys-
tals of calcium phosphate in the form
of hydroxyapatite crystals. Hydroxyap-
atite is brittle but rigid, giving bone
great strength. Collagen, on the other
hand, is flexible but weak. As a result,
bone is both strong and flexible. The
collagen acts to spread the stress over
many crystals, making bone more re-
sistant to fracture than hydroxyapatite
is by itself.

Bone is a dynamic, living tissue
that is constantly reconstructed
throughout the life of an individual.
New bone is formed by osteoblasts,
which secrete the collagen-containing
organic matrix in which calcium phos-
phate is later deposited. After the cal-
cium phosphate is deposited, the cells,
now known as osteocytes, are encased
within spaces called /acunae in the cal-
cified matrix. Yet another type of
bone cells, called osteoclasts, act to
dissolve bone and thereby aid in the
remodeling of bone in response to
physical stress.

Bone is constructed in thin, concen-
tric layers, or /amellae, which are laid
down around narrow channels called
Haversian canals that ran parallel to the
length of the bone. Haversian canals
contain nerve fibers and blood vessels,
which keep the osteocytes alive even
though they are entombed in a calcified matrix. The con-
centric lamellae of bone, with their entrapped osteocytes,
that surround a Haversian canal form the basic unit of bone
structure, called a Haversian system.

Bone formation occurs in two ways. In flat bones, such
as those of the skull, osteoblasts located in a web of dense
connective tissue produce bone within that tissue. In long
bones, the bone is first “modeled” in cartilage. Calcifica-
tion then occurs, and bone is formed as the cartilage de-
generates. At the end of this process, cartilage remains
only at the articular (joint) surfaces of the bones and at
the growth plates located in the necks of the long bones.
A child grows taller as the cartilage thickens in the
growth plates and then is partly replaced with bone. A
person stops growing (usually by the late teenage years)
when the entire cartilage growth plate becomes replaced

FIGURE 50.4

Capillary in
Haversian canal

  
    
  
    

 

containing
osteocytes

Spongy bone

The organization of bone, shown at three levels of detail. Some parts of bone are
dense and compact, giving the bone strength. Other parts are spongy, with a more open
lattice; it is there that most blood cells are formed.

by bone. At this point, only the articular cartilage at the
ends of the bone remains.

The ends and interiors of long bones are composed of
an open lattice of bone called spongy bone. The spaces
within contain marrow, where most blood cells are formed
(figure 50.4). Surrounding the spongy bone tissue are con-
centric layers of compact bone, where the bone is much
denser. Compact bone tissue gives bone the strength to
withstand mechanical stress.

 

Bone consists of cells and an extracellular matrix that
contains collagen fibers, which provide flexibility, and
calcium phosphate, which provides strength. Bone
contains blood vessels and nerves and is capable of
growth and remodeling.

 

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1001
