52.3 The vertebrate heart has undergone progressive evolutionary change.

The Fish Heart

The chordates that were ancestral to the vertebrates are
thought to have had simple tubular hearts, similar to those
now seen in lancelets (see chapter 48). The heart was little
more than a specialized zone of the ventral artery, more
heavily muscled than the rest of the arteries, which con-
tracted in simple peristaltic waves. A pumping action re-
sults because the uncontracted portions of the vessel have a
larger diameter than the contracted portion, and thus pre-
sent less resistance to blood flow.

The development of gills by fishes required a more effi-
cient pump, and in fishes we see the evolution of a true cham-
ber-pump heart. The fish heart is, in essence, a tube with four
chambers arrayed one after the other (figure 52.12a). The
first two chambers—the sinus venosus and atrium—are col-
lection chambers, while the second two, the ventricle and
conus arteriosus, are pumping chambers.

As might be expected, the sequence of the heartbeat in
fishes is a peristaltic sequence, starting at the rear and
moving to the front, similar to the early chordate heart.
The first of the four chambers to contract is the sinus
venosus, followed by the atrium, the ventricle, and finally
the conus arteriosus. Despite shifts in the relative posi-
tions of the chambers in the vertebrates that evolved later,
this heartbeat sequence is maintained in all vertebrates. In
fish, the electrical impulse that produces the contraction
is initiated in the sinus venosus; in other vertebrates, the
electrical impulse is initiated by their equivalent of the
sinus venosus.

The fish heart is remarkably well suited to the gill respi-
ratory apparatus and represents one of the major evolution-
ary innovations in the vertebrates. Perhaps its greatest ad-
vantage is that the blood that moves through the gills is
fully oxygenated when it moves into the tissues. After blood
leaves the conus arteriosus, it moves through the gills,
where it becomes oxygenated; from the gills, it flows
through a network of arteries to the rest of the body; then
it returns to the heart through the veins (figure 52.12).
This arrangement has one great limitation, however. In
passing through the capillaries in the gills, the blood loses
much of the pressure developed by the contraction of the
heart, so the circulation from the gills through the rest of
the body is sluggish. This feature limits the rate of oxygen
delivery to the rest of the body.

 

The fish heart is a modified tube, consisting of a series
of four chambers. Blood first enters the heart at the
sinus venosus, where the wavelike contraction of the
heart begins.

 

 

Sinus
venosus Conus
arteriosus

Atrium Ventricle

 

sv A v CA

 

 

 

 

 

 

(@)

 

Systemic
capillaries

Respiratory
capillaries

 

FIGURE 52.12

The heart and circulation of a fish. (a) Diagram of a fish heart,
showing the chambers in series with each other. (6) Diagram of
fish circulation, showing that blood is pumped by the ventricle
through the gills and then to the body. Blood rich in oxygen
(oxygenated) is shown in red; blood low in oxygen (deoxygenated)
is shown in blue.

Chapter 52. Circulation 1045
