Carbon Dioxide and Nitric Oxide
Transport

The systemic capillaries deliver oxygen to the tissues and
remove carbon dioxide. About 8% of the CO; in blood is
simply dissolved in plasma; another 20% is bound to hemo-
globin. (Because CO) binds to the protein portion of he-
moglobin, however, and not to the heme irons, it does not
compete with oxygen.) The remaining 72% of the CO) dif-
fuses into the red blood cells, where the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase catalyzes the combination of CO with water to
form carbonic acid (H)CO3). Carbonic acid dissociates into
bicarbonate (HCO3°) and hydrogen (H*) ions. The H*
binds to deoxyhemoglobin, and the bicarbonate moves out
of the erythrocyte into the plasma via a transporter that ex-
changes one chloride ion for a bicarbonate (this is called
the “chloride shift”). This reaction removes large amounts
of CO) from the plasma, facilitating the diffusion of addi-
tional CO) into the plasma from the surrounding tissues
(figure 53.18). The formation of carbonic acid is also im-
portant in maintaining the acid-base balance of the blood,
because bicarbonate serves as the major buffer of the blood
plasma.

The blood carries CO; in these forms to the lungs. The
lower Pco, of the air inside the alveoli causes the carbonic
anhydrase reaction to proceed in the reverse direction,

converting H)CO3 into H2O and CO) (see figure 53.18).
The CO) diffuses out of the red blood cells and into the
alveoli, so that it can leave the body in the next exhalation
(figure 53.19).

Nitric Oxide Transport

Hemoglobin also has the ability to hold and release nitric
oxide gas (NO). Although a noxious gas in the atmos-
phere, nitric oxide has an important physiological role in
the body and acts on many kinds of cells to change their
shapes and functions. For example, in blood vessels the
presence of NO causes the blood vessels to expand be-
cause it relaxes the surrounding muscle cells (see chap-
ters 7 and 52). Thus, blood flow and blood pressure are
regulated by the amount of NO released into the
bloodstream.

A current hypothesis proposes that hemoglobin carries
NO in a special form called super nitric oxide. In this
form, NO has acquired an extra electron and is able to
bind to the amino acid cysteine in hemoglobin. In the
lungs, hemoglobin that is dumping CO) and picking up
Oy also picks up NO as super nitric oxide. In blood vessels
at the tissues, hemoglobin that is releasing its O2 and
picking up CQ) can do one of two things with nitric
oxide. To increase blood flow, hemoglobin can release the

 

Tissue cells

 

Carbonic
anhydrase

Red blood cells

 

  

 

 

Alveoli

HCO,"

 

Plasma

 

FIGURE 53.18

‘The transport of carbon dioxide by the blood. CO, is transported in three ways: dissolved in plasma, bound to the protein portion of
hemoglobin, and as carbonic acid and bicarbonate, which form in the red blood cells. When the blood passes through the pulmonary
capillaries, these reactions are reversed so that CO> gas is formed, which is exhaled.

1068 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
