The hindbrain was the major component of these early
brains, as it still is in fishes today. Composed of the cerebel-
Jum, pons, and medulla oblongata, the hindbrain may be con-
sidered an extension of the spinal cord devoted primarily to
coordinating motor reflexes. Tracts containing large num-
bers of axons run like cables up and down the spinal cord to
the hindbrain. The hindbrain, in turn, integrates the many
sensory signals coming from the muscles and coordinates
the pattern of motor responses.

Much of this coordination is carried on within a small
extension of the hindbrain called the cerebellum (“little
cerebrum”). In more advanced vertebrates, the cerebellum
plays an increasingly important role as a coordinating cen-
ter for movement and is correspondingly larger than it is in
the fishes. In all vertebrates, the cerebellum processes data
on the current position and movement of each limb, the
state of relaxation or contraction of the muscles involved,
and the general position of the body and its relation to the
outside world. These data are gathered in the cerebellum,
synthesized, and the resulting commands issued to efferent
pathways.

In fishes, the remainder of the brain is devoted to the re-
ception and processing of sensory information. The mid-
brain is composed primarily of the optic lobes, which re-
ceive and process visual information, while the forebrain is
devoted to the processing of olfactory (smell) information.
The brains of fishes continue growing throughout their
lives. This continued growth is in marked contrast to the
brains of other classes of vertebrates, which generally com-
plete their development by infancy (figure 54.24). The

Midbrain
(Mesencephalon)
Hindbrain
(Rhombencephalon) Pons
Medulla
oblongata

 

cord
Diencephalon

Telencephalon

Forebrain (Prosencephalon)
5 weeks 8 weeks

FIGURE 54.24

Mesencephalon

Cerebellum

\ah
YY

Spinal

Optic

tectum Thalamus — Cerebrum

   
    
  

    

Olfactory
bulb

»\

—"

Hypothalamus

Cerebellum

Spinal
cord

aw

Medulla oblongata

   
   
  

     

   

Optic
chiasma

Pituitary

|__|

Hindbrain Midbrain Forebrain
(Rhombencephalon) (Mesencephalon) (Prosencephalon)

FIGURE 54.23

The basic organization of the vertebrate brain can be seen in
the brains of primitive fishes. The brain is divided into three
regions that are found in differing proportions in all vertebrates:
the hindbrain, which is the largest portion of the brain in fishes;
the midbrain, which in fishes is devoted primarily to processing
visual information; and the forebrain, which is concerned mainly
with olfaction (the sense of smell) in fishes. In terrestrial
vertebrates, the forebrain plays a far more dominant role in neural
processing than it does in fishes.

human brain continues to develop through early childhood,
but no new neurons are produced once development has
ceased, except in the tiny hippocampus, which controls
which experiences are filed away into long-term memory
and which are forgotten.

Cerebrum

Telencephalon Thalamus

Optic
tectum

  
  
 
 
  
 

Hypothalamus

 

Sa

Cerebellum

Diencephalon rari

oblongata

Pituitary gland

11 weeks 9months

Development of the brain in humans. The main regions of the brain form during fetal development.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1089
