51.1

Types of Digestive Systems

Heterotrophs are divided into three groups on the basis
of their food sources. Animals that eat plants exclusively
are classified as herbivores; common examples include
cows, horses, rabbits and sparrows. Animals that are
meat-eaters, such as cats, eagles, trout, and frogs, are
carnivores. Omnivores are animals that eat both plants
and other animals. Humans are omnivores, as are pigs,
bears, and crows.

Single-celled organisms (as well as sponges) digest
their food intracellularly. Other animals digest their
food extracellularly, within a digestive cavity. In this
case, the digestive enzymes are released into a cavity that
is continuous with the animal’s external environment. In
coelenterates and flatworms (such as Planaria), the diges-
tive cavity has only one opening that serves as both
mouth and anus. There can be no specialization within
this type of digestive system, called a gastrovascular cavity,
because every cell is exposed to all stages of food diges-
tion (figure 51.2).

Specialization occurs when the digestive tract, or ali-
mentary canal, has a separate mouth and anus, so that
transport of food is one-way. The most primitive digestive
tract is seen in nematodes (phylum Nematoda), where it is
simply a tubular gut lined by an epithelial membrane.
Earthworms (phylum Annelida) have a digestive tract spe-

   
 

Tentacle

Gastrovascular
cavity

FIGURE 51.2

The gastrovascular cavity of Hydra, a coelenterate. Because
there is only one opening, the mouth is also the anus, and no
specialization is possible in the different regions that participate
in extracellular digestion.

1018 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Animals employ a digestive system to prepare food for assimilation by cells.

cialized in different regions for the ingestion, storage, frag-
mentation, digestion, and absorption of food. All higher
animal groups, including all vertebrates, show similar spe-
cializations (figure 51.3).

The ingested food may be stored in a specialized region
of the digestive tract or may first be subjected to physical
fragmentation. This fragmentation may occur through the
chewing action of teeth (in the mouth of many vertebrates),
or the grinding action of pebbles (in the gizzard of earth-
worms and birds). Chemical digestion then occurs, break-
ing down the larger food molecules of polysaccharides and
disaccharides, fats, and proteins into their smallest sub-
units. Chemical digestion involves hydrolysis reactions that
liberate the subunit molecules—primarily monosaccha-
rides, amino acids, and fatty acids—from the food. These
products of chemical digestion pass through the epithelial
lining of the gut into the blood, in a process known as ab-
sorption. Any molecules in the food that are not absorbed
cannot be used by the animal. These waste products are ex-
creted, or defecated, from the anus.

 

Most animals digest their food extracellularly. The
digestive tract, with a one-way transport of food and
specialization of regions for different functions, allows
food to be ingested, physically fragmented, chemically
digested, and absorbed.

 

    
 

Mouth Pharynx

Intestine

Earthworm ClOP Gizzard

   
 
   
   

Anus

Intestine Cloaca

Salamander Stomach

Esophagus Pancreas
FIGURE 51.3

The one-way digestive tract of nematodes, earthworms, and
vertebrates. One-way movement through the digestive tract
allows different regions of the digestive system to become
specialized for different functions.
