Blood Flow and Blood Pressure
Cardiac Output

Cardiac output is the volume of blood pumped by each
ventricle per minute. Because humans (like all vertebrates)
have a closed circulation, the cardiac output is the same as
the volume of blood that traverses the systemic or pul-
monary circulations per minute. It is calculated by multi-
plying the heart rate by the stroke volume, which is the vol-
ume of blood ejected by each ventricle per beat. For
example, if the heart rate is 72 beats per minute and the
stroke volume is 70 milliliters, the cardiac output is 5 liters
per minute, which is about average in a resting person.

Cardiac output increases during exercise because of an
increase in heart rate and stroke volume. When exercise be-
gins, the heart rate increases up to about 100 beats per
minute. As exercise becomes more intense, skeletal muscles
squeeze on veins more vigorously, returning blood to the
heart more rapidly. In addition, the ventricles contract more
strongly, so they empty more completely with each beat.

During exercise, the cardiac output increases to a maxi-
mum of about 25 liters per minute in an average young
adult. Although the cardiac output has increased five times,
not all organs receive five times the blood flow; some re-
ceive more, others less. This is because the arterioles in
some organs, such as in the digestive system, constrict,
while the arterioles in the exercising muscles and heart di-
late. As previously mentioned, the resistance to flow de-
creases as the radius of the vessel increases. As a conse-
quence, vasodilation greatly increases and vasoconstriction
greatly decreases blood flow.

Blood Pressure and the Baroreceptor Reflex

The arterial blood pressure depends on two factors: how
much blood the ventricles pump (the cardiac output) and
how great a resistance to flow the blood encounters in
the entire arterial system. An increased blood pressure,
therefore, could be produced by an increased heart rate
or an increased blood volume (because both increase the
cardiac output) or by vasoconstriction, which increases
the resistance to blood flow. Conversely, blood pressure
will fall if the heart rate slows or if the blood volume is
reduced, for example by dehydration or excessive bleed-
ing (hemorrhage).

Changes in the arterial blood pressure are detected by
baroreceptors located in the arch of the aorta and in the
carotid arteries. These receptors activate sensory neurons
that relay information to cardiovascular control centers in the
medulla oblongata, a region of the brain stem. When the
baroreceptors detect a fall in blood pressure, they stimulate
neurons that go to blood vessels in the skin and viscera,
causing arterioles in these organs to constrict and raise the
blood pressure. This baroreceptor reflex therefore com-
pletes a negative feedback loop that acts to correct the fall
in blood pressure and restore homeostasis.

1050 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Blood Volume Reflexes

Blood pressure depends in part on the total blood volume.
A decrease in blood volume, therefore, will decrease blood
pressure, if all else remains equal. Blood volume regulation
involves the effects of four hormones: (1) antidiuretic hor-
mone; (2) aldosterone; (3) atrial natriuretic hormone; and
(4) nitric oxide.

Antidiuretic Hormone. Antidiuretic hormone (ADH),
also called vasopressin, is secreted by the posterior pituitary
gland in response to an increase in the osmotic concentra-
tion of the blood plasma. Dehydration, for example, causes
the blood volume to decrease while the remaining plasma
becomes more concentrated. This stimulates osmoreceptors
in the hypothalamus of the brain, a region located immedi-
ately above the pituitary. The osmoreceptors promote
thirst and stimulate ADH secretion from the posterior pi-
tuitary gland. ADH, in turn, stimulates the kidneys to re-
tain more water in the blood, excreting less in the urine
(urine is derived from blood plasma—see chapter 58). A de-
hydrated person thus drinks more and urinates less, helping
to raise the blood volume and restore homeostasis.

Aldosterone. If a person’s blood volume is lowered (by
dehydration, for example), the flow of blood through the
organs will be reduced if no compensation occurs. When-
ever the kidneys experience a decreased blood flow, a group
of kidney cells initiate the release of a short polypeptide
known as angiotensin II. This is a very powerful molecule: it
stimulates vasoconstriction throughout the body while it
also stimulates the adrenal cortex (the outer region of the
adrenal glands) to secrete the hormone aldosterone. This im-
portant steroid hormone is necessary for life; it acts on the
kidneys to promote the retention of Na* and water in the
blood. An animal that lacks aldosterone will die if un-
treated, because so much of the blood volume is lost in
urine that the blood pressure falls too low to sustain life.

Atrial Natriuretic Hormone. When the body needs to
eliminate excessive Na‘, less aldosterone is secreted by the
adrenals, so that less Na* is retained by the kidneys. In re-
cent years, scientists have learned that Na* excretion in the
urine is promoted by another hormone. Surprisingly, this
hormone is secreted by the right atrium of the heart—the
heart is an endocrine gland! The right atrium secretes atrial
natriuretic hormone in response to stretching of the atrium
by an increased blood volume. The action of atrial natri-
uretic hormone completes a negative feedback loop, be-
cause it promotes the elimination of Na* and water, which
will lower the blood volume and pressure.

Nitric Oxide. Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas that acts as a hor-
mone in vertebrates, regulating blood pressure and blood
flow. As described in chapter 7, nitric oxide gas is a
paracrine hormone, is produced by one cell, penetrates
through membranes, and alters the activities of other
