 

@
FIGURE 54.19

()

Integration of EPSPs and IPSPs takes place on the neuronal cell body. (2) The synapses made by some axons are excitatory (blue);
the synapses made by other axons are inhibitory (red). The summed influence of all of these inputs determines whether the axonal
membrane of the postsynaptic cell will be sufficiently depolarized to produce an action potential. (b) Micrograph of a neuronal cell body

with numerous synapses (15,000x).

player may not feel the full extent of his trauma, for exam-
ple, until he’s taken out of the game. The intensity with
which pain is perceived partly depends on the effects of
neuropeptides called enkephalins and endorphins.
Enkephalins are released by axons descending from the
brain and inhibit the passage of pain information to the
brain. Endorphins are released by neurons in the brain
stem and also block the perception of pain. Opium and its
derivatives, morphine and heroin, have an analgesic (pain-
reducing) effect because they are similar enough in chemi-
cal structure to bind to the receptors normally utilized by
enkephalins and endorphins. For this reason, the
enkephalins and the endorphins are referred to as endoge-
nous opiates.

Nitric oxide (NO) is the first gas known to act as a
regulatory molecule in the body. Because NO is a gas, it
diffuses through membranes so it cannot be stored in
vesicles. It is produced as needed from the amino acid
arginine. Nitric oxide’s actions are very different from
those of the more familiar nitrous oxide (N20), or laugh-
ing gas, sometimes used by dentists. Nitric oxide diffuses
out of the presynaptic axon and into neighboring cells by
simply passing through the lipid portions of the cell mem-
branes. In the PNS, nitric oxide is released by some neu-
rons that innervate the gastrointestinal tract, penis, respi-
ratory passages, and cerebral blood vessels. These are

autonomic neurons that cause smooth muscle relaxation
in their target organs. This can produce, for example, the
engorgement of the spongy tissue of the penis with blood,
causing erection. The drug sildenafil (Viagra) increases
the release of nitric oxide in the penis, prolonging erec-
tion. Nitric oxide is also released as a neurotransmitter in
the brain, and has been implicated in the processes of
learning and memory.

Synaptic Integration

The activity of a postsynaptic neuron in the brain and
spinal cord of vertebrates is influenced by different types of
input from a number of presynaptic neurons. For example,
a single motor neuron in the spinal cord can receive as
many as 50,000 synapses from presynaptic axons! Each
postsynaptic neuron may receive both excitatory and in-
hibitory synapses. The EPSPs (depolarizations) and IPSPs
(hyperpolarizations) from these synapses interact with each
other when they reach the cell body of the neuron. Small
EPSPs add together to bring the membrane potential
closer to the threshold, while IPSPs subtract from the de-
polarizing effect of the EPSPs, keeping the membrane po-
tential below the threshold (figure 54.19). This process is
called synaptic integration.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1085
