53.2 Gills are used for respiration by aquatic vertebrates.

The Gill as a Respiratory Structure

Aquatic respiratory organs increase the diffusion surface
area by extensions of tissue, called gills, that project out into
the water. Gills can be simple, as in the papulae of echino-
derms (see figure 53.2c), or complex, as in the highly con-
voluted gills of fish (see figure 53.2e). The great increase in
diffusion surface area provided by gills enables aquatic or-
ganisms to extract far more oxygen from water than would
be possible from their body surface alone.

External gills (gills that are not enclosed within body
structures) provide a greatly increased surface area for gas
exchange. Examples of vertebrates with external gills are
the larvae of many fish and amphibians, as well as develop-
mentally arrested (neotenic) amphibian larvae that remain
permanently aquatic, such as the axolotl. One of the disad-
vantages of external gills is that they must constantly be
moved or the surrounding water becomes depleted in oxy-
gen as the oxygen diffuses from the water to the blood of
the gills. The highly branched gills, however, offer signifi-
cant resistance to movement, making this form of respira-
tion ineffective except in smaller animals. Another disad-
vantage is that external gills are easily damaged. The thin
epithelium required for gas exchange is not consistent with
a protective external layer of skin.

Other types of aquatic animals evolved specialized
branchial chambers, which provide a means of pumping
water past stationary gills. Mollusks, for example, have an
internal mantle cavity that opens to the outside and contains
the gills. Contraction of the muscular walls of the mantle
cavity draws water in and then expels it. In crustaceans, the
branchial chamber lies between the bulk of the body and
the hard exoskeleton of the animal. This chamber contains
gills and opens to the surface beneath a limb. Movement of
the limb draws water through the branchial chamber, thus
creating currents over the gills.

 

 

ot.

Opercular “iy =

Mouth opened,
jaw lowered

(@) (b)
1056 Part XII Animal Form and Function

Oral valve

 

The Gills of Bony Fishes

The gills of bony fishes are located between the buccal
(mouth) cavity and the opercular cavities (figure 53.4). The
buccal cavity can be opened and closed by opening and
closing the mouth, and the opercular cavity can be opened
and closed by movements of the operculum, or gill cover.
The two sets of cavities function as pumps that expand al-
ternately to move water into the mouth, through the gills,
and out of the fish through the open operculum. Water is
brought into the buccal cavity by lowering the jaw and
floor of the mouth, and then is moved through the gills
into the opercular cavity by the opening of the operculum.
The lower pressure in the opercular cavity causes water to
move in the correct direction across the gills, and tissue
that acts as valves ensures that the movement is one-way.

Some fishes that swim continuously, such as tuna, have
practically immobile opercula. These fishes swim with their
mouths partly open, constantly forcing water over the gills in
a form of ram ventilation. Most bony fishes, however, have
flexible gill covers that permit a pumping action. For exam-
ple, the remora, a fish that rides “piggyback” on sharks, uses
ram ventilation while the shark swims and the pumping ac-
tion of its opercula when the shark stops swimming.

There are four gill arches on each side of the fish head.
Each gill arch is composed of two rows of gill filaments, and
each gill filament contains thin membranous plates, or
Jamellae, that project out into the flow of water (figure
53.5). Water flows past the lamellae in one direction only.
Within each lamella, blood flows in a direction that is oppo-
site the direction of water movement. This arrangement is
called countercurrent flow, and it acts to maximize the
oxygenation of the blood by increasing the concentration
gradient of oxygen along the pathway for diffusion, increas-
ing Ap in Fick’s Law of Diffusion.

The advantages of a countercurrent flow system were dis-
cussed in chapter 52 in relation to temperature regulation and
are again shown here in figure 53.67. Blood low in oxygen en-

FIGURE 53.4

How most bony fishes
respire. The gills are
suspended between the buccal
(mouth) cavity and the
opercular cavity. Respiration
occurs in two stages. (2) The
oral valve in the mouth is
opened and the jaw is
depressed, drawing water into
the buccal cavity while the
opercular cavity is closed. (b)
The oral valve is closed and
the operculum is opened,
drawing water through the
gills to the outside.

Mouth closed,
operculum opened
