Variations in Vertebrate Digestive
Systems

Most animals lack the enzymes necessary to digest cellu-
lose, the carbohydrate that functions as the chief struc-
tural component of plants. The digestive tracts of some
animals, however, contain bacteria and protists that con-
vert cellulose into substances the host can digest. Al-
though digestion by gastrointestinal microorganisms plays
a relatively small role in human nutrition, it is an essential
element in the nutrition of many other kinds of animals,
including insects like termites and cockroaches, and a few
groups of herbivorous mammals. The relationships be-
tween these microorganisms and their animal hosts are
mutually beneficial and provide an excellent example of
symbiosis.

Cows, deer, and other ruminants have large, divided
stomachs (figure 51.17). The first portion consists of the
rumen and a smaller chamber, the reticulum; the second
portion consists of two additional chambers: the omasum
and abomasum. The rumen which may hold up to 50 gal-
lons, serves as a fermentation vat in which bacteria and pro-
tozoa convert cellulose and other molecules into a variety
of simpler compounds. The location of the rumen at the
front of the four chambers is important because it allows
the animal to regurgitate and rechew the contents of the
rumen, an activity called rumination, or “chewing the cud.”
The cud is then swallowed and enters the reticulum, from
which it passes to the omasum and then the abomasum,
where it is finally mixed with gastric juice. Hence, only the
abomasum is equivalent to the human stomach in its func-
tion. This process leads to a far more efficient digestion of
cellulose in ruminants than in mammals that lack a ramen,
such as horses.

In horses, rodents, and lagomorphs (rabbits and hares),
the digestion of cellulose by microorganisms takes place in
the cecum, which is greatly enlarged (figure 51.18). Be-
cause the cecum is located beyond the stomach, regurgita-
tion of its contents is impossible. However, rodents and
lagomorphs have evolved another way to digest cellulose
that achieves a degree of efficiency similar to that of rumi-
nant digestion. They do this by eating their feces, thus
passing the food through their digestive tract a second
time. The second passage makes it possible for the animal
to absorb the nutrients produced by the microorganisms in
its cecum. Animals that engage in this practice of co-
prophagy (from the Greek words copros, “excrement,” and
phagein, “eat”) cannot remain healthy if they are prevented
from eating their feces.

Cellulose is not the only plant product that vertebrates
can use as a food source because of the digestive activities

1028 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Small Rumen
intestine

   

Esophagus

FIGURE 51.17

Four-chambered stomach of a ruminant. The grass and other
plants that a ruminant, such as a cow, eats enter the rumen, where
they are partially digested. Before moving into a second chamber,
the reticulum, the food may be regurgitated and rechewed. The
food is then transferred to the rear two chambers: the omasum
and abomasum. Only the abomasum is equivalent to the human
stomach in its function of secreting gastric juice.

of intestinal microorganisms. Wax, a substance indi-
gestible by most terrestrial animals, is digested by symbi-
otic bacteria living in the gut of honey guides, African
birds that eat the wax in bee nests. In the marine food
chain, wax is a major constituent of copepods (crus-
taceans in the plankton), and many marine fish and birds
appear to be able to digest wax with the aid of symbiotic
microorganisms.

Another example of the way intestinal microorganisms
function in the metabolism of their animal hosts is pro-
vided by the synthesis of vitamin K. All mammals rely on
intestinal bacteria to synthesize this vitamin, which is nec-
essary for the clotting of blood. Birds, which lack these bac-
teria, must consume the required quantities of vitamin K in
their food. In humans, prolonged treatment with antibi-
otics greatly reduces the populations of bacteria in the in-
testine; under such circumstances, it may be necessary to
provide supplementary vitamin K.

 

Much of the food value of plants is tied up in cellulose,
and the digestive tract of many animals harbors colonies
of cellulose-digesting microorganisms. Intestinal
microorganisms also produce molecules such as vitamin
K that are important to the well-being of their
vertebrate hosts.

 
