Biogenic Amines

The biogenic amines include the hormone epinephrine
(adrenaline), together with the neurotransmitters
dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. Epinephrine,
norepinephrine, and dopamine are derived from the amino
acid tyrosine and are included in the subcategory of cate-
cholamines. Serotonin is a biogenic amine derived from a
different amino acid, tryptophan.

Dopamine is a very important neurotransmitter used in
the brain to control body movements and other functions.
Degeneration of particular dopamine-releasing neurons
produces the resting muscle tremors of Parkinson’s disease,
and people with this condition are treated with L-dopa (an
acronym for dihydroxyphenylalanine), a precursor of
dopamine. Additionally, studies suggest that excessive ac-
tivity of dopamine-releasing neurons in other areas of the
brain is associated with schizophrenia. As a result, patients
with schizophrenia are sometimes helped by drugs that
block the production of dopamine.

Norepinephrine is used by neurons in the brain and
also by particular autonomic neurons, where its action as a
neurotransmitter complements the action of the hormone
epinephrine, secreted by the adrenal gland. The autonomic
nervous system will be discussed in a later section of this
chapter.

  
  
 

Serotonin

Prozac
blocks
reabsorption

1084 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Receptor

Serotonin is a neurotransmitter involved in the regula-
tion of sleep and is also implicated in various emotional
states. Insufficient activity of neurons that release serotonin
may be one cause of clinical depression; this is suggested by
the fact that antidepressant drugs, particularly fluoxetine
(Prozac) and related compounds, specifically block the
elimination of serotonin from the synaptic cleft (figure
54.18). The drug lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) specifi-
cally blocks serotonin receptors in a region of the brain
stem known as the raphe nuclei.

Other Neurotransmitters

Axons also release various polypeptides, called neuropep-
tides, at synapses. These neuropeptides may have a neuro-
transmitter function or they may have more subtle, long-
term action on the postsynaptic neurons. In the latter case,
they are often referred to as neuromodulators. A given
axon generally releases only one kind of neurotransmitter,
but many can release both a neurotransmitter and a neuro-
modulator.

One important neuropeptide is substance P, which is
released at synapses in the CNS by sensory neurons acti-
vated by painful stimuli. The perception of pain, however,
can vary depending on circumstances; an injured football

FIGURE 54.18

Serotonin and depression. Depression
can result from a shortage of the
neurotransmitter serotonin. The
antidepressant drug Prozac works by
blocking reabsorption of serotonin in the
synapse, making up for the shortage.
