Fueling Body
Activities: Digestion

Concept Outline

51.1 Animals employ a digestive system to prepare
food for assimilation by cells.

‘Types of Digestive Systems. Some invertebrates have a
gastrovascular cavity, but vertebrates have a digestive tract
that chemically digests and absorbs the food.

Vertebrate Digestive Systems. The different regions of
the gastrointestinal tract are adapted for different functions.

51.2 Food is ingested, swallowed, and transported to
the stomach.

The Mouth and Teeth. Carnivores, herbivores, and

omnivores display differences in the structure of their teeth.

Esophagus and Stomach. The esophagus delivers food
to the stomach, which secretes hydrochloric acid and
pepsin.

51.3 The small and large intestines have very different
functions.

The Small Intestine. The small intestine has mucosal
folds called villi and smaller folds called microvilli that
absorb glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids into the blood.
The Large Intestine. The large intestine absorbs water,
ions, and vitamin K, and excretes what remains as feces.
Variations in Vertebrate Digestive Systems. Digestive
systems are adapted to particular diets.

51.4 Accessory organs, neural stimulation, and
endocrine secretions assist in digestion.

Accessory Organs. The pancreas secretes digestive
enzymes and the hormones insulin and glucagon. The liver
produces bile, which emulsifies fat; the gallbladder stores
the bile.

Neural and Hormonal Regulation of Digestion.

Nerves and hormones help regulate digestive functions.

51.5 All animals require food energy and essential
nutrients.

Food Energy and Energy Expenditure. The intake of
food energy must balance the energy expended by the body
in order to maintain a stable weight.

Essential Nutrients. Food must contain vitamins,
minerals, and specific amino acids and fatty acids for health.

 

FIGURE 51.1

Animals are heterotrophs. All animals must consume plant
material or other animals in order to live. The nuts in this
chipmunk’s cheeks will be consumed and converted to body
tissue, energy, and refuse.

ants and other photosynthetic organisms can produce

the organic molecules they need from inorganic com-
ponents. Therefore, they are autotrophs, or self-sustaining.
Animals are heterotrophs: they must consume organic mol-
ecules present in other organisms (figure 51.1). The mole-
cules heterotrophs eat must be digested into smaller mole-
cules in order to be absorbed into the animal’s body. Once
these products of digestion enter the body, the animal can
use them for energy in cell respiration or for the construc-
tion of the larger molecules that make up its tissues. The
process of animal digestion is the focus of this chapter.

1017
