Comparing Cardiac and
Smooth Muscles

Cardiac and smooth muscle are similar
in that both are found within internal
organs and both are generally not
under conscious control. Cardiac mus-
cle, however, is like skeletal muscle in
that it is striated and contracts by
means of a sliding filament mecha-
nism. Smooth muscle (as its name im-
plies) is not striated. Smooth muscle
does contain actin and myosin fila-
ments, but they are arranged less reg-
ularly within the cell.

Cardiac Muscle

   

Intercalated
disks

FIGURE 50.19

Cardiac muscle. Cells are organized into
long branching chains that interconnect,
forming a lattice; neighboring cells are
linked by structures called intercalated

from one side of the cell to the other.
The thick filaments are attached either
to structures called dense bodies, the
functional equivalents of Z lines, or to
the plasma membrane. Most smooth
muscle cells have 10 to 15 thin fila-
ments per thick filament, compared to
3 per thick filament in striated muscle
fibers.

Smooth muscle cells do not have a
sarcoplasmic reticulum; during a con-
traction, Ca** enters from the extracel-
lular fluid. In the cytoplasm, Ca**
binds to calmodulin, a protein that is
structurally similar to troponin. The
Ca*+-calmodulin complex activates an
enzyme that phosphorylates (adds a

discs.

Cardiac muscle in the vertebrate

heart is composed of striated muscle

cells that are arranged differently from the fibers in a
skeletal muscle. Instead of the long, multinucleate cells
that form skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is composed of
shorter, branched cells, each with its own nucleus, that
interconnect with one another at intercalated discs (fig-
ure 50.19). Intercalated discs are regions where the mem-
branes of two cells fuse together, and the fused mem-
branes are pierced by gap junctions (chapter 7). The gap
junctions permit the diffusion of ions, and thus the
spread of electric excitation, from one cell to the next.
The mass of interconnected cardiac muscle cells forms a
single, functioning unit called a myocardium. Electric im-
pulses begin spontaneously in a specific region of the my-
ocardium known as the pacemaker. These impulses are not
initiated by impulses in motor neurons, as they are in
skeletal muscle, but rather are produced by the cardiac
muscle cells themselves. From the pacemaker, the im-
pulses spread throughout the myocardium via gap junc-
tions, causing contraction.

The heart has two myocardia, one that receives blood
from the body and one that ejects blood into the body. Be-
cause all of the cells in a myocardium are stimulated as a
unit, cardiac muscle cannot produce summated contrac-
tions or tetanus. This would interfere with the alternation
between contraction and relaxation that is necessary for

pumping.

Smooth Muscle

Smooth muscle surrounds hollow internal organs, includ-
ing the stomach, intestines, bladder, and uterus, as well as
all blood vessels except capillaries. Smooth muscle cells are
long and spindle-shaped, and each contains a single nu-
cleus. They also contain actin and myosin, but these con-
tractile proteins are not organized into sarcomeres. Parallel
arrangements of thick and thin filaments cross diagonally

1012 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

phosphate group to) the myosin heads.

Unlike the case with striated muscles,

this phosphorylation is required for the
myosin heads to form cross-bridges with actin.

This mechanism allows gradations in the strength of
contraction in a smooth muscle cell, increasing contraction
strength as more Ca** enters the cytoplasm. Heart patients
sometimes take drugs that block Ca** entry into smooth
muscle cells, reducing the cells’ ability to contract. This
treatment causes vascular smooth muscle to relax, dilating
the blood vessels and reducing the amount of work the
heart must do to pump blood through them.

In some smooth muscle tissues, the cells contract only
when they are stimulated by the nervous system. These
muscles line the walls of many blood vessels and make up
the iris of the eye. Other smooth muscle tissues, like those
in the wall of the gut, contains cells that produce electric
impulses spontaneously. These impulses spread to adjoin-
ing cells through gap junctions, leading to a slow, steady
contraction of the tissue.

Neither skeletal nor cardiac muscle can be greatly
stretched because if the thick and thin filaments no longer
overlay in the sarcomere, cross-bridges cannot form. Un-
like these striated muscles, smooth muscle can contract
even when it is greatly stretched. If one considers the de-
gree to which some internal organs may be stretched—a
uterus during pregnancy, for example—it is no wonder that
these organs contain smooth muscle instead of striated
muscle.

 

Cardiac muscle cells interconnect physically and
electrically to form a single, functioning unit called a
myocardium, which produces its own impulses at a
pacemaker region. Smooth muscles lack the
organization of myofilaments into sarcomeres and lack
sarcoplasmic reticulum but contraction still occurs as
myofilaments slide past one another by use of cross-
bridges.

 
