Modes of Animal Locomotion

Animals are unique among multicellular organisms in their
ability to actively move from one place to another. Loco-
motion requires both a propulsive mechanism and a control
mechanism. Animals employ a wide variety of propulsive
mechanisms, most involving contracting muscles to gener-
ate the necessary force. The quantity, quality, and position
of contractions are initiated and coordinated by the ner-
vous system. In large animals, active locomotion is almost
always produced by appendages that oscillate—appendicular
Jocomotion—or by bodies that undulate, pulse, or undergo
peristaltic waves—axial locomotion.

While animal locomotion occurs in many different
forms, the general principles remain much the same in all
groups. The physical restraints to movement—gravity and
frictional drag—are the same in every environment, differ-
ing only in degree. You can conveniently divide the envi-
ronments through which animals move into three types,
each involving its own forms of locomotion: water, land,
and air.

Locomotion in Water

Many aquatic and marine invertebrates move along the
bottom using the same form of locomotion employed by
terrestrial animals moving over the land surface. Flatworms
employ ciliary activity to brush themselves along, round-
worms a peristaltic slither, leeches a contract-anchor-
extend creeping. Crabs walk using limbs to pull themselves
along; mollusks use a muscular foot, while starfish use
unique tube feet to do the same thing.

Moving directly through the water, or swimming, pre-
sents quite a different challenge. Water’s buoyancy reduces
the influence of gravity. The primary force retarding for-
ward movement is frictional drag, so body shape is impor-
tant in reducing the friction and turbulence produced by
swimming through the water.

Some marine invertebrates swim using hydraulic propul-
sion. Scallops clap their shells together forcefully, while
squids and octopuses squirt water like a marine jet. All
aquatic and marine vertebrates, however, swim.

Swimming involves using the body or its appendages
to push against the water. An eel swims by sinuous undu-
lations of its whole body (figure 50.204). The undulating
body waves of cel-like swimming are created by waves of
muscle contraction alternating between the left and right
axial musculature. As each body segment in turn pushes
against the water, the moving wave forces the cel
forward.

Fish, reptiles, and aquatic amphibians swim in a way
similar to eels, but only undulate the posterior (back) por-
tion of the body (figure 50.200) and sometimes only the
caudal (rear) fin. This allows considerable specialization of
the front end of the body, while sacrificing little propulsive
force.

Eel

  

Reactive
57 tore
Trout
__ Lateral
force
@
Reactive
force —
Lateral
force
Z
(b) 2
Push
FIGURE 50.20

Movements of swimming fishes. (2) An cel pushes against the
water with its whole body, (}) a trout only with its posterior half.

Whales also swim using undulating body waves, but un-
like any of the fishes, the waves pass from top to bottom
and not from side to side. The body musculature of eels
and fish is highly segmental; that is, a muscle segment al-
ternates with each vertebra. This arrangement permits the
smooth passage of undulatory waves along the body.
Whales are unable to produce lateral undulations because
mammals do not have this arrangement.

Many tetrapod vertebrates swim, usually with appendic-
ular locomotion. Most birds that swim, like ducks and
geese, propel themselves through the water by pushing
against it with their hind legs, which typically have webbed
feet. Frogs, turtles, and most marine mammals also swim
with their hind legs and have webbed feet. Tetrapod verte-
brates that swim with their forelegs usually have these
limbs modified as flippers, and pull themselves through the
water. These include sea turtles, penguins, and fur seals. A
few principally terrestrial tetrapod vertebrates, like polar
bears and platypuses, swim with walking forelimbs not
modified for swimming.

Chapter 50 Locomotion 1013
