6.2 Proteins embedded within the plasma membrane determine its character.

The Fluid Mosaic Model

A plasma membrane is composed of both lipids and glob-
ular proteins. For many years, biologists thought the pro-
tein covered the inner and outer surfaces of the phospho-
lipid bilayer like a coat of paint. The widely accepted
Davson-Danielli model, proposed in 1935, portrayed the
membrane as a sandwich: a phospholipid bilayer between
two layers of globular protein. This model, however, was
not consistent with what researchers were learning in the
1960s about the structure of membrane proteins. Unlike
most proteins found within cells, membrane proteins are
not very soluble in water—they possess long stretches of
nonpolar hydrophobic amino acids. If such proteins in-
deed coated the surface of the lipid bilayer, as the
Davson-Danielli model suggests, then their nonpolar por-
tions would separate the polar portions of the phospho-
lipids from water, causing the bilayer to dissolve! Because
this doesn’t happen, there is clearly something wrong

with the model.

Extracellular fluid

   
   

 

Cytoplasm

FIGURE 6.5

Glycolipid

Filaments of
cytoskeleton

In 1972, S. Singer and G. Nicolson revised the model in
a simple but profound way: they proposed that the globular
proteins are inserted into the lipid bilayer, with their nonpo-
lar segments in contact with the nonpolar interior of the
bilayer and their polar portions protruding out from the
membrane surface. In this model, called the fluid mosaic
model, a mosaic of proteins float in the fluid lipid bilayer
like boats on a pond (figure 6.5).

Components of the Cell Membrane

A eukaryotic cell contains many membranes. While they
are not all identical, they share the same fundamental ar-
chitecture. Cell membranes are assembled from four com-
ponents (table 6.1):

1. Lipid bilayer. Every cell membrane is composed of
a phospholipid bilayer. The other components of the
membrane are enmeshed within the bilayer, which
provides a flexible matrix and, at the same time, im-
poses a barrier to permeability.

Glycoprotein

Peripheral
protein

The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane. A variety of proteins protrude through the plasma membrane of animal cells, and
nonpolar regions of the proteins tether them to the membrane’s nonpolar interior. The three principal classes of membrane proteins are
transport proteins, receptors, and cell surface markers. Carbohydrate chains are often bound to the extracellular portion of these proteins,
as well as to the membrane phospholipids. These chains serve as distinctive identification tags, unique to particular cells.

106 Part II Biology of the Cell
