Gill raker Gill arch Lamellae with
Gil filaments capillary networks

Artery

Gill raker Gill arch

    

Water

     

Water

 

Gill filaments

SS

FIGURE 53.5

Structure of a fish gill. Water passes from the gill arch over the filaments (from left to right in the diagram). Water always passes the
lamellae in a direction that is opposite to the direction of blood flow through the lamellae. The success of the gill’s operation critically
depends on this countercurrent flow of water and blood.

 

ters the back of the lamella, where it comes in close proximity
to water that has already had most of its oxygen removed as it Countercurrent exchange Concurrent exchange
flowed through the lamella in the opposite direction. The
water still has a higher oxygen concentration than the blood
at this point, however, so oxygen diffuses from the water to
the blood. As the blood flows toward the front of the lamella,
it runs next to water that has a still higher oxygen content, so
oxygen continuously diffuses from the water to the blood. 80% 90%
Thus, countercurrent flow ensures that a concentration gradi-

Blood (85% Water (100% Blood (50% Water (50%
Op saturation) |, saturation) saturation) 4 O, saturation)

  

85% 100%

ent remains between blood and water throughout the flow. 70% eid Nofurherm
This permits oxygen to continue to diffuse all along the 60% 70%
lamellae, so that the blood leaving the gills has nearly as high ” ”
an oxygen concentration as the a catering the gills. ° 0% ov Eo Eo

This concept is easier to understand if we look at what ai ao 40% 60%
would happen if blood and water flowed in the same direc- or hn a ae
tion, that is, had a concurrent flow. The difference in oxygen
concentration would be very high at the front of each lamella, oo ea 20% 80%
where oxygen-depleted blood would meet oxygen-rich water 10% 15% Poet aon
entering the gill (figure 53.6). The concentration difference
would fall rapidly, however, as the water lost oxygen to the
blood. Net diffusion of oxygen would cease when the oxygen | Blc04 (0% | Bees

. yest ©, saturation) O, saturation)

concentration of blood matched that of the water. At this Water (15% Water (100%
point, much less oxygen would have been transferred to the O» saturation) O, saturation)
blood than is the case with countercurrent flow. The flow of (a) (b)

blood and water in a fish gill is in fact countercurrent, and be-
cause of the countercurrent exchange of gases, fish gills are

 

When blood and water flow in opposite directions (a), the initial

 

the most efficient of all respiratory organs. ‘oxygen concentration difference between water and blood is not
large, but is sufficient for oxygen to diffuse from water to blood.
In bony fishes, water is forced past gills by the pumping ‘As more oxygen diffuses into the blood, raising the blood's
action of the buccal and opercular cavities, or by active ‘oxygen concentration, the blood encounters water with ever
swimming in ram ventilation. In the gills, blood flows in higher oxygen concentrations. At every point, the oxygen
an opposite direction to the flow of water. This concentration is higher in the water, so that diffusion continues.

In this example, blood attains an oxygen concentration of 85%.
When blood and water flow in the same direction (b), oxygen can
diffuse from the water into the blood rapidly at first, but the
diffusion rate slows as more oxygen diffuses from the water into
the blood, until finally the concentrations of oxygen in water and
FIGURE 53.6 blood are equal. In this example, blood’s oxygen concentration
Countercurrent exchange. This process allows for the most cannot exceed 50%.

efficient blood oxygenation known in nature.

countercurrent flow maximizes gas exchange, making
the fish’s gill an efficient respiratory organ.

 

 

 

 

Chapter 53 Respiration 1057
