Neural and Hormonal Regulation
of Digestion

The activities of the gastrointestinal tract are coordinated
by the nervous system and the endocrine system. The ner-
vous system, for example, stimulates salivary and gastric se-
cretions in response to the sight and smell of food. When
food arrives in the stomach, proteins in the food stimulate
the secretion of a stomach hormone called gastrin (table
51.2), which in turn stimulates the secretion of pepsinogen
and HCI from the gastric glands (figure 51.21). The se-
creted HC] then lowers the pH of the gastric juice, which
acts to inhibit further secretion of gastrin. Because inhibi-
tion of gastrin secretion will reduce the amount of HCI re-
leased into the gastric juice, a negative feedback loop is
completed. In this way, the secretion of gastric acid is kept
under tight control.

The passage of chyme from the stomach into the duo-
denum inhibits the contractions of the stomach, so that
no additional chyme can enter the duodenum until the
previous amount has been processed. This inhibition is
mediated by a neural reflex and by a hormone secreted by
the small intestine that inhibits gastric emptying. The
hormone is known generically as an enterogastrone (entero
refers to the intestine; gastro to the stomach). The chemi-
cal identity of the enterogastrone is currently controver-

sial. A hormone known as gastric inhibitory peptide
(GIP), released by the duodenum, was named for this
function but may not be the only, or even the major, en-
terogastrone. The secretion of enterogastrone is stimu-
lated most strongly by the presence of fat in the chyme.
Fatty meals therefore remain in the stomach longer than
meals low in fat.

The duodenum secretes two additional hormones.
Cholecystokinin (CCK), like enterogastrone, is secreted in
response to the presence of fat in the chyme. CCK stimu-
lates the contractions of the gallbladder, injecting bile into
the duodenum so that fat can be emulsified and more effi-
ciently digested. The other duodenal hormone is secretin.
Released in response to the acidity of the chyme that ar-
rives in the duodenum, secretin stimulates the pancreas to
release bicarbonate, which then neutralizes some of the
acidity. Secretin has the distinction of being the first hor-
mone ever discovered.

 

Neural and hormonal reflexes regulate the activity of
the digestive system. The stomach’s secretions are
regulated by food and by the hormone gastrin. Other
hormones, secreted by the duodenum, inhibit stomach
emptying and promote the release of bile from the
gallbladder and the secretion of bicarbonate in
pancreatic juice.

 

Table 51.2 Hormones of Digestion

 

Hormone Class Source Stimulus Action. Note
Gastrin Polypeptide Pyloric portion Entry of food Stimulates secretion of HC! Unusual in that it acts
of stomach into stomach and pepsinogen by stomach on same organ that

secretes it

Cholecystokinin Polypeptide | Duodenum Fatty chyme in Stimulates gallbladder Structurally similar to
duodenum contraction and secretion of gastrin
digestive enzymes by pancreas

Gastric Polypeptide Duodenum Fatty chyme in Inhibits stomach emptying Also stimulates insulin
inhibitory peptide duodenum secretion
Secretin Polypeptide | Duodenum Acidic chyme Stimulates secretion of The first hormone to

in duodenum

1032 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

bicarbonate by pancreas be discovered (1902)
