How Animals Maximize the Rate of
Diffusion

The levels of oxygen required by oxidative metabolism
cannot be obtained by diffusion alone over distances
greater than about 0.5 millimeter. This restriction se-
verely limits the size of organisms that obtain their oxy-
gen entirely by diffusion directly from the environment.
Protists are small enough that such diffusion can be ade-
quate (see figure 53.22), but most multicellular animals
are much too large.

Most of the more primitive phyla of invertebrates lack
special respiratory organs, but they have developed means
of improving the movement of water over respiratory
structures. In a number of different ways, many of which
involve beating cilia, these organisms create a water current
that continuously replaces the water over the respiratory
surfaces. Because of this continuous replenishment with
water containing fresh oxygen, the external oxygen concentra-
tion does not decrease along the diffusion pathway. Although
each oxygen molecule that passes into the organism has
been removed from the surrounding water, new water con-
tinuously replaces the oxygen-depleted water. This in-
creases the rate of diffusion by maximizing the concentra-
tion difference—the Ap of the Fick equation.

All of the more advanced invertebrates (mollusks,
arthropods, echinoderms), as well as vertebrates, possess
respiratory organs that increase the surface area available
for diffusion and bring the external environment (either
water or air) close to the internal fluid, which is usually
circulated throughout the body. The respiratory organs
thus increase the rate of diffusion by maximizing surface
area and decreasing the distance the diffusing gases must
travel (the A and d factors, respectively, in the Fick
equation).

Atmospheric Pressure and Partial Pressures

Dry air contains 78.09% nitrogen (N2), 20.95% oxygen,
0.93% argon and other inert gases, and 0.03% carbon diox-
ide. Convection currents cause air to maintain a constant
composition to altitudes of at least 100 kilometers, al-
though the amount (number of molecules) of air that is pre-
sent decreases with altitude (figure 53.3).

Imagine a column of air extending from the ground to
the limits of the atmosphere. All of the gas molecules in
this column experience the force of gravity, so they have
weight and can exert pressure. If this column were on top
of one end of a U-shaped tube of mercury at sea level, it
would exert enough pressure to raise the other end of the
tube 760 millimeters under a set of specified, standard con-
ditions (see figure 53.3). An apparatus that measures air
pressure is called a barometer, and 760 mm Hg (millime-
ters of mercury) is the barometric pressure of the air at sea
level. A pressure of 760 mm Hg is also defined as one at-
mosphere of pressure.

 

0 40 80 120 160
Oxygen partial pressure (mm Hg)

Altitude (m)

 

200 400 600
Air pressure (mm Hg)

 

 

 

FIGURE 53.3

The relationship between air pressure and altitude above sea
level. At the high altitudes characteristic of mountaintops, air
pressure is much less than at sea level. At the top of Mount
Everest, the world’s highest mountain, the air pressure is only
one-third that at sea level.

Each type of gas contributes to the total atmospheric
pressure according to its fraction of the total molecules
present. That fraction contributed by a gas is called its par-
tial pressure and is indicated by PN, Poy, Pco;, and so on.
The total pressure is the sum of the partial pressures of all
gases present. For dry air, the partial pressures are calcu-
lated simply by multiplying the fractional composition of
each gas in the air by the atmospheric pressure. Thus, at
sea level, the partial pressures of N>* inert gases, O), and
CO) are:

760 x 7902% = 6006mm Hg,
1» = 760 X 2095% = 1592mm Hg, and
Pco, = 760 X 0.03% = 0.2mm Hg.

 

Humans do not survive long at altitudes above 6000 me-
ters. Although the air at these altitudes still contains
20.95% oxygen, the atmospheric pressure is only about 380
mm Hg, so its Poy is only 80 mm Hg (80 x 20.95%), only
half the amount of oxygen available at sea level.

 

The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between an
organism and its environment occurs by diffusion of
dissolved gases across plasma membranes and is
maximized by increasing the concentration gradient and
the surface area and by decreasing the distance that the
diffusing gases must travel.

 

Chapter 53 Respiration 1055
