6.3 Passive transport across membranes moves down the concentration gradient.

Diffusion

Molecules and ions dissolved in water are in constant mo-
tion, moving about randomly. This random motion causes
a net movement of these substances from regions where
their concentration is high to regions where their concen-
tration is lower, a process called diffusion (figure 6.12).
Net movement driven by diffusion will continue until the
concentrations in all regions are the same. You can demon-
strate diffusion by filling a jar to the brim with ink, capping
it, placing it at the bottom of a bucket of water, and then
carefully removing the cap. The ink molecules will slowly
diffuse out from the jar until there is a uniform concentra-
tion in the bucket and the jar. This uniformity in the con-
centration of molecules is a type of equilibrium.

Facilitated Transport

Many molecules that cells require, including glucose and
other energy sources, are polar and cannot pass through
the nonpolar interior of the phospholipid bilayer. These
molecules enter the cell through specific channels in the
plasma membrane. The inside of the channel is polar and
thus “friendly” to the polar molecules, facilitating their
transport across the membrane. Each type of biomolecule
that is transported across the plasma membrane has its own
type of transporter (that is, it has its own channel which fits
it like a glove and cannot be used by other molecules). Each
channel is said to be selective for that type of molecule, and
thus to be selectively permeable, as only molecules admit-
ted by the channels it possesses can enter it. The plasma
membrane of a cell has many types of channels, each selec-
tive for a different type of molecule.

Lump

4 of sugar
¢% ves

molecule

Diffusion of Ions through Channels

One of the simplest ways for a substance to diffuse across a
cell membrane is through a channel, as ions do. Ions are
solutes (substances dissolved in water) with an unequal
number of protons and electrons. Those with an excess of
protons are positively charged and called cations. Ions with
more electrons are negatively charged and called anions.
Because they are charged, ions interact well with polar
molecules like water but are repelled by the nonpolar inte-
rior of a phospholipid bilayer. Therefore, ions cannot move
between the cytoplasm of a cell and the extracellular fluid
without the assistance of membrane transport proteins. Ion
channels possess a hydrated interior that spans the mem-
brane. Ions can diffuse through the channel in either direc-
tion without coming into contact with the hydrophobic
tails of the phospholipids in the membrane, and the trans-
ported ions do not bind to or otherwise interact with the
channel proteins. Two conditions determine the direction
of net movement of the ions: their relative concentrations
on either side of the membrane, and the voltage across the
membrane (a topic we'll explore in chapter 54). Each type
of channel is specific for a particular ion, such as calcium
(Ca**) or chloride (Ch), or in some cases for a few kinds of
ions. Ion channels play an essential role in signaling by the
nervous system.

 

Diffusion is the net movement of substances to regions
of lower concentration as a result of random
spontaneous motion. It tends to distribute substances
uniformly. Membrane transport proteins allow only
certain molecules and ions to diffuse through the
plasma membrane.

 

 

FIGURE 6.12

Diffusion. If a lump of sugar is dropped into a beaker of water (2), its molecules dissolve (2) and diffuse (0). Eventually, diffusion results in

an even distribution of sugar molecules throughout the water (d).

112 Part II _ Biology of the Cell
