The Blood Cells

Red blood cells function in oxygen transport, white blood
cells in immunological defenses, and platelets in blood clot-
ting (see figure 52.5).

Erythrocytes and Oxygen Transport

Each cubic millimeter of blood contains about 5 million
red blood cells, or erythrocytes. The fraction of the total
blood volume that is occupied by erythrocytes is called the
blood’s hematocrit; in humans, it is typically around 45%. A
disc with a central depression, each erythrocyte resembles a
doughnut with a hole that does not go all the way through.
As we've already seen, the erythrocytes of vertebrates con-
tain hemoglobin, a pigment which binds and transports
oxygen. In vertebrates, hemoglobin is found only in ery-
throcytes. In invertebrates, the oxygen binding pigment
(not always hemoglobin) is also present in plasma.

Erythrocytes develop from unspecialized cells, called
stem cells. When plasma oxygen levels decrease, the kidney
converts a plasma protein into the hormone, erythropoietin.
Erythropoietin then stimulates the production of erythro-
cytes in bone marrow. In mammals, maturing erythrocytes
lose their nuclei through a process called erythropoiesis. This
is different from the mature erythrocytes of all other verte-
brates, which remain nucleated. As mammalian erythro-
cytes age, they are removed from the blood by phagocytic
cells of the spleen, bone marrow, and liver. Balancing this
loss, new erythrocytes are constantly formed in the bone
marrow.

Leukocytes Defend the Body

Less than 1% of the cells in human blood are leukocytes,
or white blood cells; there are only 1 or 2 leukocytes for
every 1000 erythrocytes. Leukocytes are larger than ery-
throcytes and have nuclei. Furthermore, leukocytes are not
confined to the blood as erythrocytes are, but can migrate
out of capillaries into the interstitial (tissue) fluid.

There are several kinds of leukocytes, each of which
plays a specific role in defending the body against invading
microorganisms and other foreign substances, as described
in Chapter 57. Granular leukocytes include neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils, which are named according to
the staining properties of granules in their cytoplasm.
Nongranular leukocytes include monocytes and lym-
phocytes. Neutrophils are the most numerous of the
leukocytes, followed in order by lymphocytes, monocytes,
eosinophils, and basophils.

Platelets Help Blood to Clot

Megakaryocytes are large cells present in bone marrow.
Pieces of cytoplasm are pinched off of the megakaryocytes
and become platelets. Platelets play an important role in

 

Collagen fibers

     

 

 

Vessel is a

damaged, ———__ Red blood

exposing Se cell

surrounding

tissue to blood. —— — Platelet
Blood vessel

 

Platelets adhere
and become
sticky, forming
aplug.

 

 

 

 

 

Cascade of enzymatic reactions
is triggered by platelets, plasma
factors, and damaged tissue.

 

 

 

 

 

 

V

Prothrombin |———>

 

 

Thrombin

t

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fibrinogen | ———>| Fibrin
Fibrin threads
Threads of fibrin
trap erythrocytes

and form a clot.

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 52.6

Blood clotting. Fibrin is formed from a soluble protein,
fibrinogen, in the plasma. This reaction is catalyzed by the
enzyme thrombin, which is formed from an inactive enzyme
called prothrombin. The activation of thrombin is the last step in
a cascade of enzymatic reactions that produces a blood clot when
a blood vessel is damaged.

blood clotting. When a blood vessel is broken, smooth
muscle in the vessel walls contracts, causing the vessel to
constrict. Platelets then accumulate at the injured site and
form a plug by sticking to each other and to the surround-
ing tissues. This plug is reinforced by threads of the protein
fibrin (figure 52.6), which contract to form a tighter mass.
The tightening plug of platelets, fibrin, and often trapped
erythrocytes constitutes a blood clot.

 

Erythrocytes contain hemoglobin and serve in oxygen
transport. The different types of leukocytes have
specialized functions that serve to protect the body
from invading pathogens, and the platelets participate
in blood clotting.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1041
