6.1 Biological membranes are fluid layers of lipid.

The Phospholipid Bilayer

The membranes that encase all living cells are sheets of
lipid only two molecules thick; more than 10,000 of these
sheets piled on one another would just equal the thickness
of this sheet of paper. The lipid layer that forms the foun-
dation of a cell membrane is composed of molecules called

phospholipids (figure 6.2).

Phospholipids

Like the fat molecules you studied in chapter 3, a phos-
pholipid has a backbone derived from a three-carbon
molecule called glycerol. Attached to this backbone are
fatty acids, long chains of carbon atoms ending in a car-
boxyl (—COOH) group. A fat molecule has three such
chains, one attached to each carbon in the backbone; be-
cause these chains are nonpolar, they do not form hydro-
gen bonds with water, and the fat molecule is not water-
soluble. A phospholipid, by contrast, has only two fatty
acid chains attached to its backbone. The third carbon on
the backbone is attached instead to a highly polar organic
alcohol that readily forms hydrogen bonds with water.
Because this alcohol is attached by a phosphate group,
the molecule is called a phospholipid.

One end of a phospholipid molecule is, therefore,
strongly nonpolar (water-insoluble), while the other end is
strongly polar (water-soluble). The two nonpolar fatty
acids extend in one direction, roughly parallel to each
other, and the polar alcohol group points in the other di-
rection. Because of this structure, phospholipids are often
diagrammed as a polar head with two dangling nonpolar
tails (as in figure 6.25).

Phospholipids Form Bilayer Sheets

What happens when a collection of phospholipid molecules
is placed in water? The polar water molecules repel the
long nonpolar tails of the phospholipids as the water mole-
cules seek partners for hydrogen bonding. Due to the polar
nature of the water molecules, the nonpolar tails of the
phospholipids end up packed closely together, sequestered
as far as possible from water. Every phospholipid molecule
orients to face its polar head toward water and its nonpolar
tails away. When two layers form with the tails facing each
other, no tails ever come in contact with water. The result-
ing structure is called a lipid bilayer (figure 6.3). Lipid bi-
layers form spontaneously, driven by the tendency of water
molecules to form the maximum number of hydrogen
bonds.

The nonpolar interior of a lipid bilayer impedes the pas-
sage of any water-soluble substances through the bilayer,

104 Part II Biology of the Cell

 

eS Fatty acid

 

 

 

eS Fatty acid

 

 

 

 

romzmo<rQ

Phosphorylated
alcohol

 

 

 

 

 

(@)

a

Polar
(hydrophilic) region

Nonpolar (hydrophobic) region

 

(b)

FIGURE 6.2

Phospholipid structure. (a) A phospholipid is a composite
molecule similar to a triacylglycerol, except that only two fatty
acids are bound to the glycerol backbone; a phosphorylated
alcohol occupies the third position on the backbone. (#) Because
the phosphorylated alcohol usually extends from one end of the
molecule and the two fatty acid chains extend from the other,
phospholipids are often diagrammed as a polar head with two
nonpolar hydrophobic tails.

just as a layer of oil impedes the passage of a drop of water
(“oil and water do not mix”). This barrier to the passage of
water-soluble substances is the key biological property of
the lipid bilayer. In addition to the phospholipid molecules
that make up the lipid bilayer, the membranes of every cell
also contain proteins that extend through the lipid bilayer,
providing passageways across the membrane.

 

The basic foundation of biological membranes is a
lipid bilayer, which forms spontaneously. In such a
layer, the nonpolar hydrophobic tails of phospholipid
molecules point inward, forming a nonpolar barrier to
water-soluble molecules.

 
