 

 

   
   

Neurotransmitter

Gate closed

 

 

FIGURE 54.17

Different neurotransmitters can have
different effects. (a) An excitatory
neurotransmitter promotes a
depolarization, or excitatory postsynaptic
potential (EPSP). (b) An inhibitory
neurotransmitter promotes a
hyperpolarization, or inhibitory
postsynaptic potential (IPSP).

 

postsynaptic membrane produces a depolarization (figure
54.17a) called an excitatory postsynaptic potential
(EPSP). The EPSP can now open the voltage-gated chan-
nels for Na* and K* that are responsible for action poten-
tials. Because the postsynaptic cell we are discussing is a
skeletal muscle cell, the action potentials it produces stimu-
late muscle contraction through the mechanisms discussed
in chapter 50.

If ACh stimulates muscle contraction, we must be able
to eliminate ACh from the synaptic cleft in order to relax
our muscles. This illustrates a general principle: molecules
such as neurotransmitters and certain hormones must be
quickly eliminated after secretion if they are to be effective
regulators. In the case of ACh, the elimination is achieved
by an enzyme in the postsynaptic membrane called acetyl-
cholinesterase (AChE). This enzyme is one of the fastest
known, cleaving ACh into inactive fragments. Nerve gas
and the agricultural insecticide parathion are potent in-
hibitors of AChE and in humans can produce severe spastic
paralysis and even death if the respiratory muscles become
paralyzed.

Although ACh acts as a neurotransmitter between motor
neurons and skeletal muscle cells, many neurons also use
ACh as a neurotransmitter at their synapses with other
neurons; in these cases, the postsynaptic membrane is gen-
erally on the dendrites or cell body of the second neuron.
The EPSPs produced must then travel through the den-
drites and cell body to the initial segment of the axon,
where the first voltage-regulated channels needed for ac-
tion potentials are located. This is where the first action

Neurotransmitter

Gate closed

 

potentials will be produced, providing that the EPSP depo-
larization is above the threshold needed to trigger action
potentials.

Glutamate, Glycine, and GABA

Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the
vertebrate CNS, producing EPSPs and stimulating action
potentials in the postsynaptic neurons. Although normal
amounts produce physiological stimulation, excessive stim-
ulation by glutamate has been shown to cause neurodegen-
eration, as in Huntington’s chorea.

Glycine and GABA (an acronym for gamma-
aminobutyric acid) are inhibitory neurotransmitters. If
you remember that action potentials are triggered by a
threshold level of depolarization, you will understand
why hyperpolarization of the membrane would cause in-
hibition. These neurotransmitters cause the opening of
chemically regulated gated channels for Cl, which has a
concentration gradient favoring its diffusion into the
neuron. Because Cl is negatively charged, it makes the
inside of the membrane even more negative than it is at
rest—from —70 mV to -85 mV, for example (figure
54.17). This hyperpolarization is called an inhibitory
postsynaptic potential (IPSP), and is very important for
neural control of body movements and other brain func-
tions. Interestingly, the drug diazepam (Valium) causes
its sedative and other effects by enhancing the binding of
GABA to its receptors and thereby increasing the effec-
tiveness of GABA at the synapse.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1083
