Precapillary
sphincters open

Through-flow
channel

     

Arteriole

Capillaries

Venule

(a) Blood flows through capillary network
FIGURE 52.8

Precapillary
sphincters closed

   

(b) Blood flow in capillary network is limited

The capillary network connects arteries with veins. (@) Most of the exchange between the blood and the extracellular fluid occurs while
the blood is in the capillaries. Entrance to the capillaries is controlled by bands of muscle called precapillary sphincters at the entrance to
each capillary. (6) When a sphincter contracts, it closes off the capillary. By contracting these sphincters, the body can limit the amount of
blood in the capillary network of a particular tissue, and thus control the rate of exchange in that tissue.

quently, the blood decreases in velocity as it passes through
the capillary beds, allowing more time for it to exchange
materials with the surrounding extracellular fluid. By the
time the blood reaches the end of a capillary, it has released
some of its oxygen and nutrients and picked up carbon
dioxide and other waste products. Blood also loses most of
its pressure in passing through the vast capillary networks,
and so is under very low pressure when it enters the veins.

Venules and Veins

Blood flows from the venules to ever larger veins, and ulti-
mately back to the heart. Venules and veins have the same
tissue layers as arteries, but they have a thinner layer of
smooth muscle. Less muscle is needed because the pressure
in the veins is only about one-tenth that in the arteries.
Most of the blood in the cardiovascular system is contained
within veins, which can expand when needed to hold addi-
tional amounts of blood. You can see the expanded veins in
your feet when you stand for a long time.

When the blood pressure in the veins is so low, how
does the blood return to the heart from the feet and legs?
The venous pressure alone is not sufficient, but several
sources provide help. Most significantly, skeletal muscles
surrounding the veins can contract to move blood by
squeezing the veins. Blood moves in one direction through
the veins back to the heart with the help of venous valves
(figure 52.9). When a person’s veins expand too much with
blood, the venous valves may no longer work and the
blood may pool in the veins. Veins in this condition are
known as varicose veins.

Blood flows
toward heart

Open
valve

Vein

 

Contracting
skeletal
muscles

Valve
closed

 

FIGURE 52.9

One-way flow of blood through veins. Venous valves ensure
that blood moves through the veins in only one direction, back to
the heart.

 

Blood is pumped from the heart into the arterial
system, which branches into fine arterioles. This blood
is delivered into the thinnest and most numerous of
vessels, the capillaries, where exchanges with the tissues
occur. Blood returns to the heart through veins.

 

Chapter 52. Circulation 1043
