Locomotion

 

Concept Outline

50.1 A skeletal system supports movement in animals.

Types of Skeletons. There are three types of skeletal
systems found in animals: hydrostatic skeletons,
exoskeletons, and endoskeletons. Hydrostatic skeletons
function by the movement of fluid in a body cavity.
Exoskeletons are made of tough exterior coverings on
which muscles attach to move the body. Endoskeletons are
rigid internal bones or cartilage which move the body by
the contraction of muscles attached to the skeleton.

The Structure of Bone. The human skeleton, an
example of an endoskeleton, is made of bone that contains
cells called osteocytes within a calcified matrix.

50.2 Skeletal muscles contract to produce movements
at joints.
Types of Joints. The joints where bones meet may be
immovable, slightly movable, or freely movable.

Actions of Skeletal Muscles. Synergistic and
antagonistic muscles act on the skeleton to move the body.

50.3 Muscle contraction powers animal locomotion.

The Sliding Filament Mechanism of Contraction.
Thick and thin myofilaments slide past one another to
cause muscle shortening.

The Control of Muscle Contraction. During
contraction Ca** moves aside a regulatory protein which
had been preventing cross-bridges from attaching to the
thin filaments. Nerves stimulate the release of Ca++ from its
storage depot so that contraction can occur.

Types of Muscle Fibers. Muscle fibers can be
categorized as slow-twitch (slow to fatigue) or fast-twitch
(fatigue quickly but can provide a fast source of power).
Comparing Cardiac and Smooth Muscles. Cardiac
muscle cells are interconnected to form a single functioning
unit. Smooth muscles lack the myofilament organization
found in striated muscle but they still contract via the
sliding filament mechanism.

Modes of Animal Locomotion. Animals rarely move in
straight lines. Their movements are adjusted both by
mechanical feedback and by neural control. Muscles
generate power for movement, and also act as springs,
brakes, struts, and shock absorbers.

 

FIGURE 50.1

On the move. The movements made by this sidewinder
rattlesnake are the result of strong muscle contractions acting on.
the bones of the skeleton. Without muscles and some type of
skeletal system, complex locomotion as shown here would not be
possible.

lants and fungi move only by growing, or as the passive

passengers of wind and water. Of the three multicellu-
lar kingdoms, only animals explore their environment in an
active way, through locomotion. In this chapter we exam-
ine how vertebrates use muscles connected to bones to
achieve movement. The rattlesnake in figure 50.1 slithers
across the sand by a rhythmic contraction of the muscles
sheathing its body. Humans walk by contracting muscles in
their legs. Although our focus in this chapter will be on
vertebrates, it is important to realize that essentially all ani-
mals employ muscles. When a mosquito flies, its wings are
moved rapidly through the air by quickly contracting flight
muscles. When an earthworm burrows through the soil, its
movement is driven by strong muscles pushing its body
past the surrounding dirt.

999
