52.4 The cardiac cycle drives the cardiovascular system.

The Cardiac Cycle

The human heart, like that of all mammals and birds, is re-
ally two separate pumping systems operating within a sin-
gle organ. The right pump sends blood to the lungs, and
the left pump sends blood to the rest of the body.

The heart has two pairs of valves. One pair, the atri-
oventricular (AV) valves, guards the opening between the
atria and ventricles. The AV valve on the right side is the
tricuspid valve, and the AV valve on the left is the bicus-
pid, or mitral, valve. Another pair of valves, together called
the semilunar valves, guard the exits from the ventricles to
the arterial system; the pulmonary valve is located at the
exit of the right ventricle, and the aortic valve is located at
the exit of the left ventricle. These valves open and close as
the heart goes through its cardiac cycle of rest (diastole) and
contraction (systole). The sound of these valves closing pro-
duces the “lub-dub” sounds heard with a stethoscope.

Blood returns to the resting heart through veins that
empty into the right and left atria. As the atria fill and the
pressure in them rises, the AV valves open to admit the
blood into the ventricles. The ventricles become about
80% filled during this time. Contraction of the atria wrings
out the final 20% of the 80 milliliters of blood the ventri-
cles will receive, on average, in a resting person. These
events occur while the ventricles are relaxing, a period
called ventricular diastole.

After a slight delay, the ventricles contract; this period of
contraction is known as ventricular systole. Contraction of
each ventricle increases the pressure within each chamber,
causing the AV valves to forcefully close (the “lub” sound),
thereby preventing blood from backing up into the atria.
Immediately after the AV valves close, the pressure in the
ventricles forces the semilunar valves open so that blood
can be pushed out into the arterial system. As the ventricles
relax, closing of the semilunar valves prevents back flow
(the “dub” sound).

The right and left pulmonary arteries deliver oxygen-
depleted blood to the right and left lungs. As previously
mentioned, these return blood to the left atrium of the heart
via the pulmonary veins. The aorta and all its branches are
systemic arteries (figure 52.15), carrying oxygen-rich blood
from the left ventricle to all parts of the body. The coro-
nary arteries are the first branches off the aorta; these sup-
ply the heart muscle itself. Other systemic arteries branch
from the aorta as it makes an arch above the heart, and as it
descends and traverses the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
These branches provide all body organs with oxygenated
blood. The blood from the body organs, now lower in oxy-
gen, returns to the heart in the systemic veins. These even-
tually empty into two major veins: the superior vena cava,
which drains the upper body, and the inferior vena cava,
which drains the lower body. These veins empty into the
right atrium and thereby complete the systemic circulation.

1048 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Blood
pressure
gauge

cal 0
0! * +200 50! § 200
off250

—

Sy Stethoscope

 
 
 

Cuff 7

»

Cuff pressure: 150

=

 

Cuff pressure: 120 Cuff pressure: 75

No sound: Pulse sound: Sound stops:
artery closed Systolic pressure Diastolic pressure
FIGURE 52.15

Measurement of blood pressure.

Measuring Arterial Blood Pressure

As the ventricles contract, great pressure is generated in the
arteries throughout the body. You can tell this by feeling
your pulse, either on the inside of your wrist, below the
thumb or on the sides of your neck below your ear and jaw-
bone. The contraction of the ventricles has to be strong
enough to force blood through capillary beds but not too
strong as to cause damage to smaller arteries and arterioles.
Doctors measure your blood pressure to determine how
hard your heart is working.

The measuring device used is called a sphygmomanometer
and measures the blood pressure of the brachial artery found
on the inside part of the arm, at the elbow (figure 52.15). A
cuff wrapped around the upper part of the arm is tightened
enough to stop the flow of blood to the lower part of the arm.
As the cuff is loosened, blood will begin pulsating through
the artery and can be detected using a stethoscope. Two mea-
surements are recorded: the systolic and the diastolic pres-
sure. The systolic pressure is the peak pressure during ven-
tricular systole (contraction of the ventricle). The diastolic
pressure is the minimum pressure between heartbeats (repo-
larization of the ventricles). The blood pressure is written as a
ratio of systolic over diastolic pressure, and for a healthy per-
son in his or her twenties, a typical blood pressure is 120/75
(measurement in mm of mercury). A condition called byper-
tension (high blood pressure) occurs when the ventricles expe-
rience very strong contractions, and the blood pressure is ele-
vated, cither systolic pressure greater than 150 or diastolic
pressures greater than 90.

 

The cardiac cycle consists of systole and diastole; the
ventricles contract at systole and relax at diastole.

 
