Essential Nutrients

Over the course of their evolution, many animals have lost
the ability to synthesize specific substances that neverthe-
less continue to play critical roles in their metabolism. Sub-
stances that an animal cannot manufacture for itself but
which are necessary for its health must be obtained in the
diet and are referred to as essential nutrients.

Included among the essential nutrients are vitamins, cer-
tain organic substances required in trace amounts. Hu-
mans, apes, monkeys, and guinea pigs, for example, have
lost the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid (vitamin C). If vi-
tamin C is not supplied in sufficient quantities in their
diets, they will develop scurvy, a potentially fatal disease.
Humans require at least 13 different vitamins (table 51.3).

Some essential nutrients are required in more than trace
amounts. Many vertebrates, for example, are unable to syn-
thesize 1 or more of the 20 amino acids used in making
proteins. These essential amino acids must be obtained from
proteins in the food they eat. There are nine essential
amino acids for humans. People who are vegetarians must

choose their foods so that the essential amino acids in one
food complement those in another.

In addition, all vertebrates have lost the ability to syn-
thesize certain unsaturated fatty acids and therefore must
obtain them in food. On the other hand, some essential nu-
trients that vertebrates can synthesize cannot be manufac-
tured by the members of other animal groups. For exam-
ple, vertebrates can synthesize cholesterol, a key
component of steroid hormones, but some carnivorous in-
sects cannot.

Food also supplies essential minerals such as calcium,
phosphorus, and other inorganic substances, including a
wide variety of trace elements such as zinc and molybdenum
which are required in very small amounts (see table 2.1).
Animals obtain trace elements either directly from plants
or from animals that have eaten plants.

 

The body requires vitamins and minerals obtained in
food. Also, food must provide particular essential amino
acids and fatty acids that the body cannot manufacture
by itself.

 

Table 51.3 Major Vitamins

 

Vitamin Function Source Deficiency Symptoms
Vitamin A Used in making visual pigments, maintenance Green vegetables, Night blindness, flaky skin
(retinol) of epithelial tissues milk products, liver

B-complex vitamins

 

By Coenzyme in CO; removal during cellular ‘Meat, grains, legumes _Beriberi, weakening of heart,
respiration edema

B, Part of coenzymes FAD and FMN, which play Many different kinds Inflammation and breakdown

(riboflavin) metabolic roles of foods of skin, eye irritation

B; Part of coenzymes NAD* and NADP+ Liver, lean meats, Pellagra, inflammation of

(niacin) grains nerves, mental disorders

Bs Part of coenzyme-A, a key connection between Many different kinds _ Rare: fatigue, loss of

(pantothenic acid) carbohydrate and fat metabolism of foods coordination

Bg Coenzyme in many phases of amino acid Cereals, vegetables, Anemia, convulsions,

(pyridoxine) metabolism meats irritability

By Coenzyme in the production of nucleic acids Red meats, dairy Pernicious anemia

(cyanocobalamin) products

Biotin Coenzyme in fat synthesis and amino acid ‘Meat, vegetables Rare: depression, nausea
metabolism

Folic acid Coenzyme in amino acid and nucleic acid Green vegetables Anemia, diarrhea

metabolism
Vitamin C

help maintain resistance to infection

Important in forming collagen, cement of bone,
teeth, connective tissue of blood vessels; may

Fruit, green leafy
vegetables

Scurvy, breakdown of skin,
blood vessels

Vitamin D Increases absorption of calcium and promotes Dairy products, cod Rickets, bone deformities
(calciferol) bone formation liver oil

Vitamin E Protects fatty acids and cell membranes from Margarine, seeds, Rare

(tocopherol) oxidation green leafy vegetables

Vitamin K Essential to blood clotting Green leafy vegetables Severe bleeding

Chapter 51 Fueling Body Activities: Digestion 1035
