51.3 The small and large intestines have very different functions.

The Small Intestine
Digestion in the Small Intestine

The capacity of the small intestine is limited, and its diges-
tive processes take time. Consequently, efficient digestion
requires that only relatively small amounts of chyme be in-
troduced from the stomach into the small intestine at any
one time. Coordination between gastric and intestinal ac-
tivities is regulated by neural and hormonal signals, which
we will describe in a later section.

The small intestine is approximately 4.5 meters long in a
living person, but is 6 meters long at autopsy when the
muscles relax. The first 25 centimeters is the duodenum;
the remainder of the small intestine is divided into the je-
junum and the ileum. The duodenum receives acidic
chyme from the stomach, digestive enzymes and bicarbon-
ate from the pancreas, and bile from the liver and gallblad-
der. The pancreatic juice enzymes digest larger food mole-
cules into smaller fragments. This occurs primarily in the
duodenum and jejunum.

The epithelial wall of the small intestine is covered with
tiny, fingerlike projections called villi (singular, villus; figure

Small intestine i,

   
  
   

Microvilli

  

Nucleus

Cell membrane

1024 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

  
  
  

51.12). In turn, each of the epithelial cells lining the villi is
covered on its apical surface (the side facing the lumen) by
many foldings of the plasma membrane that form cytoplas-
mic extensions called microvilli, These are quite tiny and can
be seen clearly only with an electron microscope (figure
51.13). Ina light micrograph, the microvilli resemble the
bristles of a brush, and for that reason the epithelial wall of
the small intestine is also called a brush border.

The villi and microvilli greatly increase the surface area
of the small intestine; in humans, this surface area is 300
square meters! It is over this vast surface that the products
of digestion are absorbed. The microvilli also participate in
digestion because a number of digestive enzymes are em-
bedded within the epithelial cells’ plasma membranes, with
their active sites exposed to the chyme (figure 51.14).
These brush border enzymes include those that hydrolyze
the disaccharides lactose and sucrose, among others (table
51.1). Many adult humans lose the ability to produce the
brush border enzyme Jactase and therefore cannot digest
lactose (milk sugar), a rather common condition called /ac-
tose intolerance. The brush border enzymes complete the di-
gestive process that started with the action of the pancre-
atic enzymes released into the duodenum.

Mucosa

Submucosa

Muscularis

 

Epithelial cell

 

Capillary |— villus
Lacteal
— FIGURE 51.12
Vein ‘The small intestine.
Cross-section of the small
Artery intestine; the
enlargements show villi
Lymphatic duct and an epithelial cell with

numerous microvilli.
