When the action potential is recorded on an oscilloscope,
this part of the action potential appears as the rising phase of
a spike (figure 54.10). The membrane potential never quite
reaches +60 mV because the Na* channels close and, at
about the same time, the K* channels that were previously
closed begin to open. The action potential thus peaks at
about +30 mV. Opening the K* channels allows K* to dif-
fuse out of the cell, repolarizing the plasma membrane. On
an oscilloscope, this repolarization of the membrane ap-
pears as the falling phase of the action potential. In many
cases, the repolarization carries the membrane potential to
a value slightly more negative than the resting potential for
a brief period because K* channels remain open, resulting
in an undershoot. The entire sequence of events in an action
potential is over in a few milliseconds.

Action potentials have two distinguishing characteristics.
First, they follow an all-or-none law: each depolarization
produces either a full action potential, because the voltage-
gated Na* channels open completely at threshold, or none
at all. Secondly, action potentials are always separate
events; they cannot add together or interfere with one an-
other as graded potentials can because the membrane en-
ters a brief refractory period after it generates an action po-
tential during which time voltage-gated Na* channels
cannot reopen.

The production of an action potential results entirely
from the passive diffusion of ions. However, at the end of
each action potential, the cytoplasm has a little more Na*
and a little less K* than it did at rest. The constant activity
of the sodium-potassium pumps compensates for these
changes. Thus, although active transport is not required to
produce action potentials, it is needed to maintain the ion
gradients.

Propagation of Action Potentials

Although we often speak of axons as conducting action po-
tentials (impulses), action potentials do not really travel
along an axon—they are events that are reproduced at dif-
ferent points along the axon membrane. This can occur for
two reasons: action potentials are stimulated by depolariza-
tion, and an action potential can serve as a depolarization
stimulus. Each action potential, during its rising phase, re-
flects a reversal in membrane polarity (from —70 mV to +30
mV) as Nat diffuses rapidly into the axon. The positive
charges can depolarize the next region of membrane to
threshold, so that the next region produces its own action
potential (figure 54.11). Meanwhile, the previous region of
membrane repolarizes back to the resting membrane po-
tential. This is analogous to people in a stadium perform-
ing the “wave”: individuals stay in place as they stand up
(depolarize), raise their hands (peak of the action potential),
and sit down again (repolarize).

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cell
membrane
a ee
Cytoplasm ——
tee tte tees
-|4 +++ + 4+ 444
=
ty
Depolarized
Repolarized
Resting
FIGURE 54.11

Propagation of an action potential in an unmyelinated axon.
When one region produces an action potential and undergoes a
reversal of polarity, it serves as a depolarization stimulus for the
next region of the axon. In this way, action potentials are
regenerated along each small region of the unmyelinated axon
membrane.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1079
