54.4 The central nervous system consists of the brain and spinal cord.

The Evolution of the Vertebrate
Brain

Sponges are the only major phylum of multicellular ani-
mals that lack nerves. The simplest nervous systems occur
among cnidarians (figure 54.22): all neurons are similar and
are linked to one another in a web, or nerve net. There is no
associative activity, no control of complex actions, and little
coordination The simplest animals with associative activity
in the nervous system are the free-living flatworms, phylum
Platyhelminthes. Running down the bodies of these flat-
worms are two nerve cords; peripheral nerves extend out-
ward to the muscles of the body. The two nerve cords con-
verge at the front end of the body, forming an enlarged
mass of nervous tissue that also contains associative neu-
rons with synapses connecting neurons to one another.
This primitive “brain” is a rudimentary central nervous sys-
tem and permits a far more complex control of muscular
responses than is possible in cnidarians.

Central nervous
system

an

Peripheral

    

Cnidarian

Associative
neurons

  

FIGURE 54.22

All of the subsequent evolutionary changes in nervous
systems can be viewed as a series of elaborations on the
characteristics already present in flatworms. For example,
earthworms exhibit a central nervous system that is con-
nected to all other parts of the body by peripheral nerves.
And, in arthropods, the central coordination of complex re-
sponse is increasingly localized in the front end of the
nerve cord. As this region evolved, it came to contain a
progressively larger number of associative interneurons,
and to develop tracts, which are highways within the brain
that connect associative elements.

Casts of the interior braincases of fossil agnathans, fishes
that swam 500 million years ago, have revealed much about
the early evolutionary stages of the vertebrate brain. Al-
though small, these brains already had the three divisions
that characterize the brains of all contemporary vertebrates:
(1) the hindbrain, or rhombencephalon; (2) the midbrain,
or mesencephalon; and (3) the forebrain, or prosen-

cephalon (figure 54.23).

  
   
  
  
  

Cerebrum — <=

oe

       
     
  

  
 

  
  

Cerebellum
Spinal cord are
[ nerves
Ventral nerve BS
cords ae
BS
FAN |_ Thoracic
as nerves
A va
nt
Lumbar
| nerves

 

Femoral
nerve

Sciatic

nerve

Tibial
nerve

Echinoderm }

Evolution of the nervous system. Animals exhibit a progressive elaboration of organized nerve cords and the centralization of complex

responses in the front end of the nerve cord.

1088 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
