see a remarkable difference between fishes and reptiles, on
the one hand, and birds and mammals, on the other.
Mammals have brains that are particularly large relative to
their body mass. This is especially true of porpoises and
humans; the human brain weighs about 1.4 kilograms. The
increase in brain size in the mammals largely reflects the
great enlargement of the cerebrum, the dominant part of
the mammalian brain. The cerebrum is the center for cor-
relation, association, and learning in the mammalian brain.
It receives sensory data from the thalamus and issues
motor commands to the spinal cord via descending tracts
of axons.

In vertebrates, the central nervous system is composed
of the brain and the spinal cord (table 54.3). These two
structures are responsible for most of the information
processing within the nervous system and consist primar-
ily of interneurons and neuroglia. Ascending tracts carry
sensory information to the brain. Descending tracts carry
impulses from the brain to the motor neurons and in-
terneurons in the spinal cord that control the muscles of
the body.

 

The vertebrate brain consists of three primary regions:
the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The hindbrain
was the principal component of the brain of early
vertebrates; it was devoted to the control of motor
activity. In vertebrates more advanced than fishes, the
processing of information is increasingly centered in
the forebrain.

 

Table 54.3 Subdivisions of the Central Nervous System.

Major
Subdivision Function
SPINAL CORD Spinal reflexes; relays sensory
information
HINDBRAIN
(thombencephalon)
Medulla oblongata Sensory nuclei; reticular activating
system; visceral control
Pons - ;
Reticular activating system;
visceral control
an Coordination of movements;
balance
MIDBRAIN Reflexes involving eyes and ears
(Mesencephalon)
FOREBRAIN
(Prosencephalon)

Thalamus Relay station for ascending
sensory and descending tracts;
visceral control

Hypothalamus Visceral control; neuroendocrine

control

Telencephalon (cerebrum)
Basal ganglia Motor control
Corpus callosum Connects the two hemispheres

Hippocampus
(limbic system)

Memory; emotion

Cerebral cortex. Higher functions

 

 

  
 
   

 

  
  
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

Elephant.
@ Mammals
Birds a Homo sapiens + * Porpoise Blue
1000}- oO Fish 1000 |- whale
Reptiles . Australopithecus

a m Dinosaurs . Baboon + Male gorilla

§ 100 |- i. Wolf Lion

e Chimpanzee

3 10;- -

E -

€ o Vampire bat

s IP r

a °

+ Mole
O1- EF
Vertebrates Mammals
I 1 1 1 1 L 1 1 1 L L 1 1 1
0.01 01 1 10 100 1000 10,000 0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000 10,000
(a) Body mass in kilograms (b)

FIGURE 54.26

Brain mass versus body mass. Among most vertebrates, brain mass is a relatively constant proportion of body mass, so that a plot of
brain mass versus body mass gives a straight line. (@) However, the proportion of brain mass to body mass is much greater in birds than in
reptiles, and it is greater still in mammals. () Among mammals, humans have the greatest brain mass per unit of body mass (that is, the
farthest perpendicular distance from the plotted line). In second place are the porpoises.

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1091
