Esophagus and Stomach
Structure and Function of the Esophagus

Swallowed food enters a muscular tube called the esopha-
gus, which connects the pharynx to the stomach. In adult
humans, the esophagus is about 25 centimeters long; the
upper third is enveloped in skeletal muscle, for voluntary
control of swallowing, while the lower two-thirds is sur-
rounded by involuntary smooth muscle. The swallowing
center stimulates successive waves of contraction in these
muscles that move food along the esophagus to the stom-
ach. These rhythmic waves of muscular contraction are
called peristalsis (figure 51.10); they enable humans and
other vertebrates to swallow even if they are upside
down.

In many vertebrates, the movement of food from the
esophagus into the stomach is controlled by a ring of circu-
lar smooth muscle, or a sphincter, that opens in response to
the pressure exerted by the food. Contraction of this
sphincter prevents food in the stomach from moving back
into the esophagus. Rodents and horses have a true sphinc-
ter at this site and thus cannot regurgitate, while humans
lack a true sphincter and so are able to regurgitate. Nor-
mally, however, the human esophagus is closed off except
during swallowing.

Structure and Function of the Stomach

The stomach (figure 51.11) is a saclike portion of the diges-
tive tract. Its inner surface is highly convoluted, enabling it
to fold up when empty and open out like an expanding bal-
loon as it fills with food. Thus, while the human stomach
has a volume of only about 50 milliliters when empty, it
may expand to contain 2 to 4 liters of food when full. Car-
nivores that engage in sporadic gorging as an important
survival strategy possess stomachs that are able to distend
much more than that.

Secretory Systems

The stomach contains an extra layer of smooth muscle for
churning food and mixing it with gastric juice, an acidic se-
cretion of the tubular gastric glands of the mucosa (figure
51.11). These exocrine glands contain two kinds of secre-
tory cells: parietal cells, which secrete hydrochloric acid
(HCI); and chief cells, which secrete pepsinogen, a weak
protease (protein-digesting enzyme) that requires a very
low pH to be active. This low pH is provided by the HCl.
Activated pepsinogen molecules then cleave one another at
specific sites, producing a much more active protease,
pepsin. This process of secreting a relatively inactive en-
zyme that is then converted into a more active enzyme out-
side the cell prevents the chief cells from digesting them-
selves. It should be noted that only proteins are partially
digested in the stomach—there is no significant digestion
of carbohydrates or fats.

1022 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Epiglottis

Esophagus

 

Wy Relaxed muscles
\

Contracted muscles

 

FIGURE 51.10

The esophagus and peristalsis. After food has entered the
esophagus, rhythmic waves of muscular contraction, called
peristalsis, move the food down to the stomach.

Action of Acid

The human stomach produces about 2 liters of HCI and
other gastric secretions every day, creating a very acidic so-
lution inside the stomach. The concentration of HCl in
this solution is about 10 millimolar, corresponding to a pH
of 2. Thus, gastric juice is about 250,000 times more acidic
than blood, whose normal pH is 7.4. The low pH in the
stomach helps denature food proteins, making them easier
to digest, and keeps pepsin maximally active. Active pepsin
hydrolyzes food proteins into shorter chains of polypep-
tides that are not fully digested until the mixture enters the
small intestine. The mixture of partially digested food and
gastric juice is called chyme.
