53.1
Fick’s Law of Diffusion

Respiration involves the diffusion of gases across plasma
membranes. Because plasma membranes must be sur-
rounded by water to be stable, the external environment in
gas exchange is always aqueous. This is true even in terres-
trial animals; in these cases, oxygen from air dissolves in a
thin layer of fluid that covers the respiratory surfaces, such
as the alveoli in lungs.

In vertebrates, the gases diffuse into the aqueous layer
covering the epithelial cells that line the respiratory organs.
The diffusion process is passive, driven only by the differ-
ence in OQ) and CO) concentrations on the two sides of the
membranes. In general, the rate of diffusion between two
regions is governed by a relationship known as Fick’s Law
of Diffusion:

= 4p
R=Dx Az
In this equation,

R= the rate of diffusion; the amount of oxygen or carbon
dioxide diffusing per unit of time;

Epidermis

 

Respiration involves the diffusion of gases.

D = the diffusion constant;

A =the area over which diffusion takes place;

Ap = the difference in concentration (for gases, the difference
in their partial pressures) between the interior of the
organism and the external environment; and

d=the distance across which diffusion takes place.

Major changes in the mechanism of respiration have oc-
curred during the evolution of animals (figure 53.2) that
have tended to optimize the rate of diffusion R. By in-
specting Fick’s Law, you can see that natural selection can
optimize R by favoring changes that (1) increase the sur-
face area A; (2) decrease the distance d; or (3) increase the
concentration difference, as indicated by Ap. The evolu-
tion of respiratory systems has involved changes in all of
these factors.

 

Fick’s Law of Diffusion states that the rate of diffusion
across a membrane depends on surface area,
concentration (partial pressure) difference, and
distance.

 

Epidermis

 

 

 

FIGURE 53.2

Gas exchange may take place in a variety of ways. (2) Gases diffuse directly into single-celled organisms. (b) Amphibians and many
other animals respire across their skin. () Echinoderms have protruding papulae, which provide an increased respiratory surface area. (d)
Inspects respire through an extensive tracheal system. (¢) The gills of fishes provide a very large respiratory surface area and
countercurrent exchange. (f ) The alveoli in mammalian lungs provide a large respiratory surface area but do not permit countercurrent
exchange.

1054 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
