Myosin head

      

Myosin molecule

FIGURE 50.10

Myosin head

 

Thick filament

Thick filaments are composed of myosin. (7) Each myosin molecule consists of two polypeptide chains wrapped around each other; at
the end of each chain is a globular region referred to as the “head.” (}) Thick filaments consist of myosin molecules combined into bundles

from which the heads protrude at regular intervals.

Electron micrographs reveal cross-
bridges that extend from the thick to
the thin filaments, suggesting a mecha-
nism that might cause the filaments to
slide. To understand how this is accom-
plished, we have to examine the thick
and thin filaments at a molecular level.
Biochemical studies show that each
thick filament is composed of many

myosin proteins packed together, and _ Thin filament
every myosin molecule has a “head” re-
gion that protrudes from the thick fila~

FIGURE 50.11

ments (figure 50.10). These myosin
heads form the cross-bridges seen in
electron micrographs. Biochemical
studies also show that each thin filament
consists primarily of many globular
actin proteins twisted into a double helix (figure 50.11).
Therefore, if we were able to see a sarcomere at a molecu-
lar level, it would have the structure depicted in figure
50.124.

Before the myosin heads bind to the actin of the thin
filaments, they act as ATPase enzymes, splitting ATP into
ADP and Pj. This activates the heads, “cocking” them so
that they can bind to actin and form cross-bridges. Once a
myosin head binds to actin, it undergoes a conformational
(shape) change, pulling the thin filament toward the cen-

1006 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Actin molecules

 

Thin filaments are composed of globular actin proteins. Two rows of actin proteins
are twisted together in a helix to produce the thin filaments.

ter of the sarcomere (figure 50.124) in a power stroke. At
the end of the power stroke, the myosin head binds to a
new molecule of ATP. This allows the head to detach
from actin and continue the cross-bridge cycle (figure
50.13), which repeats as long as the muscle is stimulated
to contract.

In death, the cell can no longer produce ATP and
therefore the cross-bridges cannot be broken—this
causes the muscle stiffness of death, or rigor mortis. A liv-
ing cell, however, always has enough ATP to allow the
