52.1

Open and Closed Circulatory
Systems

Among the unicellular protists, oxygen and nutrients are
obtained directly from the aqueous external environment
by simple diffusion. The body wall is only two cell layers
thick in cnidarians, such as Hydra, and flatworms, such as
Planaria. Each cell layer is in direct contact with either
the external environment or the gastrovascular cavity (fig-
ure 52.2a). The gastrovascular cavity of Hydra (see chap-
ter 51) extends from the body cavity into the tentacles,
and that of Planaria branches extensively to supply every
cell with oxygen and nutrients. Larger animals, however,
have tissues that are several cell layers thick, so that many
cells are too far away from the body surface or digestive
cavity to exchange materials directly with the environ-
ment. Instead, oxygen and nutrients are transported from
the environment and digestive cavity to the body cells by
an internal fluid within a circulatory system.

There are two main types of circulatory systems: open or
closed. In an open circulatory system, such as that found in
mollusks and arthropods (figure 52.24), there is no distinc
tion between the circulating fluid (blood) and the extracel-
lular fluid of the body tissues (interstitial fluid or lymph).
This fluid is thus called hemolymph. In insects, the heart
is a muscular tube that pumps hemolymph through a net-
work of channels and cavities in the body. The fluid then
drains back into the central cavity.

In a closed circulatory system, the circulating fluid, or
blood, is always enclosed within blood vessels that trans-
port blood away from and back to a pump, the heart. An-
nelids (see chapter 45) and all vertebrates have a closed cir-
culatory system. In annelids such as an earthworm, a dorsal
vessel contracts rhythmically to function as a pump. Blood
is pumped through five small connecting arteries which
also function as pumps, to a ventral vessel, which transports

   
 

Tubular heart
@)\..

YS S
(b) Insect:

open circulation

 

Pharynx

Mouth

(a) Planaria:
gastrovascular cavity

FIGURE 52.2

The circulatory systems of animals may be open or closed.

the blood posteriorly until it eventually reenters the dorsal
vessel. Smaller vessels branch from each artery to supply
the tissues of the earthworm with oxygen and nutrients and
to transport waste products (figure 52.2c).

The Functions of Vertebrate Circulatory Systems

The vertebrate circulatory system is more elaborate than
the invertebrate circulatory system. It functions in trans-
porting oxygen and nutrients to tissues by the cardiovascu-
lar system. Blood vessels form a tubular network that per-
mits blood to flow from the heart to all the cells of the
body and then back to the heart. Arteries carry blood away
from the heart, whereas veins return blood to the heart.
Blood passes from the arterial to the venous system in capil-
Jaries, which are the thinnest and most numerous of the
blood vessels.

As blood plasma passes through capillaries, the pressure
of the blood forces some of this fluid out of the capillary
walls. Fluid derived from plasma that passes out of capillary
walls into the surrounding tissues is called interstitial
fluid. Some of this fluid returns directly to capillaries, and
some enters into lymph vessels, located in the connective
tissues around the blood vessels. This fluid, now called
Jymph, is returned to the venous blood at specific sites. The
lymphatic system is considered a part of the circulatory sys-
tem and is discussed later in this chapter.

The vertebrate circulatory system has three principal
functions: transportation, regulation, and protection.

1. Transportation. All of the substances essential for
cellular metabolism are transported by the circula-
tory system. These substances can be categorized as
follows:

a. Respiratory. Red blood cells, or erythrocytes, trans-

port oxygen to the tissue cells. In the capillaries of

Dorsal blood vessel

   
    

Ventral blood
vessel

(c) Earthworm:
closed circulation

Circulatory systems of the animal kingdom. (a) The gastrovascular cavity of Planaria serves as both a digestive and circulatory system,
delivering nutrients directly to the tissue cells by diffusion from the digestive cavity. (}) In the open circulation of an insect, hemolymph is
pumped from a tubular heart into cavities in the insect’s body; the hemolymph then returns to the blood vessels so that it can be
recirculated. (c) In the closed circulation of the earthworm, blood pumped from the hearts remains within a system of vessels that returns it
to the hearts. All vertebrates also have closed circulatory systems.

1038 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
