50.1

Types of Skeletons

Animal locomotion is accomplished through the force of
muscles acting on a rigid skeletal system. There are three
types of skeletal systems in the animal kingdom: hydraulic
skeletons, exoskeletons, and endoskeletons.

Hydrostatic skeletons are primarily found in soft-
bodied invertebrates such as earthworms and jellyfish. In
this case, a fluid-filled cavity is encircled by muscle fibers.
As the muscles contract, the fluid in the cavity moves and
changes the shape of the cavity. In an earthworm, for ex-
ample, a wave of contractions of circular muscles begins
anteriorly and compresses each segment of the body, so
that the fluid pressure pushes it forward. Contractions of
longitudinal muscles then pull the rear of the body for-
ward (figure 50.2).

Exoskeletons surround the body as a rigid hard case
in most animals. Arthropods, such as crustaceans and in-
sects, have exoskeletons made of the polysaccharide chitin
(figure 50.32). An exoskeleton offers great protection to
internal organs and resists bending. However, in order to
grow, the animal must periodically molt. During molt-
ing, the animal is particularly vulnerable to predation be-
cause its old exoskeleton has been shed. Having an exo-
skeleton also limits the size of the animal. An animal
with an exoskeleton cannot get too large because its ex-
oskeleton would have to become thicker and heavier, in
order to prevent collapse, as the animal grew larger. If an
insect were the size of a human being, its exoskeleton
would have to be so thick and heavy it would be unable
to move.

Endoskeletons, found in vertebrates and echino-
derms, are rigid internal skeletons to which muscles are
attached. Vertebrates have a flexible exterior that accom-
modates the movements of their skeleton. The en-
doskeleton of vertebrates is composed of cartilage or
bone. Unlike chitin, bone is a cellular, living tissue capa-
ble of growth, self-repair, and remodeling in response to
physical stresses.

The Vertebrate Skeleton

A vertebrate endoskeleton (figure 50.30) is divided into an
axial and an appendicular skeleton. The axial skeleton’s
bones form the axis of the body and support and protect
the organs of the head, neck, and chest. The appendicular
skeleton’s bones include the bones of the limbs, and the
pectoral and pelvic girdles that attach them to the axial
skeleton.

The bones of the skeletal system support and protect the
body, and serve as levers for the forces produced by con-
traction of skeletal muscles. Blood cells form within the
bone marrow, and the calcified matrix of bones acts as a
reservoir for calcium and phosphate ions.

1000 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

A skeletal system supports movement in animals.

Ta AT
a _ >

 

 

 

 

 

 

> >
> Ce eran

FIGURE 50.2

Locomotion in earthworms. The hydrostatic skeleton of the
earthworm uses muscles to move fluid within the segmented body
cavity changing the shape of the animal. When an earthworm’s
circular muscles contract, the internal fluid presses on the
longitudinal muscles, which then stretch to elongate segments of
the earthworms. A wave of contractions down the body of the
earthworm produces forward movement.

Chitinous outercovering

 

(a) Exoskeleton

      

Skull Scapula

(b) Endoskeleton

FIGURE 50.3

Exoskeleton and endoskeleton. (2) The hard, tough outcovering
of an arthropod, such as this crab, is its exoskeleton. (b)
Vertebrates, such as this cat, have endoskeletons. The axial
skeleton is shown in the peach shade, the appendicular skeleton in
the yellow shade. Some of the major bones are labeled.

 

There are three types of animal skeletons: hydrostatic
skeleton, exoskeleton, and endoskeleton. The
endoskeletons found in vertebrates are composed of
bone or cartilage and are organized into axial and
appendicular portions.

 
