The Lymphatic System

The cardiovascular system is considered to be a closed
system because all of its vessels are connected with one
another—none are simply open-ended. However, some
water and solutes in the blood plasma do filter through
the walls of the capillaries to form the interstitial (tissue)
fluid. This filtration is driven by the pressure of the
blood, and it helps supply the tissue cells with oxygen and
nutrients. Most of the fluid is filtered from the capillaries
near their arteriolar ends, where the blood pressure is
higher, and returned to the capillaries near their venular
ends. This return of fluid occurs by osmosis, which is dri-
ven by a higher solute concentration within the capillar-
ies. Most of the plasma proteins cannot escape through
the capillary pores because of their large size and so the
concentration of proteins in the plasma is greater than the
protein concentration in the interstitial fluid. The differ-
ence in protein concentration produces an osmotic pres-
sure, called the oncotic pressure, that causes osmosis of
water into the capillaries (figure 52.10).

Because interstitial fluid is produced because of the
blood pressure, high capillary blood pressure could cause
too much interstitial fluid to be produced. A common ex-
ample of this occurs in pregnant women, when the fetus
compresses veins and thereby increases the capillary blood
pressure in the mother’s lower limbs. The increased inter-
stitial fluid can cause swelling of the tissues, or edema, of
the feet. Edema may also result if the plasma protein con-
centration (and thus the oncotic pressure) is too low. Fluids
will not return to the capillaries but will remain as intersti-
tial fluid. This may be caused either by liver disease, be-
cause the liver produces most of the plasma proteins, or by
protein malnutrition (kwashiorkor).

Even under normal conditions, the amount of fluid fil-
tered out of the capillaries is greater than the amount
that returns to the capillaries by osmosis. The remainder
does eventually return to the cardiovascular system, how-
ever, by way of an open circulatory system called the lym-
phatic system. The lymphatic system consists of lym-
phatic capillaries, lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, and
lymphatic organs, including the spleen and thymus. Ex-
cess fluid in the tissues drains into blind-ended lymph
capillaries with highly permeable walls. This fluid, now
called lymph, passes into progressively larger lymphatic
vessels, which resemble veins and have one-way valves
(figure 52.11). The lymph eventually enters two major
lymphatic vessels, which drain into veins on each side of
the neck.

Movement of lymph in mammals is accomplished by
skeletal muscles squeezing against the lymphatic vessels, a
mechanism similar to the one that moves blood through
veins. In some cases, the lymphatic vessels also contract
rhythmically. In many fishes, all amphibians and reptiles,
bird embryos, and some adult birds, movement of lymph is

propelled by lymph hearts.

1044 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Lymphatic i
capillary

  

Excess interstitial fluid
becomes lymph

Blood pressure Osmosis due to plasma
causes net filtration Proteins causes net
absorption

 

    
 

@| Interstitial
fluid

ei

 

 

 

Capillary

Arteriole Venule

FIGURE 52.10

Plasma fluid, minus proteins, is filtered out of capillaries.
This forms interstitial fluid, which bathes the tissues. Much of the
interstitial fluid is returned to the capillaries by the osmotic
pressure generated by the higher protein concentration in plasma.
‘The excess interstitial fluid is drained into open-ended lymphatic
capillaries, which ultimately return the fluid to the cardiovascular
system.

 

FIGURE 52.11

A lymphatic vessel valve (25%). Valves allow lymph to flow in
one direction (from left to right in this figure) but not in the
reverse direction.

As the lymph moves through lymph nodes and lym-
phatic organs, it is modified by phagocytic cells that line
the channels of those organs. In addition, the lymph nodes
and lymphatic organs contain germinal centers for the pro-
duction of lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell critically

important in immunity.

 

Lymphatic vessels carry excess interstitial fluid back to
the vascular system. This fluid, called lymph, travels
through lymph nodes and lymphatic organs where it
encounters the immune cells called lymphocytes that
are produced in these organs.

 
