ACh

“oO 5 Ke

Gell membrane of
pacemaker cell in heart

    
   

ACh binds
to recep

tor
“eee WOO VOODOO CO

Pr

of epee
subunits
dissociate

G protein
subunit binds

to Kt channel, =

  

  
   

Oo

O Receptor

   

G proteins
Oo OQ
°

FIGURE 54.38

 
 
  

 

causing it to open

 

K+ channel
eo. 6
Hyperpolarization Q
Oo slows the heart rate

‘The parasympathetic effects of ACh require the action of G proteins. The binding of ACh to its receptor causes dissociation of a G
protein complex, releasing some components of this complex to move within the membrane and bind to other proteins that form ion
channels. The example shown here is the effects of ACh on the heart, where the G protein components cause the opening of potassium
channels. This leads to outward diffusion of potassium and hyperpolarization, slowing the heart rate.

G Proteins Mediate Cell Responses
to Autonomic Nerves

You might wonder how ACh can slow the heart rate—an
inhibitory effect—when it has excitatory effects elsewhere.
This inhibitory effect in the pacemaker cells of the heart is
produced because ACh causes the opening of potassium
channels, leading to the outward diffusion of potassium and
thus to hyperpolarization. This and other parasympathetic
effects of ACh are produced indirectly, using a group of
membrane proteins called G proteins (so-called because
they are regulated by guanosine diphosphate and guanosine
triphosphate [GDP and GTP}). Because the ion channels
are located some distance away from the receptor proteins
for ACh, the G proteins are needed to serve as connecting
links between them.

There are three G protein subunits, designated ©, B, and
y, bound together and attached to the receptor protein for
ACh. When ACh, released by parasympathetic endings,
binds to its receptor, the G protein subunits dissociate (fig-
ure 54.38). Specific G protein components move within the

membrane to the potassium channel and cause it to open,
producing hyperpolarization and a slowing of the heart. In
other organs, the G proteins have different effects that lead
to excitation. In this way, for example, the parasympathetic
nerves that innervate the stomach can cause increased gas-
tric secretions and contractions.

The sympathetic nerve effects also involve the action of
G proteins. Stimulation by norepinephrine from sympa-
thetic nerve endings and epinephrine from the adrenal
medulla requires G proteins to activate the target cells. We
will describe this in more detail, together with hormone ac-
tion, in chapter 56.

 

‘The sympathetic division of the autonomic system,
together with the adrenal medulla, activates the body
for fight-or-flight responses, whereas the
parasympathetic division generally has antagonistic
effects. The actions of parasympathetic nerves are
produced by ACh, whereas the actions of sympathetic
nerves are produced by norepinephrine.

 

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1101
