The Adrenal Glands

The adrenal glands are located just above each kidney (fig-
ure 56.19). Each gland is composed of an inner portion, the
adrenal medulla, and an outer layer, the adrenal cortex.

The Adrenal Medulla

The adrenal medulla receives neural input from axons of
the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system,
and it secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine in response
to stimulation by these axons. The actions of these hor-
mones trigger “alarm” responses similar to those elicited by
the sympathetic division, helping to prepare the body for
“fight or flight.” Among the effects of these hormones are
an increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, dilation
of the bronchioles, elevation in blood glucose, and reduced
blood flow to the skin and digestive organs. The actions of
epinephrine released as a hormone supplement those of
norepinephrine released as a sympathetic nerve neurotrans-
mitter.

The Adrenal Cortex: Homeostasis
of Glucose and Na*

The hormones from the adrenal cortex are all steroids and
are referred to collectively as corticosteroids. Cortisol (also
called hydrocortisone) and related steroids secreted by the
adrenal cortex act on various cells in the body to maintain
glucose homeostasis. In mammals, these hormones are re-
ferred to as glucocorticoids. The glucocorticoids stimulate
the breakdown of muscle protein into amino acids, which
are carried by the blood to the liver. They also stimulate
the liver to produce the enzymes needed for gluconeogene-
sis, the conversion of amino acids into glucose. This cre-
ation of glucose from protein is particularly important dur-
ing very long periods of fasting or exercise, when blood
glucose levels might otherwise become dangerously low.

Right adrenal
gland

    

Medulla.

 

1142 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Vena cava

In addition to regulating glucose metabolism, the gluco-
corticoids modulate some aspects of the immune response.
Glucocorticoids are given medically to suppress the im-
mune system in persons with immune disorders, such as
rheumatoid arthritis. Derivatives of cortisol, such as pred-
nisone, have widespread medical use as antiinflammatory
agents.

Aldosterone, the other major corticosteroid, is classi-
fied as a mineralocorticoid because it helps regulate min-
eral balance through two functions. One of the functions
of aldosterone is to stimulate the kidneys to reabsorb Na*
from the urine. (Urine is formed by filtration of blood
plasma, so the blood levels of Na* will decrease if Na* is
not reabsorbed from the urine; see chapter 58.) Sodium is
the major extracellular solute and is needed for the main-
tenance of normal blood volume and pressure. Without
aldosterone, the kidneys would lose excessive amounts of
blood Nat in the urine, followed by Cl- and water; this
would cause the blood volume and pressure to fall. By
stimulating the kidneys to reabsorb salt and water, aldo-
sterone thus maintains the normal blood volume and
pressure essential to life.

The other function of aldosterone is to stimulate the
kidneys to secrete K* into the urine. Thus, when aldos-
terone levels are too low, the concentration of K* in the
blood may rise to dangerous levels. Because of these essen-
tial functions performed by aldosterone, removal of the
adrenal glands, or diseases that prevent aldosterone secre-
tion, are invariably fatal without hormone therapy.

 

The adrenal medulla is stimulated by sympathetic
neurons to secrete epinephrine and norepinephrine
during the fight-or-flight reaction. The adrenal cortex
is stimulated to secrete its steroid hormones by ACTH
from the anterior pituitary. Cortisol helps to regulate
blood glucose and aldosterone acts to regulate blood
Na‘ and K* levels.

 

Left adrenal
gland

   

FIGURE 56.19

The adrenal glands. The inner
portion of the gland, the adrenal
medulla, produces epinephrine and
norepinephrine, which initiate a
response to stress. The outer
portion of the gland, the adrenal
cortex, produces steroid hormones
that influence blood glucose levels.
