 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

FIGURE 56.10 ;
The effects of antidiuretic Dehydration >| Lowers blood volume | <------ :
hormone (ADH). An increase in Osman and pressure '

the osmotic concentration of the ee

blood stimulates the posterior ©: ‘of blood 1©
pituitary gland to secrete ADH, Negative increases Negative
which promotes water retention by feedback Osmoreceptors feedback

the kidneys. This works as a
negative feedback loop to correct
the initial disturbance of
homeostasis.

 

(ADH, also known as vasopressin), that stimulates water
retention by the kidneys (figure 56.10). When ADH is
missing, the kidneys do not retain water and excessive
quantities of urine are produced. This is why the consump-
tion of alcohol, which inhibits ADH secretion, leads to fre-
quent urination.

The posterior pituitary also secretes oxytocin, a second
peptide hormone which, like ADH, is composed of nine
amino acids. Oxytocin stimulates the milk-ejection reflex,
so that contraction of the smooth muscles around the
mammary glands and ducts causes milk to be ejected from
the ducts through the nipple. During suckling, sensory re-
ceptors in the nipples send impulses to the hypothalamus,
which triggers the release of oxytocin. Oxytocin is also
needed to stimulate uterine contractions in women during
childbirth. Oxytocin secretion continues after childbirth in
a woman who is breast-feeding, which is why the uterus of
a nursing mother returns to its normal size after pregnancy
more quickly than does the uterus of a mother who does
not breast-feed.

oe

4 li

     
  
    

—~ abi synthesized

by neurosecretory
cells in hypothalamus

 

ADH released from posterior
pituitary into blood

 

Increased
vasoconstriction

(in some vertebrates)
leading to higher
blood pressure

 

 

 

 

 

Reduced
urine volume

 

ADH and oxytocin are actually produced by neuron cell
bodies located in the hypothalamus. These two hormones are
transported along the axon tract that runs from the hypothal-
amus to the posterior pituitary and are stored in the posterior
pituitary. In response to the appropriate stimulation—
increased blood plasma osmolarity in the case of ADH, the
suckling of a baby in the case of oxytocin—the hormones
are released by the posterior pituitary into the blood. Be-
cause this reflex control involves both the nervous and en-
docrine systems, the secretion of ADH and oxytocin are
neuroendocrine reflexes.

 

The posterior pituitary gland contains axons originating
from neurons in the hypothalamus. These neurons
produce ADH and oxytocin, which are stored in and
released from the posterior pituitary gland in response
to neural stimulation from the hypothalamus.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1135
