The kidneys of terrestrial reptiles also reabsorb much
of the salt and water in their nephron tubules, helping
somewhat to conserve blood volume in dry environments.
Like fish and amphibians, they cannot produce urine that
is more concentrated than the blood plasma. However,
when their urine enters their cloaca (the common exit of
the digestive and urinary tracts), additional water can be
reabsorbed.

Mammals and Birds

Mammals and birds are the only vertebrates able to pro-
duce urine with a higher osmotic concentration than
their body fluids. This allows these vertebrates to excrete
their waste products in a small volume of water, so that
more water can be retained in the body. Human kidneys
can produce urine that is as much as 4.2 times as concen-
trated as blood plasma, but the kidneys of some other
mammals are even more efficient at conserving water.
For example, camels, gerbils, and pocket mice of the
genus Perognathus can excrete urine 8, 14, and 22 times as
concentrated as their blood plasma, respectively. The
kidneys of the kangaroo rat (figure 58.15) are so efficient
it never has to drink water; it can obtain all the water it
needs from its food and from water produced in aerobic
cell respiration!

The production of hypertonic urine is accomplished by
the Joop of Henle portion of the nephron (see figure 58.18),
found only in mammals and birds. A nephron with a long
loop of Henle extends deeper into the renal medulla, where
the hypertonic osmotic environment draws out more water,
and so can produce more concentrated urine. Most mam-
mals have some nephrons with short loops and other
nephrons with loops that are much longer (see figure
58.17). Birds, however, have relatively few or no nephrons
with long loops, so they cannot produce urine that is as
concentrated as that of mammals. At most, they can only
reabsorb enough water to produce a urine that is about
twice the concentration of their blood. Marine birds solve
the problem of water loss by drinking salt water and then
excreting the excess salt from salt glands near the eyes (fig-
ure 58.16).

The moderately hypertonic urine of a bird is delivered
to its cloaca, along with the fecal material from its digestive
tract. If needed, additional water can be absorbed across
the wall of the cloaca to produce a semisolid white paste or
pellet, which is excreted.

 

The kidneys of freshwater fish must excrete copious
amounts of very dilute urine, while marine teleosts
drink seawater and excrete an isotonic urine. The basic
design and function of the nephron of freshwater fishes
have been retained in the terrestrial vertebrates.
Modifications, particularly the presence of a loop of
Henle, allow mammals and birds to reabsorb more
water and produce a hypertonic urine.

 

 

FIGURE 58.15

The kangaroo rat, Dipodomys panamintensis. This mammal has
very efficient kidneys that can concentrate urine to a high degree
by reabsorbing water, thereby minimizing water loss from the
body. This feature is extremely important to the kangaroo rat’s
survival in dry or desert habitats.

 

"—~ salt secretion

FIGURE 58.16

Marine birds drink seawater and then excrete the salt
through salt glands. The extremely salty fluid excreted by these
glands can then dribble down the beak.

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1185
