57.4 B cells label specific cells for destruction.

B Cells: The Humoral Response

B cells also respond to helper T cells activated by interleukin-
1. Like cytotoxic T cells, B cells have receptor proteins on
their surface, one type of receptor for each type of B cell. B
cells recognize invading microbes much as cytotoxic T cells
recognize infected cells, but unlike cytotoxic T cells, they
do not go on the attack themselves. Rather, they mark the
pathogen for destruction by mechanisms that have no “ID
check” system of their own. Early in the immune response,
the markers placed by B cells alert complement proteins to
attack the cells carrying them. Later in the immune re-
sponse, the markers placed by B cells activate macrophages
and natural killer cells.

The way B cells do their marking is simple and fool-
proof. Unlike the receptors on T cells, which bind only to
antigen-MHC protein complexes on antigen-presenting
cells, B cell receptors can bind to free, unprocessed anti-

 
    
 
 
 
    

Invading
microbe

Macrophage

antigen

B cell receptor

(antibody)

FIGURE 57.12

T cell receptor
MHC-II protein
Processed antigen

   
    
   
 
      
   
 

gens. When a B cell encounters an antigen, antigen parti-
cles will enter the B cell by endocytosis and get
processed. Helper T cells that are able to recognize the
specific antigen will bind to the antigen-MHC protein
complex on the B cell and release interleukin-2, which
stimulates the B cell to divide. In addition, free, un-
processed antigens stick to antibodies on the B cell sur-
face. This antigen exposure triggers even more B cell
proliferation. B cells divide to produce long-lived mem-
ory B cells and plasma cells that serve as short-lived anti-
body factories (figure 57.12). The antibodies are released
into the blood plasma, lymph, and other extracellular flu-
ids. Figure 57.13 summarizes the roles of helper T cells,
which are essential in both the cell-mediated and hu-
moral immune responses.

Antibodies are proteins in a class called im-
munoglobulins (abbreviated Ig), which is divided into
subclasses based on the structures and functions of the

Helper T cell

Memory cell

 

Helper T cell

Plasma cell

 
 
    

¥
yy Xn e
Antibod,

y x Sy, Microbe
marked for

destruction

‘The B cell immune defense. Invading particles are bound by B cells, which interact with helper T cells and are activated to divide. The
multiplying B cells produce either memory B cells or plasma cells that secrete antibodies which bind to invading microbes and tag them for

destruction by macrophages.

1158 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
