FIGURE 6.16

How solutes create osmotic pressure.
Charged or polar substances are soluble in
water because they form hydrogen bonds with
water molecules clustered around them. When
a polar solute (illustrated here with urea) is
added to the solution on one side of a
membrane, the water molecules that gather
around each urea molecule are no longer free
to diffuse across the membrane; in effect, the
polar solute has reduced the number of free
water molecules on that side of the membrane
increasing the osmotic pressure. Because the
hypoosmotic side of the membrane (on the
right, with less solute) has more unbound
water molecules than the hyperosmotic side
(on the left, with more solute), water moves by
diffusion from the right to the left.

(the extracellular fluid). The direction of the net diffusion
of water across this membrane is determined by the os-
motic concentrations of the solutions on either side (figure
6.15). For example, if the cytoplasm of a cell were hypoos-
motic to the extracellular fluid, water would diffuse out of
the cell, toward the solution with the higher concentration
of solutes (and, therefore, the lower concentration of un-
bound water molecules). This loss of water from the cyto-
plasm would cause the cell to shrink until the osmotic con-
centrations of the cytoplasm and the extracellular fluid
become equal.

Osmotic Pressure

What would happen if the cell’s cytoplasm were hyperos-
motic to the extracellular fluid? In this situation, water
would diffuse into the cell from the extracellular fluid,
causing the cell to swell. The pressure of the cytoplasm
pushing out against the cell membrane, or hydrostatic
pressure, would increase. On the other hand, the osmotic
pressure (figure 6.16), defined as the pressure that must be
applied to stop the osmotic movement of water across a
membrane, would also be at work. If the membrane were
strong enough, the cell would reach an equilibrium, at
which the osmotic pressure, which tends to drive water into
the cell, is exactly counterbalanced by the hydrostatic pres-
sure, which tends to drive water back out of the cell. How-
ever, a plasma membrane by itself cannot withstand large
internal pressures, and an isolated cell under such condi-
tions would burst like an overinflated balloon. Accordingly,
it is important for animal cells to maintain isosmotic condi-
tions. The cells of bacteria, fungi, plants, and many pro-
tists, in contrast, are surrounded by strong cell walls. The
cells of these organisms can withstand high internal pres-
sures without bursting.

Water
molecules

Urea
molecule

Semipermeable
membrane

 

Maintaining Osmotic Balance

Organisms have developed many solutions to the osmotic
dilemma posed by being hyperosmotic to their environment.

Extrusion. Some single-celled eukaryotes like the protist
Paramecium use organelles called contractile vacuoles to re-
move water. Each vacuole collects water from various parts
of the cytoplasm and transports it to the central part of the
vacuole, near the cell surface. The vacuole possesses a small
pore that opens to the outside of the cell. By contracting
rhythmically, the vacuole pumps the water out of the cell
through the pore.

Isosmotic Solutions. Some organisms that live in the
ocean adjust their internal concentration of solutes to
match that of the surrounding seawater. Isosmotic with re-
spect to their environment, there is no net flow of water
into or out of these cells. Many terrestrial animals solve the
problem in a similar way, by circulating a fluid through
their bodies that bathes cells in an isosmotic solution. The
blood in your body, for example, contains a high concen-
tration of the protein albumin, which elevates the solute
concentration of the blood to match your cells.

Turgor. Most plant cells are hyperosmotic to their im-
mediate environment, containing a high concentration of
solutes in their central vacuoles. The resulting internal hy-
drostatic pressure, known as turgor pressure, presses the
plasma membrane firmly against the interior of the cell
wall, making the cell rigid. The newer, softer portions of
trees and shrubs depend on turgor pressure to maintain
their shape, and wilt when they lack sufficient water.

 

Osmosis is the diffusion of water, but not solutes,
across a membrane.

 

115

Chapter 6 Membranes
