Freshwater fish

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Food,
fresh water
Gills: ; \
Active absorption of
NaCl, water enters
osmotically
Stomach:
Passive reabsorption
of NaCl and water
Marine fish
Food,
seawater

 

 

     
     
   

La Active tubular
glomerulus reabsorption
of NaCl

 

 

 

] Kidney: Excretion
~ | of dilute urine

 

Intestinal Urine

wastes

Glomerulus
reduced or
absent
Active tubular
secretion
of MgSO,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gils: Kidney:

Active secretion of Intestinal wastes: Excretion of MgSO,,

NaCl, water loss MgSO, voided urea, little water
with feces

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 58.13

Freshwater and marine teleosts (bony fish) face different osmotic problems. Whereas the freshwater teleost is hypertonic to its
environment, the marine teleost is hypotonic to seawater. To compensate for its tendency to take in water and lose ions, a freshwater fish
excretes dilute urine, avoids drinking water, and reabsorbs ions across the nephron tubules. To compensate for its osmotic loss of water,
the marine teleost drinks seawater and eliminates the excess ions through active transport across epithelia in the gills and kidneys.

Cartilaginous Fish

The elasmobranchs, including sharks and rays, are by far the
most common subclass in the class Chondrichthyes (carti-
laginous fish). Elasmobranchs have solved the osmotic prob-
lem posed by their seawater environment in a different way
than have the bony fish. Instead of having body fluids that
are hypotonic to seawater, so that they have to continuously
drink seawater and actively pump out ions, the elasmo-
branchs reabsorb urea from the nephron tubules and main-

tain a blood urea concentration that is 100 times higher than
that of mammals. This added urea makes their blood ap-
proximately isotonic to the surrounding sea. Because there is
no net water movement between isotonic solutions, water
loss is prevented. Hence, these fishes do not need to drink
seawater for osmotic balance, and their kidneys and gills do
not have to remove large amounts of ions from their bodies.
The enzymes and tissues of the cartilaginous fish have
evolved to tolerate the high urea concentrations.

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1183
