Hypothalamic Control of Anterior Pituitary
Gland Secretion

The anterior pituitary gland, unlike the posterior pitu-
itary, is not derived from the brain and does not receive
an axon tract from the hypothalamus. Nevertheless, the
hypothalamus controls production and secretion of the
anterior pituitary hormones. This control is exerted hor-
monally rather than by means of nerve axons. Neurons in
the hypothalamus secrete releasing hormones and inhibit-
ing hormones into blood capillaries at the base of the hy-
pothalamus (figure 56.13). These capillaries drain into
small veins that run within the stalk of the pituitary to a
second bed of capillaries in the anterior pituitary. This
unusual system of vessels is known as the hypothalamohy-
pophyseal portal system (another name for the pituitary is
the hypophysis). It is called a portal system because it has
a second capillary bed downstream from the first; the only
other body location with a similar system is the liver,
where capillaries receive blood drained from the gastroin-
testinal tract (via the hepatic portal vein—see chapter 52).
Because the second bed of capillaries receives little oxygen
from such vessels, the vessels must be delivering some-
thing else of importance.

Each releasing hormone delivered by the hypothalamo-
hypophyseal system regulates the secretion of a specific
anterior pituitary hormone. For example, thyrotropin-
releasing hormone (TRH) stimulates the release of TSH,
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulates the release
of ACTH, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
stimulates the release of FSH and LH. A releasing hor-
mone for growth hormone, called growth hormone—releasing
hormone (GHRH) has also been discovered, and a releasing
hormone for prolactin has been postulated but has thus far
not been identified.

The hypothalamus also secretes hormones that inhibit
the release of certain anterior pituitary hormones. To date,
three such hormones have been discovered: somatostatin in-
hibits the secretion of GH; prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF),
found to be the neurotransmitter dopamine, inhibits the se-
cretion of prolactin; and melanotropin-inbibiting hormone
(MIB) inhibits the secretion of MSH.

Negative Feedback Control of Anterior Pituitary
Gland Secretion

Because hypothalamic hormones control the secretions of
the anterior pituitary gland, and the anterior pituitary hor-
mones control the secretions of some other endocrine
glands, it may seem that the hypothalamus is in charge of
hormonal secretion for the whole body. This idea is not
valid, however, for two reasons. First, a number of en-
docrine organs, such as the adrenal medulla and the pan-
creas, are not directly regulated by this control system. Sec-
ond, the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary gland are
themselves partially controlled by the very hormones
whose secretion they stimulate! In most cases this is an in-

1138 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Cell body

 
   
  

Axons to
Primary
capillaries

Hypophyseal
portal system

FIGURE 56.13

Hormonal control of the anterior pituitary gland by the
hypothalamus. Neurons in the hypothalamus secrete hormones
that are carried by short blood vessels directly to the anterior
pituitary gland, where they either stimulate or inhibit the
secretion of anterior pituitary hormones.

hibitory control, where the target gland hormones inhibit
the secretions of the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary
(figure 56.14). This type of control system is called nega-
tive feedback inhibition and acts to maintain relatively con-
stant levels of the target cell hormone.

Let’s consider the hormonal control of the thyroid
gland. The hypothalamus secretes TRH into the hypothal-
amohypophyseal portal system, which stimulates the ante-
rior pituitary gland to secrete TSH, which in turn stimu-
lates the thyroid gland to release thyroxine. Among
thyroxine’s many target organs are the hypothalamus and
the anterior pituitary gland themselves. Thyroxine acts
upon these organs to inhibit their secretion of TRH and
TSH, respectively (figure 56.15). This negative feedback
inhibition is essential for homeostasis because it keeps the
thyroxine levels fairly constant.

To illustrate the importance of negative feedback in-
hibition, we will examine a person who lacks sufficient
iodine in the diet. Without iodine, the thyroid gland
cannot produce thyroxine (which contains four iodines
per molecule). As a result, thyroxine levels in the blood
fall drastically, and the hypothalamus and anterior pitu-
itary receive far less negative feedback inhibition than is
normal. This reduced inhibition causes an elevated se-
cretion of TRH and TSH. The high levels of TSH stim-
