Hormones That Do Not Enter Cells

Hormones that are too large or too polar to cross the
plasma membranes of their target cells include all of the
peptide and glycoprotein hormones, as well as the cate-
cholamine hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine.
These hormones bind to receptor proteins located on the
outer surface of the plasma membrane—the hormones do
not enter the cell. If you think of the hormone as a messen
ger sent from an endocrine gland to the target cell, it is evi-
dent that a second messenger is needed within the target
cell to produce the effects of the hormone. A number of
different molecules in the cell can serve as second messen-
gers, as we saw in chapter 7. The interaction between the
hormone and its receptor activates mechanisms in the
plasma membrane that increase the concentration of the
second messengers within the target cell cytoplasm.

The binding of a water-soluble hormone to its receptor
is reversible and usually very brief. After the hormone
binds to its receptor and activates a second-messenger sys-
tem, it dissociates from the receptor and may travel in the
blood to another target cell somewhere else in the body.
Eventually, enzymes (primarily in the liver) degrade the
hormone by converting it into inactive derivatives.

 

The Cyclic AMP Second-Messenger System

The action of the hormone epinephrine can serve as an ex-
ample of a second-messenger system. Epinephrine can bind
to two categories of receptors, called alpha (0)- and beta (B)-
adrenergic receptors. The interaction of epinephrine with
each type of receptor activates a different second-messenger
system in the target cell.

In the early 1960s, Earl Sutherland showed that cyclic
adenosine monophosphate, or cyclic AMP (cAMP),
serves as a second messenger when epinephrine binds to
B-adrenergic receptors on the plasma membranes of liver
cells (figure 56.7). The cAMP second-messenger system
was the first such system to be described.

The B-adrenergic receptors are associated with mem-
brane proteins called G proteins (see chapters 7 and 54).
Each G protein is composed of three subunits, and the
binding of epinephrine to its receptor causes one of the G
protein subunits to dissociate from the other two. This
subunit then diffuses within the plasma membrane until it
encounters adenylyl cyclase, a membrane enzyme that is
inactive until it binds to the G protein subunit. When ac-
tivated by the G protein subunit, adenylyl cyclase cat-
alyzes the formation of cAMP from ATP. The cAMP
formed at the inner surface of the plasma membrane dif-
fuses within the cytoplasm, where it binds to and activates
protein kinase-A, an enzyme that adds phosphate groups
to specific cellular proteins.

The identities of the proteins that are phosphorylated by
protein kinase-A varies from one cell type to the next, and
this variation is one of the reasons epinephrine has such di-

1132 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Liver cell

    
 

 

 

 

 

Receptor
protein eo

 

FIGURE 56.7

The action of epinephrine on a liver cell. (1) Epinephrine
binds to specific receptor proteins on the cell surface. (2) Acting
through intermediary G proteins, the hormone-bound receptor
activates the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which converts ATP into
cyclic AMP (cAMP). (3) Cyclic AMP performs as a second
messenger and activates protein kinase-A, an enzyme that was
previously present in an inactive form. (4) Protein kinase-A.
phosphorylates and thereby activates the enzyme phosphorylase,
which catalyzes the hydrolysis of glycogen into glucose.

verse effects on different tissues. In liver cells, protein kinase-
A phosphorylates and thereby activates another enzyme,
phosphorylase, which converts glycogen into glucose.
Through this multistep mechanism, epinephrine causes the
liver to secrete glucose into the blood during the fight-or-
flight reaction, when the adrenal medulla is stimulated by the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system (see
chapter 54). In cardiac muscle cells, protein kinase-A phos-
phorylates a different set of cellular proteins, which cause the
heart to beat faster and more forcefully.

The IP3/Ca** Second-Messenger System

When epinephrine binds to a-adrenergic receptors, it
doesn’t activate adenylyl cyclase and cause the production
of cAMP. Instead, through a different type of G protein, it
activates another membrane-bound enzyme, phospholipase
C (figure 56.8). This enzyme cleaves certain membrane
phospholipids to produce the second messenger, inositol
