55.4 Optic receptors detect light over a broad range of wavelengths.

Evolution of the Eye

Vision begins with the capture of light energy by pho-
toreceptors. Because light travels in a straight line and ar-
rives virtually instantaneously, visual information can be
used to determine both the direction and the distance of
an object. No other stimulus provides as much detailed
information.

Many invertebrates have simple visual systems with
photoreceptors clustered in an eyespot. Simple eyespots
can be made sensitive to the direction of a light source by
the addition of a pigment layer which shades one side of
the eye. Flatworms have a screening pigmented layer on
the inner and back sides of both eyespots allowing stimula-
tion of the photoreceptor cells only by light from the front
of the animal (figure 55.16). The flatworm will turn and
swim in the direction in which the photoreceptor cells are
the least stimulated. Although an eyespot can perceive the
direction of light, it cannot be used to construct a visual
image. The members of four phyla—annelids, mollusks,
arthropods, and chordates—have evolved well-developed,
image-forming eyes. True image-forming eyes in these
phyla, though strikingly similar in structure, are believed
to have evolved independently (figure 55.17). Interest-
ingly, the photoreceptors in all of them use the same light-
capturing molecule, suggesting that not many alternative
molecules are able to play this role.

Structure of the Vertebrate Eye

The eye of a human is typical of the vertebrate eye (figure
55.18). The “white of the eye” is the sclera, formed of
tough connective tissue. Light enters the eye through a
transparent cornea, which begins to focus the light. This

Photoreceptors

a

   

Flatworm will tum
away from light

FIGURE 55.16

Simple eyespots in the flatworm. Eyespots will detect the
direction of light because a pigmented layer on one side of the
eyespot screens out light coming from the back of the animal.
Light is thus the strongest coming from the front of the animal;
flatworms will respond by turning away from the light.

occurs because light is refracted (bent) when it travels into
a medium of different density. The colored portion of the
eye is the iris; contraction of the iris muscles in bright light
decreases the size of its opening, the pupil. Light passes
through the pupil to the lens, a transparent structure that
completes the focusing of the light onto the retina at the
back of the eye. The lens is attached by the suspensory liga-
ment to the ciliary muscles.

The shape of the lens is influenced by the amount of
tension in the suspensory ligament, which surrounds the

 

Insect

Mollusk

FIGURE 55.17

Vertebrate

Eyes in three phyla of animals. Although they are superficially similar, these eyes differ greatly in structure and are not homologous.
Each has evolved separately and, despite the apparent structural complexity, has done so from simpler structures.

1118 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
