Transport Processes in the
Mammalian Nephron

As previously described, approximately 180 liters (in a
human) of isotonic glomerular filtrate enters the Bowman’s
capsules each day. After passing through the remainder of
the nephron tubules, this volume of fluid would be lost as
urine if it were not reabsorbed back into the blood. It is
clearly impossible to produce this much urine, yet water is
only able to pass through a cell membrane by osmosis, and
osmosis is not possible between two isotonic solutions.
‘Therefore, some mechanism is needed to create an osmotic
gradient between the glomerular filtrate and the blood, al-
lowing reabsorption.

Proximal Tubule

Approximately two-thirds of the NaCl and water filtered
into Bowman’s capsule is immediately reabsorbed across
the walls of the proximal convoluted tubule. This reabsorp-
tion is driven by the active transport of Na* out of the fil-
trate and into surrounding peritubular capillaries. Cl- fol-
lows Na* passively because of electrical attraction, and
water follows them both because of osmosis. Because NaCl
and water are removed from the filtrate in proportionate
amounts, the filtrate that remains in the tubule is still iso-
tonic to the blood plasma.

Although only one-third of the initial volume of filtrate
remains in the nephron tubule after the initial reabsorption
of NaCl and water, it still represents a large volume (60 L
out of the original 180 L of filtrate produced per day by
both human kidneys). Obviously, no animal can excrete
that much urine, so most of this water must also be reab-
sorbed. It is reabsorbed primarily across the wall of the col-
lecting duct because the interstitial fluid of the renal
medulla surrounding the collecting ducts is hypertonic.
The hypertonic renal medulla draws water out of the col-
lecting duct by osmosis, leaving behind a hypertonic urine
for excretion.

Loop of Henle

The reabsorption of much of the water in the tubular fil-
trate thus depends on the creation of a hypertonic renal
medulla; the more hypertonic the medulla is, the steeper
the osmotic gradient will be and the more water will leave
the collecting ducts. It is the loops of Henle that create
the hypertonic renal medulla in the following manner

(figure 58.20):

1. The ascending limb of the loop actively extrudes Na*,
and Cl- follows. The mechanism that extrudes NaCl
from the ascending limb of the loop differs from that
which extrudes NaCl from the proximal tubule, but
the most important difference is that the ascending
limb is not permeable to water. As Na* exits, the fluid
within the ascending limb becomes increasingly di-

lute (hypotonic) as it enters the

 

    
  
  
    
   

Proximal
tubule

Bowman's

Glomerulus eapsule)

 

300

2
3
8

Total solute concentration (mOsm)

Loop of Henle —

Inner medulla
1200

cortex, while the surrounding
tissue becomes increasingly
concentrated (hypertonic).

Distal tubule

Collecting
duct

—™

FIGURE 58.20

The reabsorption of salt and

water in the mammalian kidney.
Active transport of Na* out of the
proximal tubules is followed by the
passive movement of Cl and water.
Active extrusion of NaCl from the
ascending limb of the loop of Henle
creates the osmotic gradient required
for the reabsorption of water from
the collecting duct. The changes in
osmolality from the cortex to the
medulla is indicated to the left of the
figure.

 

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1189
