The Lateral Line System

The lateral line system provides fish with a sense of “dis-
tant touch,” enabling them to sense objects that reflect
pressure waves and low-frequency vibrations. This enables
a fish to detect prey, for example, and to swim in synchrony
with the rest of its school. It also enables a blind cave fish
to sense its environment by monitoring changes in the pat-
terns of water flow past the lateral line receptors. The lat-
eral line system is found in amphibian larvae, but is lost at
metamorphosis and is not present in any terrestrial verte-
brate. The sense provided by the lateral line system supple-
ments the fish’s sense of hearing, which is performed by a
different sensory structure. The structures and mechanisms
involved in hearing will be described in a later section.

The lateral line system consists of sensory structures
within a longitudinal canal in the fish’s skin that extends

Lateral line

   

Canal Lateral line Nerve Opening
organ
Cupula
Cilia
Hair cell

Afferent axons

Sensory nerves

 

(a)

along each side of the body and within several canals in the
head (figure 55.92). The sensory structures are known as
hair cells because they have hairlike processes at their sur-
face that project into a gelatinous membrane called a cupula
(Latin, “little cup”). The hair cells are innervated by sen-
sory neurons that transmit impulses to the brain.

Hair cells have several hairlike processes of approxi-
mately the same length, called stereocilia, and one longer
process called a kinocilium (figure 55.9b). Vibrations carried
through the fish’s environment produce movements of the
cupula, which cause the hairs to bend. When the stereocilia
bend in the direction of the kinocilium, the associated sen-
sory neurons are stimulated and generate a receptor poten-
tial. Asa result, the frequency of action potentials produced
by the sensory neuron is increased. If the stereocilia are
bent in the opposite direction, on the other hand, the activ-
ity of the sensory neuron is inhibited.

Kinocilium
(not present in
mammalian cochlea)

Inhibition Excitation
Stereocilia
=
i
Hair cell (i

Stimulation of
sensoryneuron

 

(b)

FIGURE 55.9

The lateral line system. (a) This system consists of canals
running the length of the fish’s body beneath the surface of the
skin. Within these canals are sensory structures containing hair
cells with cilia that project into a gelatinous cupula. Pressure
waves traveling through the water in the canals deflect the cilia
and depolarize the sensory neurons associated with the hair cells.
(b) Hair cells are mechanoreceptors with hairlike cilia that project
into a gelatinous membrane. The hair cells of the lateral line
system (and the membranous labyrinth of the vertebrate inner ear)
have a number of smaller cilia called stereocilia and one larger
kinocilium. When the cilia bend in the direction of the
kinocilium, the hair cell releases a chemical transmitter that
depolarizes the associated sensory neuron. Bending of the cilia in
the opposite direction has an inhibitory effect.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1111
