57.2 Specific immune defenses require the recognition of antigens.

The Immune Response:
The Third Line of

Defense

Few of us pass through childhood
without contracting some sort of in-
fection. Chicken pox, for example, is
an illness that many of us experience
before we reach our teens. It is a dis-
ease of childhood, because most of us
contract it as children and never catch it
again. Once you have had the disease,
you are usually immune to it. Specific
immune defense mechanisms provide
this immunity.

Discovery of the Immune
Response

FIGURE 57.7

In 1796, an English country doctor
named Edward Jenner carried out an
experiment that marks the beginning of
the study of immunology. Smallpox was
a common and deadly disease in those
days. Jenner observed, however, that
milkmaids who had caught a much milder form of “the
pox” called cowpox (presumably from cows) rarely caught
smallpox. Jenner set out to test the idea that cowpox con-
ferred protection against smallpox. He infected people with
cowpox (figure 57.7), and as he had predicted, many of
them became immune to smallpox.

We now know that smallpox and cowpox are caused by
two different viruses with similar surfaces. Jenner’s patients
who were injected with the cowpox virus mounted a de-
fense that was also effective against a later infection of the
smallpox virus. Jenner’s procedure of injecting a harmless
microbe in order to confer resistance to a dangerous one is
called vaccination. Modern attempts to develop resistance
to malaria, herpes, and other diseases often involve deliver-
ing antigens via a harmless vaccinia virus related to cowpox
virus.

Many years passed before anyone learned how exposure
to an infectious agent can confer resistance to a disease. A
key step toward answering this question was taken more
than a half-century later by the famous French scientist
Louis Pasteur. Pasteur was studying fowl cholera, and he
isolated a culture of bacteria from diseased chickens that
would produce the disease if injected into healthy birds.
Before departing on a two-week vacation, he accidentally
left his bacterial culture out on a shelf. When he returned,
he injected this old culture into healthy birds and found
that it had been weakened; the injected birds became only
slightly ill and then recovered. Surprisingly, however, those

1152 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

The birth of immunology. This famous
painting shows Edward Jenner inoculating
patients with cowpox in the 1790s and thus
protecting them from smallpox.

birds did not get sick when subse-
quently infected with fresh fowl
cholera. They remained healthy even if
given massive doses of active fowl
cholera bacteria that did produce the
disease in control chickens. Clearly,
something about the bacteria could
elicit immunity as long as the bacteria
did not kill the animals first. We now
know that molecules protruding from
the surfaces of the bacterial cells evoked
active immunity in the chickens.

Key Concepts of Specific
Immunity

An antigen is a molecule that provokes
a specific immune response. Antigens
are large, complex molecules such as
proteins; they are generally foreign to
the body, usually present of the surface
of pathogens. A large antigen may have
several parts, and each stimulate a dif-
ferent specific immune response. In this
case, the different parts are known as
antigenic determinant sites, and each
serves as a different antigen. Particular lymphocytes have
receptor proteins on their surfaces that recognize an anti-
gen and direct a specific immune response against either
the antigen or the cell that carries the antigen.

Lymphocytes called B cells respond to antigens by pro-
ducing proteins called antibodies. Antibody proteins are se-
creted into the blood and other body fluids and thus provide
humoral immunity. (The term humor here is used in its
ancient sense, referring to a body fluid.) Other lymphocytes
called T cells do not secrete antibodies but instead directly
attack the cells that carry the specific antigens. These cells
are thus described as producing cell-mediated immunity.

The specific immune responses protect the body in two
ways. First, an individual can gain immunity by being ex-
posed to a pathogen (disease-causing agent) and perhaps get-
ting the disease. This is acquired immunity, such as the resis-
tance to the chicken pox that you acquire after having the
disease in childhood. Another term for this process is active
immunity. Second, an individual can gain immunity by ob-
taining the antibodies from another individual. This hap-
pened to you before you were born, with antibodies made
by your mother being transferred to you across the placenta.
Immunity gained in this way is called passive immunity.

 

Antigens are molecules, usually foreign, that provoke a
specific immune attack. This immune attack may
involve secreted proteins called antibodies, or it may
invoke a cell-mediated attack.

 
