57.6 The immune system can be defeated.

T Cell Destruction: AIDS

One mechanism for defeating the vertebrate immune sys-
tem is to attack the immune mechanism itself. Helper T
cells and inducer T cells are CD4 T cells. Therefore, any
pathogen that inactivates CD4* T cells leaves the immune
system unable to mount a response to any foreign antigen.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a deadly
disease for just this reason. The AIDS retrovirus, called
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), mounts a direct at-
tack on CD4* T cells because it recognizes the CD4 core-
ceptors associated with these cells.

HIV’s attack on CD4* T cells cripples the immune sys-
tem in at least three ways. First, HIV-infected cells die only
after releasing replicated viruses that infect other CD4* T
cells, until the entire population of CD4 T cells is de-
stroyed (figure 57.26). In a normal individual, CD4* T cells
make up 60 to 80% of circulating T cells; in AIDS patients,
CD4* T cells often become too rare to detect (figure
57.27). Second, HIV causes infected CD4* T cells to se-
crete a soluble suppressing factor that blocks other T cells
from responding to the HIV antigen. Finally, HIV may
block transcription of MHC genes, hindering the recogni-
tion and destruction of infected CD4* T cells and thus pro-
tecting those cells from any remaining vestiges of the im-
mune system.

The combined effect of these responses to HIV infec-
tion is to wipe out the human immune defense. With no
defense against infection, any of a variety of otherwise
commonplace infections proves fatal. With no ability to
recognize and destroy cancer cells when they arise, death
by cancer becomes far more likely. Indeed, AIDS was first
recognized as a disease because of a cluster of cases of an
unusually rare form of cancer. More AIDS victims die of
cancer than from any other cause.

Although HIV became a human disease vector only re-
cently, possibly through transmission to humans from
chimpanzees in Central Africa, it is already clear that AIDS
is one of the most serious diseases in human history (figure
57.28). The fatality rate of AIDS is 100%; no patient ex-
hibiting the symptoms of AIDS has ever been known to
survive more than a few years without treatment. Aggres-
sive treatments can prolong life but how much longer has
not been determined. However, the disease is not highly
contagious, as it is transmitted from one individual to an-
other through the transfer of internal body fluids, typically
in semen and in blood during transfusions. Not all individ-
uals exposed to HIV (as judged by anti-HIV antibodies in
their blood) have yet acquired the disease.

Until recently, the only effective treatment for slowing
the progression of the disease involved treatment with
drugs such as AZT that inhibit the activity of reverse tran-
scriptase, the enzyme needed by the virus to produce DNA
from RNA. Recently, however, a new type of drug has be-

1168 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

FIGURE 57.26

HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. Viruses released from infected
CD#* T cells soon spread to neighboring CD4* T cells, infecting
them in turn. The individual viruses, colored blue in this scanning
electron micrograph, are extremely small; over 200 million would
fit on the period at the end of this sentence.

 

100

     
   
     

CD8* T cells

 

 

 

 

 

75E
2
8
&
2
§ 50h
z
5
5
ae CD4* T cells,
25-
0 L L L
0 5 10 15 20 25
Days after infection
FIGURE 57.27

Survival of T cells in culture after exposure to HIV. The virus
has little effect on the number of CD8* T cells, but it causes the
number of CD4* T cells (this group includes helper T cells) to
decline dramatically.
