 

Low blood Ca**

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ore Parathyroid

Negative hormone (PTH)

feedback

4 a
, sf
Increased absorption -
er Catarantntssiing Reabsorption of Ca" Osteoclasts dissolve
(due to PTH activation ee as al CaPO, crystals in
of vitamin D) 4 bone, releasing Cat*
Increased blood Cat*
eee eee eee eee e nee e een e nel
FIGURE 56.18

Regulation of blood Ca‘ levels by parathyroid hormone (PTH). When blood Ca“ levels are low, parathyroid hormone (PTH) is
released by the parathyroid glands. PTH directly stimulates the dissolution of bone and the reabsorption of Ca*+ by the kidneys. PTH
indirectly promotes the intestinal absorption of Ca++ by stimulating the production of the active form of vitamin D.

The hormone produced by the parathyroid glands is a
peptide called parathyroid hormone (PTH). It is one of
only two hormones in humans that are absolutely essential
for survival (the other is aldosterone, which will be dis-
cussed in the next section). PTH is synthesized and re-
leased in response to falling levels of Catt in the blood.
This cannot be allowed to continue uncorrected, because a
significant fall in the blood Ca* level can cause severe mus-
cle spasms. A normal blood Ca* is important for the func-
tioning of muscles, including the heart, and for proper
functioning of the nervous and endocrine systems.

PTH stimulates the osteoclasts (bone cells) in bone to
dissolve the calcium phosphate crystals of the bone matrix
and release Ca** into the blood (figure 56.18). PTH also
stimulates the kidneys to reabsorb Ca** from the urine and
leads to the activation of vitamin D, needed for the absorp-
tion of Ca** from food in the intestine.

Vitamin D is produced in the skin from a cholesterol de-
rivative in response to ultraviolet light. It is called a vitamin

because a dietary source is needed to supplement the
amount that the skin produces. Secreted into the blood
from the skin, vitamin D is actually an inactive form of a
hormone. In order to become activated, the molecule must
gain two hydroxyl groups (—OH); one of these is added by
an enzyme in the liver, the other by an enzyme in the kid-
neys. The enzyme needed for this final step is stimulated by
PTH, thereby producing the active form of vitamin D
known as 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D. This hormone stimu-
lates the intestinal absorption of Ca** and thereby helps to
raise blood Ca** levels so that bone can become properly
mineralized. A diet deficient in vitamin D thus leads to
poor bone formation, a condition called rickets.

 

Thyroxine helps to set the basal metabolic rate by
stimulating the rate of cell respiration throughout the
body; this hormone is also needed for amphibian
metamorphosis. Parathyroid hormone acts to raise the
blood Ca** levels, in part by stimulating osteoclasts to
dissolve bone.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1141
