 

the center of a spot of light on the retina can inhibit the
response of photoreceptors peripheral to the center. This Blue Green Red
lateral inhibition enhances contrast and sharpens the 100

image.

Sensory Transduction in Photoreceptors :

The transduction of light energy into nerve impulses fol-

lows a sequence that is the inverse of the usual way that

sensory stimuli are detected. This is because, in the dark, 4

the photoreceptors release an inhibitory neurotransmitter 25

that hyperpolarizes the bipolar neurons. Thus inhibited, /\

the bipolar neurons do not release excitatory neurotrans-

=
a

Light absorption
(percent of maximum)
a
g

mitter to the ganglion cells. Light inhibits the photorecep- 0
tors from releasing their inhibitory neurotransmitter, and 400 500 600
by this means, stimulates the bipolar cells and thus the gan- Wavelength (nm)

 

 

glion cells, which transmit action potentials to the brain.
Arod or cone contains many Na* channels in the plasma
membrane of its outer segment, and in the dark, many of FIGURE 55.22

 

these channels are open. As a consequence, Na* continu- _ Color vision. The absorption maximum of cis-retinal in the
ously diffuses into the outer segment and across the narrow _thodopsin of rods is 500 nanometers (nm). However, the “blue
stalk to the inner segment. This flow of Na* that occurs in Cones” have their maximum light absorption at 455 nm; the

“green cones” at 530 nm, and the red cones at 625 nm. The brain
perceives all other colors from the combined activities of these
three cones’ systems.

the absence of light is called the dark current, and it causes
the membrane of a photoreceptor to be somewhat depolar-
ized in the dark. In the light, the Na* channels in the outer
segment rapidly close, reducing the dark current and caus-
ing the photoreceptor to hyperpolarize.

Researchers have discovered that cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (CGMP) is required to keep the Na* chan-
nels open, and that the channels will close if the cGMP is

lar cells activate ganglion cells, which transmit action po-
tentials to the brain.

 

converted into GMP. How does light cause this conversion Photoreceptor rods and cones contain the

and consequent closing of the Na* channels? When a pho- photopigment cis-retinal, which dissociates in response
topigment absorbs light, cis-retinal isomerizes and dissoci- to light and indirectly activates bipolar neurons and
ates from opsin in what is known as the bleaching reaction. then ganglion cells.

 

As a result of this dissociation, the opsin protein changes
shape. Each opsin is associated with over a hundred regula-
tory G proteins (see chapters 7 and 54). When the opsin
changes shape, the G proteins dissociate, releasing subunits
that activate hundreds of molecules of the enzyme phospho-
diesterase. This enzyme converts CGMP to GMP, thus clos-
ing the Nat channels at a rate of about 1000 per second and
inhibiting the dark current. The absorption of a single pho-
ton of light can block the entry of more than a million
sodium ions, thereby causing the photoreceptor to
hyperpolarize and release less inhibitory neuro- —

Axons to
optic nerve

Ganglion cell

       
 
 
 
 
    
  
  

Bipolar cell Choroid

transmitters. Freed from inhibition, the bipo-

 

Light

FIGURE 55.23

Structure of the retina. Note that the rods and

cones are at the rear of the retina, not the front. Light
passes through four other types of cells in the retina before it reaches the rods
and cones. Once the photoreceptors are activated, they stimulate bipolar Amacrine cell
cells, which in turn stimulate ganglion cells. The direction of nerve impulses

in the retina is thus opposite to the direction of light. Horizontal cell Rod

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1121
