2. The NaCl pumped out of the ascending limb of the
loop is trapped within the surrounding interstitial
fluid. This is because the peritubular capillaries in
the medulla also have loops, called vasa recta, so that
NaCl can diffuse from the blood leaving the
medulla to the blood entering the medulla. Thus,
the vasa recta functions in a countercurrent ex-
change, similar to that described for oxygen in the
countercurrent flow of water and blood in the gills
of fish (see chapter 53). In the case of the renal
medulla, the diffusion of NaCl between the blood
vessels keeps much of the NaCl within the intersti-
tial fluid, making it hypertonic.

3. The descending limb is permeable to water, so water
leaves by osmosis as the fluid descends into the hy-
pertonic renal medulla. This water enters the blood
vessels of the vasa recta and is carried away in the
general circulation.

4. The loss of water from the descending limb multi-
plies the concentration that can be achieved at each
level of the loop through the active extrusion of
NaCl by the ascending limb. The longer the loop of
Henle, the longer the region of interaction between
the descending and ascending limbs, and the greater
the total concentration that can be achieved. In a
human kidney, the concentration of filtrate entering
the loop is 300 milliosmolal, and this concentration
is multiplied to more than 1200 milliosmolal at the
bottom of the longest loops of Henle in the renal
medulla.

Because fluid flows in opposite directions in the two
limbs of the loop, the action of the loop of Henle in creat-
ing a hypertonic renal medulla is known as the countercur-
rent multiplier system. The high solute concentration of the
renal medulla is primarily the result of NaCl accumulation
by the countercurrent multiplier system, but urea also con-
tributes to the total osmolality of the medulla. This is be-
cause the descending limb of the loop of Henle and the
collecting duct are permeable to urea, which leaves these
regions of the nephron by diffusion.

Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct

Because NaCl was pumped out of the ascending limb, the
filtrate that arrives at the distal convoluted tubule and en-
ters the collecting duct in the renal cortex is hypotonic
(with a concentration of only 100 mOsm). The collecting
duct carrying this dilute fluid now plunges into the
medulla. As a result of the hypertonic interstitial fluid of
the renal medulla, there is a strong osmotic gradient that
pulls water out of the collecting duct and into surrounding
blood vessels.

The osmotic gradient is normally constant, but the per-
meability of the collecting duct to water is adjusted by a
hormone, antidiuretic hormone (ADH, also called vaso-
pressin), discussed in chapters 52 and 56. When an animal

1190 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Secreted
He. Kt
1 + pistat
convoluted
tubule

   

FIGURE 58.21

The nephron controls the amounts of K*, H*, and HCO;-
excreted in the urine. K+ is completely reabsorbed in the
proximal tubule and then secreted in varying amounts into the
distal tubule. HCO; - is filtered but normally completely
reabsorbed. H+ is filtered and also secreted into the distal tubule,
so that the final urine has an acidic pH.

needs to conserve water, the posterior pituitary gland se-
cretes more ADH, and this hormone increases the number
of water channels in the plasma membranes of the collect-
ing duct cells. This increases the permeability of the col-
lecting ducts to water so that more water is reabsorbed and
less is excreted in the urine. The animal thus excretes a hy-
pertonic urine.

In addition to the regulation of water balance, the kid-
neys regulate the balance of electrolytes in the blood by
reabsorption and secretion. For example, the kidneys re-
absorb K* in the proximal tubule and then secrete an
amount of K* needed to maintain homeostasis into the
distal convoluted tubule (figure 58.21). The kidneys also
maintain acid-base balance by excreting H* into the urine
and reabsorbing bicarbonate (HCO3)), as previously
described.

 

The loop of Henle creates a hypertonic renal medulla as
a result of the active extrusion of NaCl from the
ascending limb and the interaction with the descending
limb. The hypertonic medulla then draws water
osmotically from the collecting duct, which is
permeable to water under the influence of antidiuretic
hormone.

 
