Cells of the Specific

Immune System

The immune defense mechanisms of the body
involve the actions of white blood cells, or
leukocytes. Leukocytes include neutrophils,
eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes, all of
which are phagocytic and are involved in the
second line of defense, as well as two types of
lymphocytes (T cells and B cells), which are not
phagocytic but are critical to the specific im-
mune response (table 57.1), the third line of de-
fense. T cells direct the cell-mediated response,
B cells the humoral response.

After their origin in the bone marrow,
T cells migrate to the thymus (hence the desig-
nation “T”), a gland just above the heart.
There they develop the ability to identify mi-
croorganisms and viruses by the antigens ex-
posed on their surfaces. Tens of millions of
different T cells are made, each specializing in
the recognition of one particular antigen. No
invader can escape being recognized by at least
a few T cells. There are four principal kinds of
T cells: inducer T cells oversee the develop-
ment of T cells in the thymus; helper T cells
(often symbolized Ty) initiate the immune re-
sponse; cytotoxic (“cell-poisoning”) T cells
(often symbolized To) lyse cells that have been
infected by viruses; and suppressor T cells ter-
minate the immune response.

Unlike T cells, B cells do not travel to the
thymus; they complete their maturation in the
bone marrow. (B cells are so named because they
were originally characterized in a region of
chickens called the bursa.) From the bone mar-
row, B cells are released to circulate in the blood
and lymph. Individual B cells, like T cells, are
specialized to recognize particular foreign anti-
gens. When a B cell encounters the antigen to
which it is targeted, it begins to divide rapidly,
and its progeny differentiate into plasma cells
and memory cells. Each plasma cell is a minia-
ture factory producing antibodies that stick like
flags to that antigen wherever it occurs in the
body, marking any cell bearing the antigen for
destruction. The immunity that Pasteur ob-
served resulted from such antibodies and from
the continued presence of the B cells that pro-
duced them.

The lymphocytes, T cells and B cells, are
involved in the specific immune response.

T cells develop in the thymus while B cells
develop in the bone marrow.

Table 57.1 Cells of the Immune System

Cell Type

Helper T cell p

Inducer T cell

Function

Cytotoxic T cell

Suppressor T cell

B cell

oe

Plasma cell

&

Mast cell

Monocyte

Macrophage

Natural killer cell

 

 

 

Commander of the immune response;
detects infection and sounds the alarm,
initiating both T cell and B cell
responses

Not involved in the immediate response
to infection; mediates the maturation of
other T cells in the thymus

Detects and kills infected body cells;
recruited by helper T cells

Dampens the activity of T and B cells,
scaling back the defense after the
infection has been checked

Precursor of plasma cell; specialized to
recognize specific foreign antigens

Biochemical factory devoted to the
production of antibodies directed against
specific foreign antigens

Initiator of the inflammatory response,
which aids the arrival of leukocytes at a
site of infection; secretes histamine and
is important in allergic responses

Precursor of macrophage

The body’s first cellular line of defense;
also serves as antigen-presenting cell to
B and T cells and engulfs antibody-
covered cells

Recognizes and kills infected body cells;
natural killer (NK) cell detects and kills
cells infected by a broad range of
invaders; killer (K) cell attacks only
antibody-coated cells

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1153
