antibodies. The different immunoglobulin subclasses are
as follows:

1.IgM. This is the first type of antibody to be secreted
during the primary response and they serve as recep-
tors on the lymphocyte surface. These antibodies also
promote agglutination reactions (causing antigen-con-
taining particles to stick together, or agglutinate).

2.IgG. This is the major form of antibody in the
blood plasma and is secreted in a secondary response.

3.IgD. These antibodies serve as receptors for anti-
gens on the B cell surface. Their other functions are
unknown.

4. IgA. This is the major form of antibody in external
secretions, such as saliva and mother’s milk.

5.IgE. This form of antibodies promotes the release
of histamine and other agents that aid in attacking a
pathogen. Unfortunately, they sometimes trigger a
full-blown response when a harmless antigen enters
the body producing allergic symptoms, such as those
of hay fever.

Each B cell has on its surface about 100,000 IgM or
IgD receptors. Unlike the receptors on T cells, which
bind only to antigens presented by certain cells, B recep-
tors can bind to free antigens. This provokes a primary
response in which antibodies of the IgM class are se-
creted, and also stimulates cell division and clonal expan-
sion. Upon subsequent exposure, the plasma cells secrete
large amounts of antibodies that are generally of the IgG
class. Although plasma cells live only a few days, they
produce a vast number of antibodies. In fact, antibodies
constitute about 20% by weight of the total protein in
blood plasma. Production of IgG antibodies peaks after
about three weeks (figure 57.14).

When IgM (and to a lesser extent IgG) antibodies bind
to antigens on a cell, they cause the aggregation of com-
plement proteins. As we mentioned earlier, these pro-
teins form a pore that pierces the plasma membrane of
the infected cell (see figure 57.5), allowing water to enter
and causing the cell to burst. In contrast, when IgG anti-
bodies bind to antigens on a cell, they serve as markers
that stimulate phagocytosis by macrophages. Because cer-
tain complement proteins attract phagocytic cells, activa-
tion of complement is generally accompanied by in-
creased phagocytosis. Notice that antibodies don’t kill
invading pathogens directly; rather, they cause destruc-
tion of the pathogens by activating the complement sys-
tem and by targeting the pathogen for attack by phago-
cytic cells.

 

In the humoral immune response, B cells recognize
antigens and divide to produce plasma cells, producing
large numbers of circulating antibodies directed against
those antigens. IgM antibodies are produced first, and
they activate the complement system. Thereafter, IgG
antibodies are produced and promote phagocytosis.

 

 

Initiate
differentiation
of new
Tcells

 

 

 

    
  
  
   

   
  

Activate
inducer
T cells

 
 
     
  
 
 
  

Produce

Cause cytotoxic
T cells to
multiply

   
 

interleukin-2

 

B cell-antigen
complexes

 

Shut down both
cell-mediated and
humoral immune
responses

 

 

 

   

Activate
‘suppressor
T cells

   
 

  
     

Bind to

Cause B cells
to multiply

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cause Stimulate Cause
cell-mediated macrophages humoral
immune to congregate at immune
response site of infection response
FIGURE 57.13

The many roles of helper T cells. Helper T cells, through their
secretion of lymphokines and interaction with other cells of the
immune system, participate in every aspect of the immune

response.

 

Exposure
to
antigen

Antibody levels —>

 

IgG

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 57.14

IgM and IgG antibodies. The first antibodies produced in the
humoral immune response are IgM antibodies, which are very
effective at activating the complement system. This initial wave of
antibody production peaks after about one week and is followed

by a far more extended production of IgG antibodies.

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1159
