Because they pass information along only a few neurons,
reflexes are very fast. Many reflexes never reach the brain.
The nerve impulse travels only as far as the spinal cord and
then comes right back as a motor response. A few reflexes,
like the knee-jerk reflex (figure 54.32), are monosynaptic
reflex arcs. In these, the sensory nerve cell makes synaptic
contact directly with a motor neuron in the spinal cord
whose axon travels directly back to the muscle. The knee-
jerk reflex is also an example of a muscle stretch reflex. When
the muscle is briefly stretched by tapping the patellar liga-
ment with a rubber mallet, the muscle spindle apparatus is
also stretched. The spindle apparatus is embedded within
the muscle, and, like the muscle fibers outside the spindle,
is stretched along with the muscle. Stretching of the spin-
dle activates sensory neurons that synapse directly with so-
matic motor neurons within the spinal cord. As a result, the
somatic motor neurons conduct action potentials to the
skeletal muscle fibers and stimulate the muscle to contract.
This reflex is the simplest in the vertebrate body because
only one synapse is crossed in the reflex arc.

Most reflexes in vertebrates, however, involve a single
connecting interneuron between the sensory and the motor
neuron. The withdrawal of a hand from a hot stove or the
blinking of an eye in response to a puff of air involve a relay
of information from a sensory neuron through one or more
interneurons to a motor neuron. The motor neuron then
stimulates the appropriate muscle to contract (figure

54.33).

Gray
matter
White
matter Dorsal
Cell body in

i dorsal root
. ganglion

Spinal
cord Ventral
FIGURE 54.33

A cutaneous spinal reflex. This reflex is more involved than a
knee-jerk reflex because it involves interneurons as well as
sensory and motor neurons.

Sensory
neuron

Spinal Cord Regeneration

In the past, scientists have tried to repair severed spinal
cords by installing nerves from another part of the body to
bridge the gap and act as guides for the spinal cord to re-
generate. But most of these experiments have failed be-
cause although axons may regenerate through the im-
planted nerves, they cannot penetrate the spinal cord tissue
once they leave the implant. Also, there is a factor that in-
hibits nerve growth in the spinal cord. After discovering
that fibroblast growth factor stimulates nerve growth, neu-
robiologists tried gluing on the nerves, from the implant to
the spinal cord, with fibrin that had been mixed with the fi-
broblast growth factor. Three months later, rats with the
nerve bridges began to show movement in their lower bod-
ies. In further analyses of the experimental animals, dye
tests indicated that the spinal cord nerves had regrown
from both sides of the gap. Many scientists are encouraged
by the potential to use a similar treatment in human medi-
cine. However, most spinal cord injuries in humans do not
involve a completely severed spinal cord; often, nerves are
crushed, which results in different tissue damage. Also,
while the rats with nerve bridges did regain some locomo-
tory ability, tests indicated that they were barely able to
walk or stand.

 

The spinal cord relays messages to and from the brain
and processes some sensory information directly.

 

Stimulus

   
       
     
   

Receptor
in skin

 
   

Motor
neuron

Effector
(muscle)

Chapter 54 The Nervous System 1097
