Osmoregulatory Organs

Animals have evolved a variety of mechanisms to cope with
problems of water balance. In many animals, the removal of
water or salts from the body is coupled with the removal of
metabolic wastes through the excretory system. Protists
employ contractile vacuoles for this purpose, as do sponges.
Other multicellular animals have a system of excretory
tubules (little tubes) that expel fluid and wastes from the
body.

In flatworms, these tubules are called protonephridia, and
they branch throughout the body into bulblike flame cells
(figure 58.9). While these simple excretory structures open
to the outside of the body, they do not open to the inside of
the body. Rather, cilia within the flame cells must draw in
fluid from the body. Water and metabolites are then reab-
sorbed, and the substances to be excreted are expelled
through excretory pores.

Other invertebrates have a system of tubules that open
both to the inside and to the outside of the body. In the
earthworm, these tubules are known as metanephridia
(figure 58.10). The metanephridia obtain fluid from the
body cavity through a process of filtration into funnel-
shaped structures called mephrostomes. The term filtration
is used because the fluid is formed under pressure and
passes through small openings, so that molecules larger
than a certain size are excluded. This fil-
tered fluid is isotonic to the fluid in the
coelom, but as it passes through the tubules
of the metanephridia, NaCl is removed by
active transport processes. A general term
for transport out of the tubule and into the
surrounding body fluids is reabsorption. Be-
cause salt is reabsorbed from the filtrate,
the urine excreted is more dilute than the
body fluids (is hypotonic). The kidneys of
mollusks and the excretory organs of crus-
taceans (called antennal glands) also produce
urine by filtration and reclaim certain ions
by reabsorption.

The excretory organs in insects are the
Malpighian tubules (figure 58.11), exten-
sions of the digestive tract that branch off
anterior to the hindgut. Urine is not
formed by filtration in these tubules, be-
cause there is no pressure difference be-
tween the blood in the body cavity and the
tubule. Instead, waste molecules and potas-
sium (K*) ions are secreted into the tubules
by active transport. Secretion is the oppo-
site of reabsorption—ions or molecules are
transported from the body fluid into the
tubule. The secretion of K* creates an os-
motic gradient that causes water to enter

. > environment.
the tubules by osmosis from the body’s

1180 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

   

Coelomic fluid

FIGURE 58.10

The metanephridia of annelids. Most invertebrates, such as the annelid shown
here, have metanephridia. These consist of tubules that receive a filtrate of coelomic
fluid, which enters the funnel-like nephrostomes. Salt can be reabsorbed from these
tubules, and the fluid that remains, urine, is released from pores into the external

  
  

tubule

FIGURE 58.9
‘The protonephridia of flatworms. A branching system of
tubules, bulblike flame cells, and excretory pores make up the
protonephridia of flatworms. Cilia inside the flame cells draw in
fluids from the body by their beating action. Substances are then
expelled through pores which open to the outside of the body.

Capillary
network

Pore for
urine excretion

Nephrostome
