Maintaining the Internal
Environment

 

Concept Outline

58.1 The regulatory systems of the body maintain
homeostasis.

The Need to Maintain Homeostasis. Regulatory
mechanisms maintain homeostasis through negative
feedback loops.

Antagonistic Effectors and Positive Feedback.
Antagonistic effectors cause opposite changes, while
positive feedback pushes changes further in the same way.

58.2 The extracellular fluid concentration is constant
in most vertebrates.

Osmolality and Osmotic Balance. Vertebrates have to
cope with the osmotic gain or loss of body water.
Osmoregulatory Organs. Invertebrates have a variety of
organs to regulate water balance; kidneys are the
osmoregulatory organs of most vertebrates.

Evolution of the Vertebrate Kidney. Freshwater bony
fish produce a dilute urine and marine bony fish produce an
isotonic urine. Only birds and mammals can retain so much
water that they produce a concentrated urine.

58.3 The functions of the vertebrate kidney are
performed by nephrons.

The Mammalian Kidney. Each kidney contains
nephrons that produce a filtrate which is modified by
reabsorption and secretion to produce urine.

‘Transport Processes in the Mammalian Nephron.
The nephron tubules of birds and mammals have loops of
Henle, which function to draw water out of the tubule and
back into the blood.

Ammonia, Urea, and Uric Acid. The breakdown of
protein and nucleic acids yields nitrogen, which is excreted
as ammonia in bony fish, as urea in mammals, and as uric
acid in reptiles and birds.

58.4 The kidney is regulated by hormones.

Hormones Control Homeostatic Functions.

Antidiuretic hormone promotes water retention and the
excretion of a highly concentrated urine. Aldosterone
stimulates the retention of salt and water, whereas atrial
natriuretic hormone promotes the excretion of salt and water.

 

FIGURE 58.1

Regulating body temperature with water. One of the ways an
elephant can regulate its temperature is to spray water on its
body. Water also cycles through the elephant’s body in enormous
quantities each day and helps to regulate its internal environment.

lhe first vertebrates evolved in seawater, and the physi-

ology of all vertebrates reflects this origin. Approxi-
mately two-thirds of every vertebrate’s body is water. If the
amount of water in the body of a vertebrate falls much
lower than this, the animal will die. In this chapter, we dis-
cuss the various mechanisms by which animals avoid gain-
ing or losing too much water. As we shall see, these mecha-
nisms are closely tied to the way animals exploit the varied
environments in which they live and to the regulatory sys-
tems of the body (figure 58-1).

1173
