56.1

Types of Regulatory Molecules

As we discussed in chapter 54, the axons of neurons secrete
chemical messengers called neurotransmitters into the
synaptic cleft. These chemicals diffuse only a short distance
to the postsynaptic membrane, where they bind to their re-
ceptor proteins and stimulate the postsynaptic cell (another
neuron, or a muscle or gland cell). Synaptic transmission
generally affects only the one postsynaptic cell that receives
the neurotransmitter.

A hormone is a regulatory chemical that is secreted into
the blood by an endocrine gland or an organ of the body
exhibiting an endocrine function. The blood carries the
hormone to every cell in the body, but only the target
cells for a given hormone can respond to it. Thus, the dif-
ference between a neurotransmitter and a hormone is not
in the chemical nature of the regulatory molecule, but
rather in the way it is transported to its target cells, and its
distance from these target cells. A chemical regulator called
norepinephrine, for example, is released as a neurotrans-
mitter by sympathetic nerve endings and is also secreted by
the adrenal gland as a hormone.

Some specialized neurons secrete chemical messengers
into the blood rather than into a narrow synaptic cleft. In
these cases, the chemical that the neurons secrete is some-

 
   

Regulation is often accomplished by chemical messengers.

times called a neurohormone. The distinction between
the nervous system and endocrine system blurs when it
comes to such molecules. Indeed, because some neurons in
the brain secrete hormones, the brain can be considered an
endocrine gland!

In addition to the chemical messengers released as
neurotransmitters and as hormones, other chemical regu-
latory molecules are released and act within an organ. In
this way, the cells of an organ regulate one another. This
type of regulation is not endocrine, because the regula-
tory molecules work without being transported by the
blood, but is otherwise similar to the way that hormones
regulate their target cells. Such regulation is called
paracrine. Another type of chemical messenger that is
released into the environment is called a pheromone.
These messengers aid in the communication between an-
imals, not in the regulation within an animal. A compari-
son of the different types of chemical messengers used
for regulation is given in figure 56.2.

 

Regulatory molecules released by axons at a synapse are
neurotransmitters, those released by endocrine glands
into the blood are hormones, and those that act within
the organ in which they are produced are paracrine
regulators.

 

Endocrine gland

Neurotransmitter

    
  

Paracrine regulator

FIGURE 56.2

 

Hormone
cartied by blood

Receptor proteins

The functions of organs are influenced by neural, paracrine, and endocrine regulators. Each type of chemical regulator binds in a
specific fashion to receptor proteins on the surface of or within the cells of target organs.

1126 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
