Evolution of the Vertebrate Kidney

The kidney is a complex organ made up of thousands of re-
peating units called nephrons, cach with the structure of a
bent tube (figure 58.12). Blood pressure forces the fluid in
blood past a filter, called the glomerulus, at the top of each
nephron. The glomerulus retains blood cells, proteins, and
other useful large molecules in the blood but allows the
water, and the small molecules and wastes dissolved in it, to
pass through and into the bent tube part of the nephron. As
the filtered fluid passes through the nephron tube, useful
sugars and ions are recovered from it by active transport,
leaving the water and metabolic wastes behind in a fluid
urine.

Although the same basic design has been retained in all
vertebrate kidneys, there have been a few modifications.
Because the original glomerular filtrate is isotonic to blood,
all vertebrates can produce a urine that is isotonic to blood
by reabsorbing ions and water in equal proportions or hy-
potonic to blood—that is, more dilute than the blood, by
reabsorbing relatively less water blood. Only birds and
mammals can reabsorb enough water from their glomeru-
lar filtrate to produce a urine that is hypertonic to blood—
that is, more concentrated than the blood, by reabsorbing
relatively more water.

Freshwater Fish

Kidneys are thought to have evolved first among the
freshwater teleosts, or bony fish. Because the body fluids
of a freshwater fish have a greater osmotic concentration
than the surrounding water, these animals face two seri-
ous problems: (1) water tends to enter the body from the
environment; and (2) solutes tend to leave the body and

Neck

Glomerulus

 

 

 

enter the environment. Freshwater fish address the first
problem by not drinking water and by excreting a large
volume of dilute urine, which is hypotonic to their body
fluids. They address the second problem by reabsorbing
ions across the nephron tubules, from the glomerular fil-
trate back into the blood. In addition, they actively trans-
port ions across their gill surfaces from the surrounding
water into the blood.

Marine Bony Fish

Although most groups of animals seem to have evolved first
in the sea, marine bony fish (teleosts) probably evolved
from freshwater ancestors, as was mentioned in chapter 48.
They faced significant new problems in making the transi-
tion to the sea because their body fluids are hypotonic to
the surrounding seawater. Consequently, water tends to
leave their bodies by osmosis across their gills, and they
also lose water in their urine. To compensate for this con-
tinuous water loss, marine fish drink large amounts of sea-
water (figure 58.13).

Many of the divalent cations (principally Ca*t and Mg**)
in the seawater that a marine fish drinks remain in the di-
gestive tract and are eliminated through the anus. Some,
however, are absorbed into the blood, as are the monova-
lent ions K*, Na*, and Cl-. Most of the monovalent ions are
actively transported out of the blood across the gill sur-
faces, while the divalent ions that enter the blood are se-
creted into the nephron tubules and excreted in the urine.
In these two ways, marine bony fish eliminate the ions they
get from the seawater they drink. The urine they excrete is
isotonic to their body fluids. It is more concentrated than
the urine of freshwater fish, but not as concentrated as that
of birds and mammals.

Distal arm

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

at
a ey eaiey tion of Proximal | 7
¢ basic organization arm
the vertebrate nephron. The Glucose |*— § [1-0] | J Neel }
nephron tubule of the Amino acids | <— > H,0]
freshwater fish is a basic -
design that has been retained Dyelent)<—\F>([Hzo] > WES & om
in the kidneys of marine fish ’ e
and terrestrial vertebrates that t— Collecting duct
evolved later. Sugars, amino intermediate —
acids, and divalent ions such as segment
Ca* are recovered in the (Loop of Henle)
proximal arm; monovalent
ions such as Nat and Cl- are
recovered in the distal arm; i
and water is recovered in the i

collecting duct.

1182 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 
