Smell

In terrestrial vertebrates, the sense of smell, or olfaction,
involves chemoreceptors located in the upper portion of
the nasal passages (figure 55.8). These receptors are bipolar
neurons whose dendrites end in tassels of cilia that project
into the nasal mucosa, and whose axon projects directly
into the cerebral cortex. A terrestrial vertebrate uses its
sense of smell in much the same way that a fish uses its
sense of taste—to sample the chemical environment around
it. Because terrestrial vertebrates are surrounded by air
rather than water, their sense of smell has become special-
ized to detect airborne particles (but these particles must
first dissolve in extracellular fluid before they can activate
the olfactory receptors). The sense of smell can be ex-
tremely acute in many mammals, so much so that a single
odorant molecule may be all that is needed to excite a given
receptor.

Although humans can detect only four modalities of
taste, they can discern thousands of different smells. New
research suggests that there may be as many as a thousand
different genes coding for different receptor proteins for
smell. The particular set of olfactory neurons that respond
to a given odor might serve as a “fingerprint” the brain can
use to identify the odor.

Olfactory nerve

     

Nasal passage

FIGURE 55.8

Olfactory mucosa

Internal Chemoreceptors

Sensory receptors within the body detect a variety of
chemical characteristics of the blood or fluids derived
from the blood, including cerebrospinal fluid. Included
among these receptors are the peripheral chemoreceptors of
the aortic and carotid bodies, which are sensitive primar-
ily to plasma pH, and the central chemoreceptors in the
medulla oblongata of the brain, which are sensitive to the
pH of cerebrospinal fluid. These receptors were dis-
cussed together with the regulation of breathing in chap-
ter 53. When the breathing rate is too low, the concen-
tration of plasma CQ) increases, producing more
carbonic acid and causing a fall in the blood pH. The
carbon dioxide can also enter the cerebrospinal fluid and
cause a lowering of the pH, thereby stimulating the cen-
tral chemoreceptors. This chemoreceptor stimulation in-
directly affects the respiratory control center of the brain
stem, which increases the breathing rate. The aortic bod-
ies can also respond to a lowering of blood oxygen con-
centrations, but this effect is normally not significant un-
less a person goes to a high altitude.

To olfactory Basal cell Support cell

To olfactory

Receptor cell

 

Smell. Humans detect smells by means of olfactory neurons located in the lining of the nasal passages. The axons of these neurons
transmit impulses directly to the brain via the olfactory nerve. Basal cells regenerate new olfactory neurons to replace dead or damaged

cells. Olfactory neurons typically live about one month.

1110 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
