Renal cortex

Descending limb
of loop of Henle
Renal medulla

 

Loop of Henle

FIGURE 58.18

Proximal
convoluted tubule

Bowman's
capsule

  
 

Distal
convoluted tubule

Ascending limb
of loop of Henle

Collecting duct

To ureter

Peritubule
capillaries

A nephron in a mammalian kidney. The nephron tubule is surrounded by peritubular capillaries, which carry away molecules and ions

that are reabsorbed from the filtrate.

this glomerular filtrate, but large amounts of water and
dissolved molecules leave the vascular system at this step.
The filtrate immediately enters the first region of the
nephron tubules. This region, Bowman’s capsule, envelops
the glomerulus much as a large, soft balloon surrounds
your fist if you press your fist into it. The capsule has slit
openings so that the glomerular filtrate can enter the sys-
tem of nephron tubules.

After the filtrate enters Bowman’s capsule it goes into
a portion of the nephron called the proximal convoluted
tubule, located in the cortex. The fluid then moves down
into the medulla and back up again into the cortex in a
loop of Henle. Only the kidneys of mammals and birds
have loops of Henle, and this is why only birds and mam-
mals have the ability to concentrate their urine. After
leaving the loop, the fluid is delivered to a distal convo-

luted tubule in the cortex that next drains into a collect-
ing duct. The collecting duct again descends into the
medulla, where it merges with other collecting ducts to
empty its contents, now called urine, into the renal
pelvis.

Blood components that were not filtered out of the
glomerulus drain into an efferent arteriole, which then
empties into a second bed of capillaries called peritubular
capillaries that surround the tubules. This is the only loca-
tion in the body where two capillary beds occur in series.
The glomerulus is drained by an arteriole and this second
arteriole delivers blood to a second capillary bed, the per-
itubular capillaries. As described later, the peritubular
capillaries are needed for the processes of reabsorption
and secretion.

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1187
