Extracellular

 

1. Protein in membrane binds intracellular

sodium. ‘sodium.

2. ATP phosphorylates protein with bound

 

3. Phosphorylation causes conformational
change in protein, allowing sodium to
leave.

 

4, Extracellular potassium binds to exposed
sites. phorylation of protein.

FIGURE 6.21

5, Binding of potassium causes dephos-

6. Dephosphorylation of protein triggers
change back to original conformation,
potassium moves into cell, and the cycle
repeats.

The sodium-potassium pump. The protein channel known as the sodium-potassium pump transports sodium (Na*) and potassium (K*)
ions across the cell membrane. For every three Na* that are transported out of the cell, two K* are transported into the cell. The sodium-

potassium pump is fueled by ATP.

so they now face the exterior. In this new conformation,
the protein has a low affinity for Na*, and the three
bound Na* dissociate from the protein and diffuse into
the extracellular fluid.

Step 4. The new conformation has a high affinity for
K*, two of which bind to the extracellular side of the

protein as soon as it is free of the Na*.

Step 5. The binding of the K* causes another confor-
mational change in the protein, this time resulting in the
dissociation of the bound phosphate group.

Step 6. Freed of the phosphate group, the protein re-
verts to its original conformation, exposing the two K*
to the cytoplasm. This conformation has a low affinity
for K*, so the two bound K* dissociate from the protein

and diffuse into the interior of the cell. The original
conformation has a high affinity for Na*; when these
ions bind, they initiate another cycle.

Three Na* leave the cell and two K* enter in every
cycle. The changes in protein conformation that occur
during the cycle are rapid, enabling each carrier to
transport as many as 300 Na* per second. The sodium-
potassium pump appears to be ubiquitous in animal cells,
although cells vary widely in the number of pump pro-
teins they contain.

 

Active transport moves a solute across a membrane up
its concentration gradient, using protein carriers driven
by the expenditure of chemical energy.

 

Chapter6 Membranes 119
