Bowman's

Glomerulus capsule

   
   
 
 
  

Reabsorption and Secretion

Most of the water and dissolved solutes that enter the
glomerular filtrate must be returned to the blood (figure
58.19), or the animal would literally urinate to death. In a
human, for example, approximately 2000 liters of blood
passes through the kidneys each day, and 180 liters of
water leaves the blood and enters the glomerular filtrate.
Because we only have a total blood volume of about 5
liters and only produce | to 2 liters of urine per day, it is
obvious that each liter of blood is filtered many times per
day and most of the filtered water is reabsorbed. The re-
absorption of water occurs as a consequence of salt
(NaCl) reabsorption through mechanisms that will be de-
scribed shortly.

The reabsorption of glucose, amino acids, and many
other molecules needed by the body is driven by active
transport carriers. As in all carrier-mediated transport, a
maximum rate of transport is reached whenever the carriers
are saturated (see chapter 6). For the renal glucose carriers,
saturation occurs when the concentration of glucose in the
blood (and thus in the glomerular filtrate) is about 180 mil-
ligrams per 100 milliliters of blood. If a person has a blood
glucose concentration in excess of this amount, as happens
in untreated diabetes mellitus, the glucose left untrans-
ported in the filtrate is expelled in the urine. Indeed, the
presence of glucose in the urine is diagnostic of diabetes
mellitus.

The secretion of foreign molecules and particular
waste products of the body involves the transport of these
molecules across the membranes of the blood capillaries
and kidney tubules into the filtrate. This process is similar
to reabsorption, but it proceeds in the opposite direction.
Some secreted molecules are eliminated in the urine so
rapidly that they may be cleared from the blood in a sin-
gle pass through the kidneys. This rapid elimination ex-

1188 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Filtration *

Reabsorption to blood

FIGURE 58.19

Four functions of the
kidney. Molecules enter
the urine by filtration out
of the glomerulus and by
secretion into the tubules
from surrounding
peritubular capillaries.
Molecules that entered
the filtrate can be
returned to the blood by
reabsorption from the
tubules into surrounding
peritubular capillaries, or
they may be eliminated
from the body by excretion
through the tubule to a
ureter, then to the
bladder.

Secretion from blood

Excretion

Renal tubule

plains why penicillin, which is secreted by the nephrons,
must be administered in very high doses and several times
per day.

Excretion

A major function of the kidney is the elimination of a vari-
ety of potentially harmful substances that animals eat and
drink. In addition, urine contains nitrogenous wastes, such
as urea and uric acid, that are products of the catabolism of
amino acids and nucleic acids. Urine may also contain ex-
cess K+, H+, and other ions that are removed from the
blood. Urine’s generally high H* concentration (pH 5 to 7)
helps maintain the acid-base balance of the blood within a
narrow range (pH 7.35 to 7.45). Moreover, the excretion of
water in urine contributes to the maintenance of blood vol-
ume and pressure; the larger the volume of urine excreted,
the lower the blood volume.

The purpose of kidney function is therefore homeosta-
sis—the kidneys are critically involved in maintaining the
constancy of the internal environment. When disease inter-
feres with kidney function, it causes a rise in the blood con-
centration of nitrogenous waste products, disturbances in
electrolyte and acid-base balance, and a failure in blood
pressure regulation. Such potentially fatal changes high-
light the central importance of the kidneys in normal body

physiology.

 

‘The mammalian kidney is divided into a cortex and
medulla and contains microscopic functioning units
called nephrons. The nephron tubules receive a blood
filtrate from the glomeruli and modify this filtrate to
produce urine, which empties into the renal pelvis and
is expelled from the kidney through the ureter.

 
