tain only a few hundred copies of the genes encoding
those receptors?

The answer to this question is that in the B cell the mil-
lions of immune receptor genes do not have to be inherited at
conception because they do not exist as single sequences of
nucleotides. Rather, they are assembled by stitching together
three or four DNA segments that code for different parts of
the receptor molecule. When an antibody is assembled, the
different sequences of DNA are brought together to form a
composite gene (figure 57.17). This process is called somatic
rearrangement. For example, combining DNA in different
ways can produce 16,000 different heavy chains and about
1200 different light chains (in mouse antibodies).

Two other processes generate even more sequences.
First, the DNA segments are often joined together with
one or two nucleotides off-register, shifting the reading
frame during gene transcription and so generating a totally
different sequence of amino acids in the protein. Second,
random mistakes occur during successive DNA replications
as the lymphocytes divide during clonal expansion. Both
mutational processes produce changes in amino acid se-
quences, a phenomenon known as somatic mutation be-
cause it takes place in a somatic cell, a B cell rather than in
a gamete.

Because a B cell may end up with any heavy-chain gene
and any light-chain gene during its maturation, the total
number of different antibodies possible is staggering:
16,000 heavy-chain combinations x 1200 light-chain com-
binations = 19 million different possible antibodies. If one
also takes into account the changes induced by somatic mu-
tation, the total can exceed 200 million! It should be under-
stood that, although this discussion has centered on B cells
and their receptors, the receptors on T cells are as diverse
as those on B cells because they also are subject to similar
somatic rearrangements and mutations.

Immunological Tolerance

A mature animal’s immune system normally does not re-
spond to that animal’s own tissue. This acceptance of self
cells is known as immunological tolerance. The immune
system of an embryo, on the other hand, is able to respond
to both foreign and self molecules, but it loses the ability to
respond to self molecules as its development proceeds. In-
deed, if foreign tissue is introduced into an embryo before
its immune system has developed, the mature animal that
results will not recognize that tissue as foreign and will ac-
cept grafts of similar tissue without rejection.

There are two general mechanisms for immunological
tolerance: clonal deletion and clonal suppression. During
the normal maturation of hemopoietic stem cells in an em-
bryo, fetus, or newborn, most lymphocyte clones that have
receptors for self antigens are either eliminated (clonal
deletion) or suppressed (clonal suppression). The cells
“learn” to identify self antigens because the antigens are
encountered very frequently. If a receptor is activated fre-

     
  
 
 
 
 

Rearrangement
of DNA \,

    

Transcription

differentiated
Bcell

‘Chromosome of
undifferentiated B cell

FIGURE 57.17

The lymphocyte receptor molecule is produced by a
composite gene. Different regions of the DNA code for different
regions of the receptor structure (C, constant regions; 7, joining
regions; D, diversity regions; and V, variable regions) and are
brought together to make a composite gene that codes for the
receptor. Through different somatic rearrangements of these

DNA segments, an enormous number of different receptor
molecules can be produced.

quently, it is assumed that the cell is recognizing a self anti-
gen and the lymphocytes are eliminated or suppressed.
Thus, the only clones that survive this phase of develop-
ment are those that are directed against foreign rather than
self molecules.

Immunological tolerance sometimes breaks down, caus-
ing either B cells or T cells (or both) to recognize their
own tissue antigens. This loss of immune tolerance results
in autoimmune disease. Myasthenia gravis, for example, is
an autoimmune disease in which individuals produce anti-
bodies directed against acetylcholine receptors on their
own skeletal muscle cells, causing paralysis. Autoimmunity
will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter.

 

An antibody molecule is composed of constant and
variable regions. The variable regions recognize a
specific antigen because they possess clefts into which
the antigen can fit. Lymphocyte receptors are encoded
by genes that are assembled by somatic rearrangement
and mutation of the DNA.

 

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1161
