Natural Selection

Darwin was thoroughly familiar with
variation in domesticated animals and
began On the Origin of Species with a
detailed discussion of pigeon breeding.
He knew that breeders selected certain
varieties of pigeons and other animals,
such as dogs, to produce certain char-
acteristics, a process Darwin called ar-
tificial selection. Once this had been
done, the animals would breed true for
the characteristics that had been select-
ed. Darwin had also observed that the
differences purposely developed be-
tween domesticated races or breeds
were often greater than those that sep-
arated wild species. Domestic pigeon
breeds, for example, show much
greater variety than all of the hundreds
of wild species of pigeons found
throughout the world. Such relation-
ships suggested to Darwin that evolu-
tionary change could occur in nature
too. Surely if pigeon breeders could
foster such variation by “artificial selec-
tion,” nature could do the same, play-
ing the breeder’s role in selecting the
next generation—a process Darwin
called natural selection.

Darwin’s theory thus incorporates
the hypothesis of evolution, the pro-
cess of natural selection, and the mass of new evidence
for both evolution and natural selection that Darwin
compiled. Thus, Darwin’s theory provides a simple and
direct explanation of biological diversity, or why animals
are different in different places: because habitats differ in
their requirements and opportunities, the organisms with
characteristics favored locally by natural selection will
tend to vary in different places.

FIGURE 1.11

an 1874 publication.

Darwin Drafts His Argument

Darwin drafted the overall argument for evolution by natu-
ral selection in a preliminary manuscript in 1842. After
showing the manuscript to a few of his closest scientific
friends, however, Darwin put it in a drawer, and for
16 years turned to other research. No one knows for sure
why Darwin did not publish his initial manuscript—it is
very thorough and outlines his ideas in detail. Some histo-
rians have suggested that Darwin was shy of igniting public
criticism of his evolutionary ideas—there could have been
little doubt in his mind that his theory of evolution by nat-
ural selection would spark controversy. Others have pro-

14 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

 

Darwin greets his monkey ancestor. In
his time, Darwin was often portrayed
unsympathetically, as in this drawing from

posed that Darwin was simply refining
his theory all those years, although
there is little evidence he altered his
initial manuscript in all that time.

Wallace Has the Same Idea

The stimulus that finally brought Dar-
win’s theory into print was an essay he
received in 1858. A young English nat-
uralist named Alfred Russel Wallace
(1823-1913) sent the essay to Darwin
from Malaysia; it concisely set forth
the theory of evolution by means of
natural selection, a theory Wallace had
developed independently of Darwin.
Like Darwin, Wallace had been
greatly influenced by Malthus’s 1798
essay. Colleagues of Wallace, knowing
of Darwin’s work, encouraged him to
communicate with Darwin. After re-
ceiving Wallace’s essay, Darwin ar-
ranged for a joint presentation of their
ideas at a seminar in London. Darwin
then completed his own book, expand-
ing the 1842 manuscript which he had
written so long ago, and submitted it
for publication.

Publication of Darwin’s Theory

Darwin’s book appeared in November 1859 and caused an
immediate sensation. Many people were deeply disturbed by
the suggestion that human beings were descended from the
same ancestor as apes (figure 1.11). Darwin did not actually
discuss this idea in his book, but it followed directly from the
principles he outlined. In a subsequent book, The Descent of
Man, Darwin presented the argument directly, building a
powerful case that humans and living apes have common an-
cestors. Although people had long accepted that humans
closely resembled apes in many characteristics, the possibility
that there might be a direct evolutionary relationship was un-
acceptable to many. Darwin’s arguments for the theory of
evolution by natural selection were so compelling, however,
that his views were almost completely accepted within the in-
tellectual community of Great Britain after the 1860s.

 

The fact that populations do not really expand
geometrically implies that nature acts to limit
population numbers. The traits of organisms that
survive to produce more offspring will be more
common in future generations—a process Darwin
called natural selection.

 
