Coupled Transport

Many molecules are transported into cells up a concentration
gradient through a process that uses ATP indirectly. The
molecules move hand-in-hand with sodium ions or protons
that are moving down their concentration gradients. This type
of active transport, called cotransport, has two components:

1. Establishing the down gradient. ATP is used to
establish the sodium ion or proton down gradient,
which is greater than the up gradient of the molecule
to be transported.

2. Traversing the up gradient. Cotransport proteins
(also called coupled transport proteins) carry the mol-
ecule and cither a sodium ion or a proton together
across the membrane.

Because the down gradient of the sodium ion or proton is
greater than the up gradient of the molecule to be trans-
ported, the net movement across the membrane is in the
direction of the down gradient, typically into the cell.

Establishing the Down Gradient

Either the sodium-potassium pump or the proton pump es-
tablishes the down gradient that powers most active trans-
port processes of the cell.

The Sodium-Potassium Pump. The sodium-potassium
pump actively pumps sodium ions out of the cell, powered
by energy from ATP. This establishes a sodium ion con-
centration gradient that is lower inside the cell.

The Proton Pump. The proton pump pumps protons
(H+ ions) across a membrane using energy derived from
energy-rich molecules or from photosynthesis. This cre-
ates a proton gradient, in which the concentration of pro-
tons is higher on one side of the membrane than the other.
Membranes are impermeable to protons, so the only way
protons can diffuse back down their concentration gradi-
ent is through a second cotransport protein.

Traversing the Up Gradient

Animal cells accumulate many amino acids and sugars against
a concentration gradient: the molecules are transported into
the cell from the extracellular fluid, even though their con-
centrations are higher inside the cell. These molecules couple
with sodium ions to enter the cell down the Na* concentra-
tion gradient established by the sodium-potassium pump. In
this cotransport process, Na* and a specific sugar or amino
acid simultaneously bind to the same transmembrane protein
on the outside of the cell, called a symport (figure 6.22).
Both are then translocated to the inside of the cell, but in the
process Na* moves down its concentration gradient while the
sugar or amino acid moves up its concentration gradient. In
effect, the cell uses some of the energy stored in the Na* con-
centration gradient to accumulate sugars and amino acids.

120 Part II _ Biology of the Cell

Outside of cell

   

AD

Inside of cell

FIGURE 6.22

Cotransport through a coupled transport protein. A

membrane protein transports sodium ions into the cell, down
their concentration gradient, at the same time it transports a sugar
molecule into the cell. The gradient driving the Na* entry is so
great that sugar molecules can be brought in against their
concentration gradient.

In a related process, called countertransport, the in-
ward movement of Na* is coupled with the outward move-
ment of another substance, such as Ca** or H*. As in co-
transport, both Nat and the other substance bind to the
same transport protein, in this case called an antiport, but
in this case they bind on opposite sides of the membrane
and are moved in opposite directions. In countertransport,
the cell uses the energy released as Na* moves down its
concentration gradient into the cell to extrude a substance
up its concentration gradient.

The cell uses the proton down gradient established by
the proton pump (figure 6.23) in ATP production. The
movement of protons through their cotransport protein is
coupled to the production of ATP, the energy-storing mol-
ecule we mentioned earlier. Thus, the cell expends energy
to produce ATP, which provides it with a convenient en-
ergy storage form that it can employ in its many activities.
The coupling of the proton pump to ATP synthesis, called
chemiosmosis, is responsible for almost all of the ATP
produced from food (see chapter 9) and all of the ATP pro-
duced by photosynthesis (see chapter 10). We know that
proton pump proteins are ancient because they are present
in bacteria as well as in eukaryotes. The mechanisms for
transport across plasma membranes are summarized in

table 6.2.

 

Many molecules are cotransported into cells up their
concentration gradients by coupling their movement to
that of sodium ions or protons moving down their
concentration gradients.

 
