lens and attaches it to the circular cil-
iary muscle. When the ciliary muscle
contracts, it puts slack in the suspen-
sory ligament and the lens becomes
more rounded and powerful. This is re-
quired for close vision; in far vision, the
ciliary muscles relax, moving away from
the lens and tightening the suspensory
ligament. The lens thus becomes more
flattened and less powerful, keeping the
image focused on the retina. People
who are nearsighted or farsighted do
not properly focus the image on the
retina (figure 55.19). Interestingly, the
lens of an amphibian or a fish does not
change shape; these animals instead
focus images by moving their lens in
and out, just as you would do to focus a
camera.

Annelids, mollusks, arthropods,
and vertebrates have independently
evolved image-forming eyes. The
vertebrate eye admits light through
a pupil and then focuses this light
by means of an adjustable lens onto
the retina at the back of the eye.

Suspensory
ligaments

Iris

Normal distant vision

Retina
Lens
.

Normal near vision

@
FIGURE 55.19

     
  

Sclera

si
esPeneory Retina

wae Optic nerve

Ciliary muscle

 

Lens

 

Suspensory
ligament under iris

FIGURE 55.18

Structure of the human eye. The transparent cornea and lens focus light onto the retina
at the back of the eye, which contains the rods and cones. The center of each eye’s visual
field is focused on the fovea. Focusing is accomplished by contraction and relaxation of the
ciliary muscle, which adjusts the curvature of the lens.

 

. .
Nearsighted Farsighted
Co .
Nearsighted, corrected Farsighted, corrected
(b) ()

Focusing the human eye. (a) In people with normal vision, the image remains focused on the retina in both near and far vision because of
changes produced in the curvature of the lens. When a person with normal vision stands 20 feet or more from an object, the lens is in its
least convex form and the image is focused on the retina. (J) In nearsighted people, the image comes to a focus in front of the retina and
the image thus appears blurred. (¢) In farsighted people, the focus of the image would be behind the retina because the distance from the

lens to the retina is too short.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1119
