Osmosis

The cytoplasm of a cell contains ions and molecules, such
as sugars and amino acids, dissolved in water. The mixture
of these substances and water is called an aqueous solu-
tion. Water, the most common of the molecules in the
mixture, is the solvent, and the substances dissolved in the
water are solutes. The ability of water and solutes to dif-
fuse across membranes has important consequences.

Molecules Diffuse down a Concentration
Gradient

Both water and solutes diffuse from regions of high con-
centration to regions of low concentration; that is, they dif-
fuse down their concentration gradients. When two re-
gions are separated by a membrane, what happens depends
on whether or not the solutes can pass freely through that
membrane. Most solutes, including ions and sugars, are not
lipid-soluble and, therefore, are unable to cross the lipid bi-
layer of the membrane.

Even water molecules, which are very polar, cannot
cross a lipid bilayer. Water flows through aquaporins,
which are specialized channels for water. A simple experi-
ment demonstrates this. If you place an amphibian egg in
hypotonic spring water, it does not swell. If you then inject
aquaporin mRNA into the egg, the channel proteins are ex-
pressed and the egg then swells.

Dissolved solutes interact with water molecules, which
form hydration shells about the charged solute. When there
is a concentration gradient of solutes, the solutes will move
from a high to a low concentration, dragging with them their
hydration shells of water molecules. When a membrane sepa-
rates two solutions, hydration shell water molecules move
with the diffusing ions, creating a net movement of water to-
wards the low solute. This net water movement across a
membrane by diffusion is called osmosis (figure 6.14).

The concentration of a// solutes in a solution determines
the osmotic concentration of the solution. If two solu-
tions have unequal osmotic concentrations, the solution
with the higher concentration is hyperosmotic (Greek
hyper, “more than”), and the solution with the lower con-
centration is hypoosmotic (Greek hypo, “less than”). If the
osmotic concentrations of two solutions are equal, the solu-
tions are isosmotic (Greek iso, “the same”).

In cells, a plasma membrane separates two aqueous solu-
tions, one inside the cell (the cytoplasm) and one outside

FIGURE 6.15

Osmosis. In a hyperosmotic solution water moves out of the cell
toward the higher concentration of solutes, causing the cell to
shrivel. In an isosmotic solution, the concentration of solutes on
either side of the membrane is the same. Osmosis still occurs, but
water diffuses into and out of the cell at the same rate, and the cell
doesn’t change size. In a hypoosmotic solution the concentration of
solutes is higher within the cell than without, so the net movement
of water is into the cell.

114 Part II Biology of the Cell

Solution stops rising
when weight of column
equals osmotic
pressure

Salt solution \y

3% salt solution

Selectively
& permeable rising 7
membrane |
i= Ia
e 1
— Distilled
water
(a) (b) (c)
FIGURE 6.14

An experiment demonstrating osmosis. (a) The end of a tube
containing a salt solution is closed by stretching a selectively
permeable membrane across its face; the membrane allows the
passage of water molecules but not salt ions. (#) When this tube is
immersed in a beaker of distilled water, the salt cannot cross the
membrane, but water can. The water entering the tube causes the
salt solution to rise in the tube. (¢) Water will continue to enter the
tube from the beaker until the weight of the column of water in the
tube exerts a downward force equal to the force drawing water
molecules upward into the tube. This force is referred to as
osmotic pressure.

Isosmotic
solution

Hyperosmotic
solution

No SP

Shriveled cells

Hypoosmotic
solution

 

Cells swell and
eventually burst

Normal cells

  
 

Human red blood cells

 

 

   

 

 

=|
Cell body shrinks Flaccid cell Normal turgid cell
from cell wall
Plant cells

 
