 

Hypothalamus

 

 

 

 

Y

Releasing hormones
(TRH, CRH, GnRH)

Y

Anterior pituitary

 

 

 

 

 

Y

Tropic hormones
(TSH, ACTH, FSH, LH)

 

Target glands

 

 

 

(Thyroid, adrenal cortex, gonads)

 

Y

Y

FIGURE 56.14

Negative feedback inhibition. The hormones secreted by some
endocrine glands feed back to inhibit the secretion of
hypothalamic releasing hormones and anterior pituitary tropic
hormones.

ulate the thyroid gland to grow, but it still cannot pro-
duce thyroxine without iodine. The consequence of this
interruption of the normal inhibition by thyroxine is an
enlarged thyroid gland, a condition known as a goiter
(figure 56.16).

Positive feedback in the control of the hypothalamus
and anterior pituitary by the target glands is not common
because positive feedback cannot maintain constancy of the
internal environment (homeostasis). Positive feedback ac-
centuates change, driving the change in the same direction.
One example of positive control involves the control of
ovulation, an explosive event that culminates in the expul-
sion of the egg cell from the ovary. In that case, an ovarian
hormone, estradiol, actually stimulates the secretion of an
anterior pituitary hormone, LH. This will be discussed in
detail in chapter 59.

 

The hypothalamus controls the anterior pituitary gland
by means of hormones, and the anterior pituitary gland
controls some other glands through the hormones it
secretes. However, both the hypothalamus and the
anterior pituitary gland are controlled by other glands
through negative feedback inhibition.

 

 

 

I~ >| Hypothalamus
'Negative © |

 

 

 

Heedback
‘inhibition

TRH
(Thyrotropin-releasing hormone)

 

 

 

 

 

Anterior pituitary |«-------~-
Negative ©
feedback
inhibition

TSH
(Thyroid-stimulating hormone)

 

 

Thyroid gland

FIGURE 56.15

Regulation of thyroxine secretion. The hypothalamus secretes
‘TRH, which stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete TSH.
The TSH then stimulates the thyroid to secrete thyroxine, which
exerts negative feedback control of the hypothalamus and anterior
pituitary.

 

 

 

FIGURE 56.16

A person with a goiter. This condition is caused by a lack of
iodine in the diet. As a result, thyroxine secretion is low, so there
is less negative feedback inhibition of TSH. The elevated TSH
secretion, in turn, stimulates the thyroid to grow and produce the
goiter.

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1139
