59.1

Asexual and Sexual
Reproduction

Asexual reproduction is the primary
means of reproduction among the pro-
tists, cnidaria, and tunicates, but it may
also occur in some of the more complex
animals. Indeed, the formation of iden-
tical twins (by the separation of two
identical cells of a very early embryo) is
a form of asexual reproduction.

Through mitosis, genetically identi-
cal cells are produced from a single
parent cell. This permits asexual repro-
duction to occur in protists by division
of the organism, or fission. Cnidaria
commonly reproduce by budding,
where a part of the parent’s body be-
comes separated from the rest and dif. ®
ferentiates into a new individual. The FIGURE 59.2
new individual may become an inde-
pendent animal or may remain at-
tached to the parent, forming a colony.

Sexual reproduction occurs when a
new individual is formed by the union
of two sex cells, or gametes, a term
that includes sperm and eggs (or
ova). The union of sperm and egg
cells produces a fertilized egg, or zygote, that develops
by mitotic division into a new multicellular organism.
The zygote and the cells it forms by mitosis are diploid;
they contain both members of each homologous pair of
chromosomes. The gametes, formed by meiosis in the sex
organs, or gonads—the testes and ovaries—are haploid
(see chapter 12). The process of spermatogenesis (sperm
formation) and oogenesis (egg formation) will be de-
scribed in later sections. For a more detailed discussion
of asexual and sexual reproduction, see chapter 12.

Different Approaches to Sex

Parthenogenesis (virgin birth) is common in many
species of arthropods; some species are exclusively
parthenogenic (and all female), while others switch be-
tween sexual reproduction and parthenogenesis in differ-
ent generations. In honeybees, for example, a queen bee
mates only once and stores the sperm. She then can con-
trol the release of sperm. If no sperm are released, the
eggs develop parthenogenetically into drones, which are
males; if sperm are allowed to fertilize the eggs, the fer-
tilized eggs develop into other queens or worker bees,
which are female.

 

1196 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Animals employ both sexual and asexual reproductive strategies.

 

Hermaphroditism and protogyny. (2) The hamlet bass (genus Hypoplectrus) is a deep-sea
fish that isa hermaphrodite—both male and female at the same time. In the course of a
single pair-mating, one fish may switch sexual roles as many as four times, alternately
offering eggs to be fertilized and fertilizing its partner’s eggs. Here the fish acting as a male
curves around its motionless partner, fertilizing the upward-floating eggs. (b) The bluehead
wrasse, Thalassoma bifasciatium, is protogynous—females sometimes turn into males. Here a
large male, or sex-changed female, is seen among females, typically much smaller.

The Russian biologist Ilya Darevsky reported in 1958
one of the first cases of unusual modes of reproduction
among vertebrates. He observed that some populations of
small lizards of the genus Lacerta were exclusively female,
and suggested that these lizards could lay eggs that were vi-
able even if they were not fertilized. In other words, they
were capable of asexual reproduction in the absence of
sperm, a type of parthenogenesis. Further work has shown
that parthenogenesis also occurs among populations of
other lizard genera.

Another variation in reproductive strategies is her-
maphroditism, when one individual has both testes and
ovaries, and so can produce both sperm and eggs (figure
59.2a). A tapeworm is hermaphroditic and can fertilize it-
self, a useful strategy because it is unlikely to encounter an-
other tapeworm. Most hermaphroditic animals, however,
require another individual to reproduce. Two earthworms,
for example, are required for reproduction—each functions
as both male and female, and each leaves the encounter
with fertilized eggs.
