Endocrine Gland
and Hormone

POSTERIOR LOBE OF PITUITARY

Target
Tissue

Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) Kidneys
Oxytocin Uterus
Mammary glands

ANTERIOR LOBE OF PITUITARY

Growth hormone (GH)

Adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH)

Many organs

Adrenal cortex

Table 56.1 Principal Endocrine Glands and Their Hormones*

Principal Actions

Stimulates reabsorption of water; conserves water

Stimulates contraction
Stimulates milk ejection

Stimulates growth by promoting protein synthesis
and fat breakdown

Stimulates secretion of adrenal cortical hormones
such as cortisol

Stimulates thyroxine secretion

Stimulates ovulation and corpus luteum formation in
females; stimulates secretion of testosterone in males

Stimulates spermatogenesis in males; stimulates
development of ovarian follicles in females

Stimulates milk production

Stimulates color change in reptiles and amphibians;
unknown function in mammals

Chemical
Nature

Peptide
(9 amino acids)
Peptide
(9 amino acids)

Protein

Peptide

(39 amino acids)
Glycoprotein
Glycoprotein
Glycoprotein
Protein

Peptide (two
forms; 13 and 22

Stimulates metabolic rate; essential to normal

amino acids)

Todinated amino

growth and development acid

‘Thyroid-stimulating hormone Thyroid gland
(TSH)

Luteinizing hormone (LH) Gonads
Follicle-stimulating hormone Gonads

(FSH)

Prolactin (PRL) Mammary glands
‘Melanocyte-stimulating Skin

hormone (MSH)

THYROID GLAND

‘Thyroxine (thyroid hormone) ‘Most cells
Calcitonin Bone
PARATHYROID GLANDS

Parathyroid hormone Bone, kidneys,

digestive tract

Lowers blood calcium level by inhibiting loss of
calcium from bone

Raises blood calcium level by stimulating bone
breakdown; stimulates calcium reabsorption in

Peptide
(32 amino acids)

Peptide
(34 amino acids)

kidneys; activates vitamin D

“These are hormones released from endocrine glands, As discussed previously, many hormones are released from other body organs.

Paracrine Regulation

Paracrine regulation occurs in many organs and among the
cells of the immune system. Some of these regulatory mol-
ecules are known as cytokines, particularly if they regulate
different cells of the immune system. Other paracrine regu-
lators are called growth factors, because they promote
growth and cell division in specific organs. Examples in-
clude platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor,
and the insulin-like growth factors that stimulate cell division
and proliferation of their target cells. Nerve growth factor is
a regulatory molecule that belongs to a family of paracrine
regulators of the nervous system called neurotrophins.
Nitric oxide, which can function as a neurotransmitter (see
chapter 54), is also produced by the endothelium of blood
vessels. In this context, it is a paracrine regulator because it
diffuses to the smooth muscle layer of the blood vessel and
promotes vasodilation. The endothelium of blood vessels also

1128 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

produces other paracrine regulators, including endothelin,
which stimulates vasoconstriction, and bradykinin, which pro-
motes vasodilation. This paracrine regulation supplements
the regulation of blood vessels by autonomic nerves.

The most diverse group of paracrine regulators are the
prostaglandins. A prostaglandin is a 20-carbon-long fatty
acid that contains a five-member carbon ring. This mole-
cule is derived from the precursor molecule arachidonic acid,
released from phospholipids in the cell membrane under
hormonal or other stimulation. Prostaglandins are pro-
duced in almost every organ and participate in a variety of
regulatory functions, including:

1. Immune system. Prostaglandins promote many as-
pects of inflammation, including pain and fever.
Drugs that inhibit prostaglandin synthesis help to al-
leviate these symptoms.

2. Reproductive system. Prostaglandins may play a
