e
Chapter 55D www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Summary Questions

55.1 Animals employ a wide variety of sensory receptors.

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

¢ Mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and 1. Can you name a sensory
photoreceptors are responsive to different categories Teceptor that does not produce
of sensory stimuli; interoceptors and exteroceptors a membrane depolarization?
respond to stimuli that originate in the internal and
external environments, respectively.

55.2 Mechanical and chemical receptors sense the body’s condition.

@

* Introduction to sense
organs

* Receptors and
sensations

* Somatic senses

 

¢ Muscle spindles respond to stretching of the skeletal 2. What mechanoreceptors
muscle. detect muscle stretch and the

tension on a tendon?
* The sensory organs of taste are taste buds, scattered

over the surface of a fish’s body but located on the 3. What structures in the

papillae of the tongue in terrestrial vertebrates. vertebrate ear detect changes in
the body’s position with respect

Ee

* Smell

* Taste

* Sense of balance

* Sense of rotational
acceleration

* Sense of taste

 

* Chemoreceptors in the aortic and carotid bodies to gravity? What structures er * Sense of smell
sense the blood pH and oxygen levels, helping to detect angular motion? * Equilibrium
regulate breathing.

* Mair cells in the membranous labyrinth of the inner
ear provide a sense of acceleration.

55.3 Auditory receptors detect pressure waves in the air.

¢ In terrestrial vertebrates, sound waves cause 4. How are sound waves * Art Activity
vibrations of ear membranes. transmitted and amplified Human ear anatomy

through the middle ear? How
is the pitch of the sound
determined?

¢ Different pitches of sounds vibrate different regions
of the basilar membrane, and therefore stimulate

 

different hair cells. * Hearing

¢ Bats and some other vertebrates use sonar to provide
a sense of “lightless vision.”

55.4 Optic receptors detect light over a broad range of wavelengths.

* A flexible lens focuses light onto the retina, which 5. How does focusing in fishes * Art Activity
contains the photoreceptors. and amphibians differ from that Human eye anatomy

. we A in other vertebrates?
¢ Light causes the photodissociation of the visual

pigment, thereby blocking the dark current and 6. When a photoreceptor
hyperpolarizing the photoreceptor; this inverse effect absorbs Tighe, what happens to
stops the inhibitory effect of the photoreceptor and the Nas ee
thereby activates the bipolar cells. ments

55.5 Some vertebrates use heat, electricity, or magnetism for orientation.

 

* Vision

 

¢ The pit organs of snakes allows them to detect the 7. Why do rattlesnakes strike a
position and movements of prey. Many aquatic moving lightbulb?
vertebrates can detect electrical currents produced by 8. How do sharks detect their
muscular contraction. Some vertebrates can orient prey? Why don’t terrestrial
themselves using the earth’s magnetic field. vertebrates have this sense?

1124 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

* Chemorecptors
