5. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is required for
the development of ovarian follicles in females. In
males, it is required for the development of sperm.
FSH and LH are both referred to as gonadotropins.

6. Prolactin (PRL) stimulates the mammary glands to
produce milk in mammals. It also helps regulate kid-
ney function in vertebrates, the production of “crop
milk” (nutritional fluid fed to chicks by regurgita-
tion) in some birds, and acts on the gills of fish that
travel from salt to fresh water to promote sodium
retention.

7. Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) stimu-
lates the synthesis and dispersion of melanin pigment,
which darken the epidermis of some fish, amphibians,
and reptiles. MSH has no known specific function in
mammals, but abnormally high amounts of ACTH
can cause skin darkening because it contains the
amino acid sequence of MSH within its structure.

Growth Hormone

The importance of the anterior pituitary gland first be-
came understood in 1909, when a 38-year-old South
Dakota farmer was cured of the growth disorder
acromegaly by the surgical removal of a pituitary tumor.
Acromegaly is a form of gigantism in which the jaw begins
to protrude and other facial features thicken. It was discov-
ered that gigantism is almost always associated with pitu-
itary tumors. Robert Wadlow, born in 1928 in Alton, Illi-
nois, stood 8 feet, 11 inches tall and weighed 485 pounds
before he died from infection at age 22 (figure 56.12). He
was the tallest human being ever recorded, and he was still
growing the year he died.

We now know that gigantism is caused by the excessive
secretion of growth hormone (GH) by the anterior pitu-
itary gland in a growing child. GH stimulates protein syn-
thesis and growth of muscles and connective tissues; it also
indirectly promotes the elongation of bones by stimulating
cell division in the cartilaginous epiphyseal growth plates of
bones. Researchers found that this stimulation does not
occur in the absence of blood plasma, suggesting that bone
cells lack receptors for GH and that the stimulation by GH
was indirect. We now know that GH stimulates the pro-
duction of insulin-like growth factors, which are pro-
duced by the liver and secreted into the blood in response
to stimulation by GH. The insulin-like growth factors then
stimulate growth of the epiphyseal growth plates and thus
elongation of the bones.

When a person’s skeletal growth plates have converted
from cartilage into bone, however, GH can no longer cause
an increase in height. Therefore, excessive GH secretion in
an adult produces bone and soft tissue deformities in the
condition called acromegaly. A deficiency in GH secretion
during childhood results in pituitary dwarfism, a failure to
achieve normal growth.

 

FIGURE 56.12

The Alton giant. This photograph of Robert Wadlow of Alton,
Illinois, taken on his 21st birthday, shows him at home with his
father and mother and four siblings. Born normal size, he
developed a growth hormone-secreting pituitary tumor as a

young child and never stopped growing during his 22 years of life.

Other Anterior Pituitary Hormones

Prolactin is like growth hormone in that it acts on organs
that are not endocrine glands. In addition to its stimulation
of milk production in mammals and “crop milk” produc-
tion in birds, prolactin has varied effects on electrolyte bal-
ance by acting on the kidneys, the gills of fish, and the salt
glands of marine birds (discussed in chapter 58). Unlike
growth hormone and prolactin, the other anterior pituitary
hormones act on specific glands.

Some of the anterior pituitary hormones that act on spe-
cific glands have common names, such as thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), and alternative names that emphasize the
tropic nature of the hormone, such as thyrotropin. TSH
stimulates only the thyroid gland, and adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) stimulates only the adrenal cortex (outer
portion of the adrenal glands). Follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) act only on the
gonads (testes and ovaries); hence, they are collectively
called gonadotropic hormones. Although both FSH and LH
act on the gonads, they each act on different target cells in
the gonads of both females and males.

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1137
