 

Starfish  Tunicate

Sponge Lamprey

   
  

 

Jawless fish

100

   

Echinoderms
Primitive chordates

200

300

 

Time (millions of years ago)

400

 

 

 

500

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 57.25

Placoderms t
%

 

*S

Shark Fish Frog

Snake Bird

Human

    

‘Amphibians

   
  
   

Cartilaginous fish

    

 

Lymphocytes separate into populations
of T and B cells,

 

 

First lymphocytes appear 4

 

 

Immune systems based on phagocytic
cells only

 

 

 

 

How immune systems evolved. Lampreys were the first vertebrates to possess an immune system based on lymphocytes, although
distinct B and T cells did not appear until the jawed fishes evolved. By the time sharks and other cartilaginous fish appeared, the vertebrate

immune response was fully formed.

this group all have a characteristic recognition structure
called the Ig fold. The fold probably evolved as a self-
recognition molecule in early metazoans. Insect im-
munoglobulins have been described in moths, grasshop-
pers, and flies that bind to microbial surfaces and promote
their destruction by phagocytes. The antibody immune re-
sponse appears to have evolved from these earlier, less
complex systems.

Vertebrates

The earliest vertebrates of which we have any clear infor-
mation, the jawless lampreys that first evolved some 500
million years ago, possess an immune system based on lym-
phocytes. At this early stage of vertebrate evolution, how-
ever, lampreys lack distinct populations of B and T cells
such as found in all higher vertebrates (figure 57.25).

With the evolution of fish with jaws, the modern verte-
brate immune system first arose. The oldest surviving group
of jawed fishes are the sharks, which evolved some 450 mil-

lion years ago. By then, the vertebrate immune defense had
fully evolved. Sharks have an immune response much like
that seen in mammals, with a cellular response carried out
by T-cell lymphocytes and an antibody-mediated humoral
response carried out by B cells. The similarities of the cellu-
lar and humoral immune defenses are far more striking than
the differences. Both sharks and mammals possess a thymus
that produces T cells and a spleen that is a rich source of
B cells. Four hundred fifty million years of evolution did lit-
tle to change the antibody molecule—the amino acid se-
quences of shark and human antibody molecules are very
similar. The most notable difference between sharks and
mammals is that their antibody-encoding genes are arrayed
somewhat differently.

 

The sophisticated two-part immune defense of
mammals evolved about the time jawed fishes appeared.
Before then, animals utilized a simpler immune defense
based on mobile phagocytic cells.

 

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1167
