58.2 The extracellular fluid concentration is constant in most vertebrates.

Osmolality and Osmotic Balance

Water in an animal’s body is distributed between the intra-
cellular and extracellular compartments (figure 58.8). In
order to maintain osmotic balance, the extracellular com-
partment of an animal’s body (including its blood plasma)
must be able to take water from its environment or to ex-
crete excess water into its environment. Inorganic ions
must also be exchanged between the extracellular body flu-
ids and the external environment to maintain homeostasis.
Such exchanges of water and electrolytes between the body
and the external environment occur across specialized ep-
ithelial cells and, in most vertebrates, through a filtration
process in the kidneys.

Most vertebrates maintain homeostasis in regard to the
total solute concentration of their extracellular fluids and in
regard to the concentration of specific inorganic ions.
Sodium (Na‘) is the major cation in extracellular fluids, and
chloride (CI) is the major anion. The divalent cations, cal-
cium (Ca**) and magnesium (Mg**), as well as other ions,
also have important functions and must be maintained at
their proper concentrations.

Osmolality and Osmotic Pressure

Osmosis is the diffusion of water across a membrane, and it
always occurs from a more dilute solution (with a lower
solute concentration) to a less dilute solution (with a higher
solute concentration). Because the total solute concentra-
tion of a solution determines its osmotic behavior, the total
moles of solute per kilogram of water is expressed as the
osmolality of the solution. Solutions that have the same
osmolality are isosmotic. A solution with a lower or higher
osmolality than another is called bypoosmotic or hyperosmotic,
respectively.

If one solution is hyperosmotic compared with an-
other, and if the two solutions are separated by a semi-
permeable membrane, water may move by osmosis from
the more dilute solution to the hyperosmotic one. In this
case, the hyperosmotic solution is also hypertonic
(“higher strength”) compared with the other solution,
and it has a higher osmotic pressure. The osmotic pres-
sure of a solution is a measure of its tendency to take in
water by osmosis. A cell placed in a hypertonic solution,
which has a higher osmotic pressure than the cell cyto-
plasm, will lose water to the surrounding solution and
shrink. A cell placed in a hypotonic solution, in contrast,
will gain water and expand.

If a cell is placed in an isosmotic solution, there may
be no net water movement. In this case, the isosmotic so-
lution can also be said to be isotonic. Isotonic solutions
such as normal saline and 5% dextrose are used in med-
ical care to bathe exposed tissues and to be given as intra-
venous fluids.

1178 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Osmoconformers and Osmoregulators

Most marine invertebrates are osmoconformers; the os-
molality of their body fluids is the same as that of seawater
(although the concentrations of particular solutes, such as
magnesium ion, are not equal). Because the extracellular
fluids are isotonic to seawater, there is no osmotic gradient
and no tendency for water to leave or enter the body.
Therefore, osmoconformers are in osmotic equilibrium
with their environment. Among the vertebrates, only the
primitive hagfish are strict osmoconformers. The sharks
and their relatives in the class Chondrichthyes (cartilagi-
nous fish) are also isotonic to seawater, even though their
blood level of NaCl is lower than that of seawater; the dif-
ference in total osmolality is made up by retaining urea at a
high concentration in their blood plasma.

All other vertebrates are osmoregulators—that is, ani-
mals that maintain a relatively constant blood osmolality
despite the different concentration in the surrounding envi-
ronment. The maintenance of a relatively constant body
fluid osmolality has permitted vertebrates to exploit a wide
variety of ecological niches. Achieving this constancy, how-
ever, requires continuous regulation.

Freshwater vertebrates have a much higher solute con-
centration in their body fluids than that of the surround-
ing water. In other words, they are hypertonic to their
environment. Because of their higher osmotic pressure,
water tends to enter their bodies. Consequently, they
must prevent water from entering their bodies as much as
possible and eliminate the excess water that does enter.
In addition, they tend to lose inorganic ions to their envi-
ronment and so must actively transport these ions back
into their bodies.

In contrast, most marine vertebrates are hypotonic to
their environment; their body fluids have only about one-
third the osmolality of the surrounding seawater. These an-
imals are therefore in danger of losing water by osmosis
and must retain water to prevent dehydration. They do this
by drinking seawater and eliminating the excess ions
through their kidneys and gills.

The body fluids of terrestrial vertebrates have a higher
concentration of water than does the air surrounding them.
Therefore, they tend to lose water to the air by evaporation
from the skin and lungs. All reptiles, birds, and mammals,
as well as amphibians during the time when they live on
land, face this problem. These vertebrates have evolved ex-
cretory systems that help them retain water.

 

 

Marine invertebrates are isotonic with their
environment, but most vertebrates are either hypertonic
or hypotonic to their environment and thus tend to gain
or lose water. Physiological mechanisms help most
vertebrates to maintain a constant blood osmolality and
constant concentrations of individual ions.

 
