55.3 Auditory receptors detect pressure waves in the air.

The Ears and Hearing

Fish detect vibrational pressure waves
in water by means of their lateral line
system. Terrestrial vertebrates detect
similar vibrational pressure waves in
air by means of similar hair cell
mechanoreceptors in the inner ear.
Hearing actually works better in water
than in air because water transmits
pressure waves more efficiently. De-
spite this limitation, hearing is widely
used by terrestrial vertebrates to mon-
itor their environments, communicate
with other members of the same
species, and to detect possible sources
of danger (figure 55.12). Auditory
stimuli travel farther and more
quickly than chemical ones, and audi-
tory receptors provide better direc-
tional information than do chemore-
ceptors. Auditory stimuli alone,
however, provide little information
about distance.

FIGURE 55.12

 

Kangaroo rats have specialized ears. Kangaroo rats (Dipodomys) are unique in having an
enlarged tympanic membrane (eardrum), a lengthened and freely rotating malleus (ear
bone), and an increased volume of air-filled chambers in the middle ear. These and other
specializations result in increased sensitivity to sound, especially to low-frequency sounds.

Experiments have shown that the kangaroo rat’s ears are adapted to nocturnal life and allow

Structure of the Ear

them to hear the low-frequency sounds of their predators, such as an owl's wingbeats or a

sidewinder rattlesnake’s scales rubbing against the ground. Also, the ears seem to be

Fish use their lateral line system to de-
tect water movements and vibrations
emanating from relatively nearby ob-
jects, and their hearing system to detect vibrations that
originate from a greater distance. The hearing system of
fish consists of the otolith organs in the membranous
labyrinth (utricle and saccule) previously described, to-
gether with a very small outpouching of the membranous
labyrinth called the lagena. Sound waves travel through
the body of the fish as easily as through the surrounding
water, as the body is composed primarily of water. There-
fore, an object of different density is needed in order for
the sound to be detected. This function is served by the
otolith (calcium carbonate crystals) in many fish. In cat-
fish, minnows, and suckers, however, this function is
served by an air-filled swim bladder that vibrates with the
sound. A chain of small bones, Weberian ossicles, then
transmits the vibrations to the saccule in some of these
fish.

In the ears of terrestrial vertebrates, vibrations in air
may be channeled through an ear canal to the eardrum, or
tympanic membrane. These structures are part of the outer
ear. Vibrations of the tympanic membrane cause movement
of three small bones (ossicles)—the malleus (hammer), incus
(anvil), and stapes (stirrup)—that are located in a bony cav-
ity known as the middle ear (figure 55.13). These middle ear
ossicles are analogous to the Weberian ossicles in fish. The

1114 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

adapted to the poor sound-carrying quality of dry, desert air.

middle ear is connected to the throat by the Eustachian tube,
which equalizes the air pressure between the middle ear
and the external environment. The “ear popping” you may
have experienced when flying in an airplane or driving on a
mountain is caused by pressure equalization between the
two sides of the eardrum.

The stapes vibrates against a flexible membrane, the
oval window, which leads into the inner ear. Because the
oval window is smaller in diameter than the tympanic
membrane, vibrations against it produce more force per
unit area, transmitted into the inner ear. The inner ear
consists of the cochlea (Latin for “snail”), a bony struc-
ture containing part of the membranous labyrinth called
the cochlear duct. The cochlear duct is located in the
center of the cochlea; the area above the cochlear duct is
the vestibular canal, and the area below is the tympanic
canal. All three chambers are filled with fluid, as previ-
ously described. The oval window opens to the upper
vestibular canal, so that when the stapes causes it to vi-
brate, it produces pressure waves of fluid. These pressure
waves travel down to the tympanic canal, pushing an-
other flexible membrane, the rownd window, that trans-
mits the pressure back into the middle ear cavity (see fig-
ure 55.13).
