55.2 Mechanical and chemical receptors sense the body’s condition.

Detecting Temperature and
Pressure

While the receptors of the skin, called the cutaneous re-
ceptors, are classified as interoceptors, they in fact respond
to stimuli at the border between the external and internal
environments. These receptors serve as good examples of
the specialization of receptor structure and function, re-
sponding to heat, cold, pain, touch, and pressure.

The skin contains two populations of thermoreceptors,
which are naked dendritic endings of sensory neurons that
are sensitive to changes in temperature. Cold receptors are
stimulated by a fall in temperature and inhibited by warm-
ing, while warm receptors are stimulated by a rise in temper-
ature and inhibited by cooling. Cold receptors are located
immediately below the epidermis, while warm receptors are
located slightly deeper, in the dermis. Thermoreceptors are
also found within the hypothalamus of the brain, where
they monitor the temperature of the circulating blood and
thus provide the CNS with information on the body’s in-
ternal (core) temperature.

A stimulus that causes or is about to cause tissue damage
is perceived as pain. The receptors that transmit impulses
that are perceived by the brain as pain are called nocicep-
tors. They consist of free nerve endings located through-
out the body, especially near surfaces where damage is most
likely to occur. Different nociceptors may respond to ex-
tremes in temperature, very intense mechanical stimula-
tion, or specific chemicals in the extracellular fluid, includ-
ing some that are released by injured cells. The thresholds
of these sensory cells vary; some nociceptors are sensitive
only to actual tissue damage, while others respond before
damage has occurred.

Free nerve / ae
ending

Merkel cell

Hair follicle
receptors

Pacinian corpuscle

Several types of mechanoreceptors are present in the
skin, some in the dermis and others in the underlying sub-
cutaneous tissue (figure 55.4). Morphologically special-
ized receptors that respond to fine touch are most con-
centrated on areas such as the fingertips and face. They
are used to localize cutaneous stimuli very precisely and
can be either phasic (intermittently activated) or tonic
(continuously activated). The phasic receptors include
hair follicle receptors and Meissner’s corpuscles, which are pre-
sent on body surfaces that do not contain hair, such as the
fingers, palms, and nipples. The tonic receptors consist of
Ruffini endings in the dermis and touch dome endings
(Merkel cells) located near the surface of the skin. These
receptors monitor the duration of a touch and the extent
to which it is applied.

Deep below the skin in the subcutaneous tissue lie pha-
sic, pressure-sensitive receptors called Pacinian corpus-
cles. Each of these receptors consists of the end of an af-
ferent axon, surrounded by a capsule of alternating layers
of connective tissue cells and extracellular fluid. When
sustained pressure is applied to the corpuscle, the elastic
capsule absorbs much of the pressure and the axon ceases
to produce impulses. Pacinian corpuscles thus monitor
only the onset and removal of pressure, as may occur re-
peatedly when something that vibrates is placed against
the skin.

 

Different cutaneous receptors respond to touch,
pressure, heat, cold, and pain. Some of these receptors
are naked dendrites of sensory neurons, while others
have supporting cells that modify the activities of their
sensory dendrites.

 

     
  

FIGURE 55.4

Sensory receptors in human skin.
Cutaneous receptors may be free nerve
endings or sensory dendrites in association

Organ of Ruffini with other supporting structures.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1107
