tive to horizontal acceleration (as in a moving car) and the
saccule to vertical acceleration (as in an elevator). In both
cases, the acceleration causes the stereocilia to bend and
consequently produces action potentials in an associated
sensory neuron.

The membranous labyrinth of the utricle and saccule is
continuous with three semicircular canals, oriented in dif-
ferent planes so that angular acceleration in any direction
can be detected (figure 55.11). At the ends of the canals are
swollen chambers called ampullae, into which protrude the
cilia of another group of hair cells. The tips of the cilia are
embedded within a sail-like wedge of gelatinous material
called a cupula (similar to the cupula of the fish lateral line
system) that protrudes into the endolymph fluid of each
semicircular canal.

When the head rotates, the fluid inside the semicircular
canals pushes against the cupula and causes the cilia to
bend. This bending either depolarizes or hyperpolarizes
the hair cells, depending on the direction in which the cilia
are bent. This is similar to the way the lateral line system

Semicircular canals

  

(@)

(b)

FIGURE 55.11

  
 

works in a fish: if the stereocilia are bent in the direction of
the kinocilium, a depolarization (receptor potential) is pro-
duced, which stimulates the production of action potentials
in associated sensory neurons.

The saccule, utricle, and semicircular canals are collec-
tively referred to as the vestibular apparatus. While the sac-
cule and utricle provide a sense of linear acceleration, the
semicircular canals provide a sense of angular acceleration.
The brain uses information that comes from the vestibular
apparatus about the body’s position in space to maintain
balance and equilibrium.

 

Receptors that sense chemicals originating outside the
body are responsible for the senses of odor, smell, and
taste. Internal chemoreceptors help to monitor
chemicals produced within the body and are needed for
the regulation of breathing. Hair cells in the lateral line
organ of fishes detect water movements, and hair cells
in the vestibular apparatus of terrestrial vertebrates
provide a sense of acceleration.

 

Cilia of hair
Y cells

f Hair cells

Supporting
cell

Vestibular
nerve

   

© rsen EE ievemen
(0)

‘The structure of the semicircular canals. (a) The position of the semicircular canals in relation to the rest of the inner ear.
@ Enlargement of a section of one ampulla, showing how hair cell cilia insert into the cupula. (¢ Angular acceleration in the plane of the
semicircular canal causes bending of the cupula, thereby stimulating the hair cells.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1113
