Sonar

Because terrestrial vertebrates have two ears located on op-
posite sides of the head, the information provided by hear-
ing can be used by the CNS to determine direction of a
sound source with some precision. Sound sources vary in
strength, however, and sounds are attenuated (weakened)
to varying degrees by the presence of objects in the envi-
ronment. For these reasons, auditory sensors do not pro-
vide a reliable measure of distance.

A few groups of mammals that live and obtain their food
in dark environments have circumvented the limitations of
darkness. A bat flying in a completely dark room easily
avoids objects that are placed in its path—even a wire less
than a millimeter in diameter (figure 55.15). Shrews use a
similar form of “lightless vision” beneath the ground, as do
whales and dolphins beneath the sea. All of these mammals
perceive distance by means of sonar. They emit sounds and
then determine the time it takes these sounds to reach an

 

FIGURE 55.15

object and return to the animal. This process is called
echolocation. A bat, for example, produces clicks that last 2
to 3 milliseconds and are repeated several hundred times
per second. The three-dimensional imaging achieved with
such an auditory sonar system is quite sophisticated.

Being able to “see in the dark” has opened a new ecolog-
ical niche to bats, one largely closed to birds because birds
must rely on vision. There are no truly nocturnal birds;
even owls rely on vision to hunt, and do not fly on dark
nights. Because bats are able to be active and efficient in
total darkness, they are one of the most numerous and
widespread of all orders of mammals.

 

Some mammals emit sounds and then determine the
time it takes for the sound to return, using the method
of sonar to locate themselves and other objects in a
totally dark environment by the characteristics of the
echo. Bats are the most adept at this echolocation.

 

Sonar. As it flies, a bat emits high-frequency “chirps” and listens for the return of the chirps after they are reflected by objects such as
moths. By timing how long it takes for a chirp to return, the bat can locate its prey and catch it even in total darkness.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1117
