58.3 The functions of the vertebrate kidney are performed by nephrons.

The Mammalian Kidney

In humans, the kidneys are fist-sized organs located in the
region of the lower back. Each kidney receives blood from
a renal artery, and it is from this blood that urine is pro-
duced. Urine drains from each kidney through a ureter,
which carries the urine to a urinary bladder. Within the
kidney, the mouth of the ureter flares open to form a fun-
nel-like structure, the renal pelvis. The renal pelvis, in turn,
has cup-shaped extensions that receive urine from the renal
tissue. This tissue is divided into an outer renal cortex and
an inner renal medulla (figure 58.17). Together, these
structures perform filtration, reabsorption, secretion, and
excretion.

   
    
 

Kidney
vena cava
Cortical

Renal vein nephron

and artery

Aorta Nephron
tubule

Ureter

Urinary
bladder

Urethra

(a)

FIGURE 58.17

‘The urinary system of a human female. (a)

The positions of the organs of the urinary

system. (J) A sectioned kidney, revealing the
internal structure. (c) The position of nephrons in
the mammalian kidney. Cortical nephrons are
located predominantly in the renal cortex, while
juxtamedullary nephrons have long loops that
extend deep into the renal medulla.

1186 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

(b)

Nephron Structure and Filtration

On a microscopic level, each kidney contains about one
million functioning nephrons. Mammalian kidneys contain a
mixture of juxtamedullary nephrons, which have long loops
which dip deeply into the medulla, and cortical nephrons
with shorter loops (see figure 58.17). The significance of
the length of the loops will be explained a little later.

Each nephron consists of a long tubule and associated
small blood vessels. First, blood is carried by an afferent ar-
teriole to a tuft of capillaries in the renal cortex, the
glomerulus (figure 58.18). Here the blood is filtered as the
blood pressure forces fluid through the porous capillary
walls. Blood cells and plasma proteins are too large to enter

   
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
  

Renal
cortex

Juxtamedullary
nephron

Renal medulla

Collecting duct

Renal pelvis

Renal medulla

Renal cortex

Ureter
