Neurosecretory cells.

FIGURE 56.22

The hormonal control of metamorphosis
in the silkworm moth, Bombyx mori.
While molting hormone (ecdysone),
produced by the prothoracic gland, triggers
when molting will occur, juvenile hormone,
produced by bodies near the brain called the
corpora allata, determines the result of a
particular molt. High levels of juvenile
hormone inhibit the formation of the pupa
and adult forms. At the late stages of
metamorphosis, therefore, it is important
that the corpora allata not produce large
amounts of juvenile hormone.

larger one. In one molt, a juvenile insect, or larvae, often
undergoes a radical transformation to the adult. This
process is called metamorphosis. Hormonal secretions in-
fluence both molting and metamorphosis in insects. Prior
to molting, neurosecretory cells on the surface of the brain
secrete a small peptide, brain hormone, which in turn
stimulates a gland in the thorax called the prothoracic
gland to produce molting hormone, or ecdysone (figure 56.22).
High levels of ecdysone bring about the biochemical and
behavioral changes that cause molting to occur. Another
pair of endocrine glands near the brain called the corpora
allata produce a hormone called juvenile hormone. High
levels of juvenile hormone prevent the transformation to
the adult and result in a larval to larval molt. If the level of
juvenile hormone is low, however, the molt will result in
metamorphosis.

Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals

Because target cells are very sensitive to hormones, these
hormones are in very low concentrations in the blood.
Therefore, small changes in concentrations can make a big
difference in how the target organs function. Unfortu-
nately, scientists are now finding that the endocrine system
is not sufficiently protected from the outside world. Some
man-made chemicals (and even a few plant-produced
chemicals) can enter the body and interrupt normal en-
docrine function. These chemicals may be ones we manu-
facture for some other purpose and accidentally leak into
the environment, ones that are industrial waste products
which we “throw away” into the environment, or ones we
purposefully release into the environment such as pesti-
cides. These environmental contaminants get into the food

Corpora se

>

 

Larval molt

        
  

 

 

i -
Brain hormone

Juvenile hormone

\ Low
‘amounts

 

 

ee
erty

Adult molt

Pupal molt

we eat and the air we breathe. They are everywhere on
earth and cannot be avoided. Some can last for years in the
environment, and just as long in an animal’s body. Those
chemicals that interfere with hormone function are called
endocrine disrupting chemicals.

Any chemical that can bind to receptor proteins and
mimic the effects of the hormone is called a hormone ago-
nist. Any chemical that binds to receptor proteins and has
no effect but blocks the hormone from binding is called a
hormone antagonist. Endocrine disrupting chemicals can
also interfere by binding to the hormone’s protein carriers
in the blood. So far, endocrine disrupting chemicals have
been shown to interfere with reproductive hormones, thy-
roid hormones, and the immune system chemical messen-
gers. These effects are not lethal, but may make individuals
vulnerable in their environment. If they are having prob-
lems reproducing, maintaining the proper metabolic rate,
or fighting off infections, then their numbers will decrease
(perhaps even leading to extinction). These environmental
contaminants may be harming humans in addition to other
species. Laws have been passed requiring the testing of
thousands of chemicals to see if they have endocrine dis-
rupting potential, and the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) must include this testing in their standard
protocols before approving any new compounds.

 

Sex steroid hormones from the gonads regulate
reproduction, melatonin secreted by the pineal gland
helps regulate circadian rhythms, and thymus hormones
help regulate the vertebrate immune system. Molting
hormone, or ecdysone, and juvenile hormone regulate
metamorphosis and molting in insects.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1145
