Myeloma cell culture

©® Myeloma cells

SS eS © hybrids

it

Selection of eg

hres cals /

X

<a Fusion Q-
Immunization <

tybidoma
e cell

me. ©

B lymphocytes
from spleen

 

FIGURE 57.22

Clone antibody- Assay for
producing (positive) antibody

Monoclonal

 

= oe
“al eel
\ gssay for antibody
antibody

mars 5

positive =e

t Freeze

hybrids hybridoma

(©) ———

for future use

The production of monoclonal antibodies. These antibodies are produced by cells that arise from successive divisions of a single B cell,
and hence all of the antibodies target a single antigenic determinant site. Such antibodies are used for a variety of medical applications,

including pregnancy testing.

Monoclonal Antibodies

Antibodies are commercially prepared for use in medical di-
agnosis and research. In the past, antibodies were obtained
by chemically purifying a specific antigen and then injecting
this antigen into animals. However, because an antigen typi-
cally has many different antigenic determinant sites, the an-
tibodies obtained by this method were polyclonal; they stimu-
lated the development of different B-cell clones with
different specificities. This decreased their sensitivity to a
particular antigenic site and resulted in some degree of
cross-reaction with closely related antigen molecules.

Monoclonal antibodies, by contrast, exhibit specificity
for one antigenic determinant only. In the preparation of
monoclonal antibodies, an animal (frequently, a mouse) is
injected with an antigen and subsequently killed. B lym-
phocytes are then obtained from the animal’s spleen and
placed in thousands of different in vitro incubation vessels.
These cells soon die, however, unless they are hybridized
with cancerous multiple myeloma cells. The fusion of a B
lymphocyte with a cancerous cell produces a hybrid that
undergoes cell division and produces a clone called a hy-
bridoma. Each hybridoma secretes large amounts of identi-
cal, monoclonal antibodies. From among the thousands of
hybridomas produced in this way, the one that produces
the desired antibody is cultured for large-scale production,
and the rest are discarded (figure 57.22).

The availability of large quantities of pure monoclonal
antibodies has resulted in the development of much more
sensitive clinical laboratory tests. Modern pregnancy tests,
for example, use particles (latex rubber or red blood cells)
that are covered with monoclonal antibodies produced
against a pregnancy hormone (abbreviated hCG—see

Antibodies attached to latex particles
Latex particles

Anti-X
antibodies
+ v 4 ve

x
Agglutination (clumping) of latex particles

FIGURE 57.23

Using monoclonal antibodies to detect an antigen. In many
clinical tests (such as pregnancy testing), the monoclonal
antibodies are bound to particles of latex, which agglutinate in the
presence of the antigen.

chapter 59) as the antigen. When these particles are mixed
with a sample that contains this hormone antigen from a
pregnant woman, the antigen-antibody reaction causes a
visible agglutination of the particles (figure 57.23).

 

Agglutination occurs because different antibodies exist
for the ABO and Rh factor antigens on the surface of
red blood cells. Monoclonal antibodies are
commercially produced antibodies that react against
one specific antigen.

 

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1165
