Allergen

oa

\

Autoimmunity and

Allergy

The previous section described ways
that pathogens can elude the immune
system to cause diseases. There is an-
other way the immune system can fail;
it can itself be the agent of disease. Such
is the case with autoimmune diseases
and allergies—the immune system is
the cause of the problem, not the cure.

B cell

Autoimmune Diseases

Autoimmune diseases are produced by
failure of the immune system to recog-
nize and tolerate self antigens. This fail-
ure results in the activation of autoreac-
tive T cells and the production of
autoantibodies by B cells, causing in-
flammation and organ damage. There
are over 40 known or suspected autoim-
mune diseases that affect 5 to 7% of the
population. For reasons that are not un-
derstood, two-thirds of the people with
autoimmune diseases are women.
Autoimmune diseases can result from
a variety of mechanisms. The self antigen may normally be
hidden from the immune system, for example, so that the
immune system treats it as foreign if exposure later occurs.
This occurs when a protein normally trapped in the thyroid
follicles triggers autoimmune destruction of the thyroid
(Hashimoto’s thyroiditis). It also occurs in systemic lupus
erythematosus, in which antibodies are made to nucleopro-
teins. Because the immune attack triggers inflammation, and
inflammation causes organ damage, the immune system

FIGURE 57.29

must be suppressed to alleviate the symptoms of autoim-
mune diseases. Immune suppression is generally accom-
plished with corticosteroids (including hydrocortisone) and
by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, including aspirin.

Allergy

The term allergy, often used interchangeably with hbypersen-
sitivity, refers to particular types of abnormal immune re-
sponses to antigens, which are called allergens in these
cases. There are two major forms of allergy: (1) immediate
hypersensitivity, which is due to an abnormal B-cell re-
sponse to an allergen that produces symptoms within sec-
onds or minutes, and (2) delayed hypersensitivity, which
is an abnormal T cell response that produces symptoms
within about 48 hours after exposure to an allergen.
Immediate hypersensitivity results from the production
of antibodies of the IgE subclass instead of the normal IgG
antibodies. Unlike IgG antibodies, IgE antibodies do not
circulate in the blood. Instead, they attach to tissue mast

a)
6D

Plasma cell

 

     

 

 

Allergy

“

Histamine and
other chemicals

 

IgE antibodies

  

Mast cell

An allergic reaction. This is an immediate hypersensitivity response, in which B cells
secrete antibodies of the IgE class. These antibodies attach to the plasma membranes of
mast cells, which secrete histamine in response to antigen-antibody binding.

cells and basophils, which have membrane receptors for
these antibodies. When the person is again exposed to the
same allergen, the allergen binds to the antibodies attached
to the mast cells and basophils. This stimulates these cells
to secrete various chemicals, including histamine, which
produce the symptom of the allergy (figure 57.29).

Allergens that provoke immediate hypersensitivity in-
clude various foods, bee stings, and pollen grains. The most
common allergy of this type is seasonal hay fever, which
may be provoked by ragweed (Ambrosia) pollen grains.
These allergic reactions are generally mild, but in some al-
lergies (as to penicillin or peanuts in susceptible people) the
widespread and excessive release of histamine may cause
anaphylactic shock, an uncontrolled fall in blood pressure.

In delayed hypersensitivity, symptoms take a longer time
(hours to days) to develop than in immediate hypersensitiv-
ity. This may be due to the fact that immediate hypersensi-
tivity is mediated by antibodies, whereas delayed hypersen-
sitivity is a T cell response. One of the best-known
examples of delayed hypersensitivity is contact dermatitis,
caused by poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac. Be-
cause the symptoms are caused by the secretion of lym-
phokines rather than by the secretion of histamine, treat-
ment with antihistamines provides little benefit. At present,
corticosteroids are the only drugs that can effectively treat
delayed hypersensitivity.

 

Autoimmune diseases are produced when the immune
system fails to tolerate self antigens.

 

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1171
