Endocrine Glands and Hormones

The endocrine system (figure 56.3) includes all of the or-
gans that function exclusively as endocrine glands—such
as the thyroid gland, pituitary gland, adrenal glands, and
so on (table 56.1)—as well as organs that secrete hor-
mones in addition to other functions. Endocrine glands
lack ducts and thus must secrete into surrounding blood
capillaries, unlike exocrine glands, which secrete their
products into a duct.

Hormones secreted by endocrine glands belong to four
different chemical categories:

1. Polypeptides. These hormones are composed of
chains of amino acids that are shorter than about
100 amino acids. Some important examples include
insulin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH).

2. Glycoproteins. These are composed of a polypep-
tide significantly longer than 100 amino acids to
which is attached a carbohydrate. Examples include
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH).

3. Amines. Derived from the amino acids tyrosine and
tryptophan, they include hormones secreted by the
adrenal medulla, thyroid, and pineal glands.

4. Steroids. These hormones are lipids derived from
cholesterol, and include the hormones testosterone,
estradiol, progesterone, and cortisol.

Steroid hormones can be subdivided into sex steroids,
secreted by the testes, ovaries, placenta, and adrenal cortex,
and corticosteroids, secreted only by the adrenal cortex
(the outer portion of the adrenal gland). The corticos-
teroids include cortisol, which regulates glucose balance,
and aldosterone, which regulates salt balance.

The amine hormones secreted by the adrenal medulla
(the inner portion of the adrenal gland), known as cate-
cholamines, include epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepi-
nephrine (noradrenaline). These are derived from the
amino acid tyrosine. Another hormone derived from tyro-
sine is thyroxine, secreted by the thyroid gland. The pineal
gland secretes a different amine hormone, melatonin, de-
rived from tryptophan.

All hormones may be categorized as lipophilic (fat-
soluble) or hydrophilic (water-soluble). The lipophilic
hormones include the steroid hormones and thyroxine; all
other hormones are water-soluble. This distinction is im-
portant in understanding how these hormones regulate
their target cells.

Neural and Endocrine Interactions

The endocrine system is an extremely important regulatory
system in its own right, but it also interacts and cooperates
with the nervous system to regulate the activities of the
other organ systems of the body. The secretory activity of
many endocrine glands is controlled by the nervous system.
Among such glands are the adrenal medulla, posterior pitu-

 

 

 

 

= Pineal
oe gland
Pituitary
gland
Parathyroid glands Thyroid
(behind thyroid) ' gland
Thymus ;
ae Pancreas
y r
os
Ovaries
(in females) “"y
4 Testes
‘ (in males)
FIGURE 56.3

‘The human endocrine system. The major endocrine glands are
shown, but many other organs secrete hormones in addition to
their primary functions.

itary, and pineal gland. These three glands are derived
from the neural ectoderm (to be discussed in chapter 60),
the same embryonic tissue layer that forms the nervous sys-
tem. The major site for neural regulation of the endocrine
system, however, is the brain’s regulation of the anterior
pituitary gland. As we'll see, the hypothalamus controls the
hormonal secretions of the anterior pituitary, which in turn
regulates other endocrine glands. On the other hand, the
secretion of a number of hormones is largely independent
of neural control. The release of insulin by the pancreas
and aldosterone by the adrenal cortex, for example, are
stimulated primarily by increases in the blood concentra-
tions of glucose and potassium (K*), respectively.

 

Any organ that secretes a hormone from a ductless
gland is part of the endocrine system. Hormones may
be any of a variety of different chemicals.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1127
