57.1
Skin: The First Line of Defense

The vertebrate is defended from infection the same way
knights defended medieval cities. “Walls and moats” make
entry difficult; “roaming patrols” attack strangers; and
“sentries” challenge anyone wandering about and call pa-
trols if a proper “ID” is not presented.

1. Walls and moats. The outermost layer of the ver-
tebrate body, the skin, is the first barrier to penetra-
tion by microbes. Mucous membranes in the respira-
tory and digestive tracts are also important barriers
that protect the body from invasion.

2. Roaming patrols. If the first line of defense is pen-
etrated, the response of the body is to mount a cellu-
lar counterattack, using a battery of cells and chemi-
cals that kill microbes. These defenses act very
rapidly after the onset of infection.

3. Sentries. Lastly, the body is also guarded by mobile
cells that patrol the bloodstream, scanning the sur-
faces of every cell they encounter. They are part of
the immune system. One kind of immune cell ag-
gressively attacks and kills any cell identified as for-
cign, whereas the other type marks the foreign cell or
virus for elimination by the roaming patrols.

The Skin as a Barrier to Infection

The skin is the largest organ of the vertebrate body, ac-
counting for 15% of an adult human’s total weight. The
skin not only defends the body by providing a nearly im-
penetrable barrier, but also reinforces this defense with
chemical weapons on the surface. Oil and sweat glands give
the skin’s surface a pH of 3 to 5, acidic enough to inhibit
the growth of many microorganisms. Sweat also contains
the enzyme lysozyme, which digests bacterial cell walls. In
addition to defending the body against invasion by viruses
and microorganisms, the skin prevents excessive loss of
water to the air through evaporation.

The epidermis of skin is approximately 10 to 30 cells
thick, about as thick as this page. The outer layer, called
the stratum corneum, contains cells that are continuously
abraded, injured, and worn by friction and stress during
the body’s many activities. The body deals with this dam-
age not by repairing the cells, but by replacing them. Cells
are shed continuously from the stratum corneum and are
replaced by new cells produced in the innermost layer of
the epidermis, the stratum basale, which contains some of
the most actively dividing cells in the vertebrate body. The
cells formed in this layer migrate upward and enter a
broad intermediate stratum spinosum layer. As they move
upward they form the protein keratin, which makes skin
tough and water-resistant. These new cells eventually ar-

1148 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Many of the body’s most effective defenses are nonspecific.

rive at the stratum corneum, where they normally remain
for about a month before they are shed and replaced by
newer cells from below. Psoriasis, which afflicts some
4 million Americans, is a chronic skin disorder in which
epidermal cells are replaced every 3 to 4 days, about eight
times faster than normal.

The dermis of skin is 15 to 40 times thicker than the
epidermis. It provides structural support for the epidermis
and a matrix for the many blood vessels, nerve endings,
muscles, and other structures situated within skin. The
wrinkling that occurs as we grow older takes place in the
dermis, and the leather used to manufacture belts and shoes
is derived from very thick animal dermis.

The layer of subcutaneous tissue below the dermis
contains primarily adipose cells. These cells act as shock
absorbers and provide insulation, conserving body heat.
Subcutaneous tissue varies greatly in thickness in differ-
ent parts of the body. It is nonexistent in the eyelids, is a
half-centimeter thick or more on the soles of the feet,
and may be much thicker in other areas of the body, such
as the buttocks and thighs.

Other External Surfaces

In addition to the skin, two other potential routes of entry
by viruses and microorganisms must be guarded: the diges-
tive tract and the respiratory tract. Recall that both the di-
gestive and respiratory tracts open to the outside and their
surfaces must also protect the body from foreign invaders.
Microbes are present in food, but many are killed by saliva
(which also contains lysozyme), by the very acidic environ-
ment of the stomach, and by digestive enzymes in the in-
testine. Microorganisms are also present in inhaled air.
The cells lining the smaller bronchi and bronchioles se-
crete a layer of sticky mucus that traps most microorgan-
isms before they can reach the warm, moist lungs, which
would provide ideal breeding grounds for them. Other
cells lining these passages have cilia that continually sweep
the mucus toward the glottis. There it can be swallowed,
carrying potential invaders out of the lungs and into the
digestive tract. Occasionally, an infectious agent, called a
pathogen, will enter the digestive and respiratory systems
and the body will use defense mechanisms such as vomit-
ing, diarrhea, coughing, and sneezing to expel the
pathogens.

 

The surface defenses of the body consist of the skin and
the mucous membranes lining the digestive and
respiratory tracts, which eliminate many
microorganisms before they can invade the body
tissues.

 
