The Anterior Pituitary Gland

The anterior pituitary, unlike the posterior pituitary, does
not develop from a downgrowth of the brain; instead, it de-
velops from a pouch of epithelial tissue that pinches off
from the roof of the embryo’s mouth. Because it is epithe-
lial tissue, the anterior pituitary is a complete gland—it
produces the hormones it secretes. Many, but not all, of
these hormones stimulate growth in their target organs, in-
cluding other endocrine glands. Therefore, the hormones
of the anterior pituitary gland are collectively termed tropic
hormones (Greek trophe, “nourishment”), or tropins. When
the target organ of a tropic hormone is another endocrine
gland, that gland is stimulated by the tropic hormone to se-
crete its own hormones.

The hormones produced and secreted by different cell
types in the anterior pituitary gland (figure 56.11) include
the following:

1. Growth hormone (GH, or somatotropin) stimulates
the growth of muscle, bone (indirectly), and other tis-
sues and is also essential for proper metabolic regula-
tion.

2. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH, or corti-
cotropin) stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce cor-
ticosteroid hormones, including cortisol (in humans)
and corticosterone (in many other vertebrates), which
regulate glucose homeostasis.

3. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH, or thy-
rotropin) stimulates the thyroid gland to produce thy-
roxine, which in turn stimulates oxidative respiration.

4. Luteinizing hormone (LH) is needed for ovulation
and the formation of a corpus luteum in the female
menstrual cycle (see chapter 59). It also stimulates the
testes to produce testosterone, which is needed for
sperm production and for the development of male
secondary sexual characteristics.

 

.
MM

Thyroid gland

Thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)

  

  
  

Bone
and muscle

FIGURE 56.11
‘The major hormones of the anterior and posterior pituitary glands. Only a few of the actions of these hormones are shown.

1136 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

     
   
  
  
 

 

Mammary glands
in mammals

   
