6.5 Active transport across membranes is powered by energy from ATP.

Active Transport

While diffusion, facilitated diffusion, and osmosis are pas-
sive transport processes that move materials down their
concentration gradients, cells can also move substances
across the membrane up their concentration gradients.
This process requires the expenditure of energy, typically
ATP, and is therefore called active transport. Like facili-
tated diffusion, active transport involves highly selective
protein carriers within the membrane. These carriers bind
to the transported substance, which could be an ion or a
simple molecule like a sugar (figure 6.20), an amino acid, or
a nucleotide to be used in the synthesis of DNA.

Active transport is one of the most important functions
of any cell. It enables a cell to take up additional molecules
of a substance that is already present in its cytoplasm in
concentrations higher than in the extracellular fluid. With-
out active transport, for example, liver cells would be un-
able to accumulate glucose molecules from the blood
plasma, as the glucose concentration is often higher inside
the liver cells than it is in the plasma. Active transport also
enables a cell to move substances from its cytoplasm to the
extracellular fluid despite higher external concentrations.

The Sodium-Potassium Pump

The use of ATP in active transport may be direct or indi-
rect. Lets first consider how ATP is used directly to move
ions against their concentration gradient. More than one-
third of all of the energy expended by an animal cell that is
not actively dividing is used in the active transport of
sodium (Na*) and potassium (K*) ions. Most animal cells
have a low internal concentration of Na‘, relative to their
surroundings, and a high internal concentration of K*.
They maintain these concentration differences by actively
pumping Na* out of the cell and K* in. The remarkable
protein that transports these two ions across the cell mem-
brane is known as the sodium-potassium pump (figure
6.21). The cell obtains the energy it needs to operate the
pump from adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a molecule we'll
learn more about in chapter 8.

The important characteristic of the sodium-potassium
pump is that it is an active transport process, transporting
Na* and K* from areas of low concentration to areas of
high concentration. This transport up their concentration
gradients is the opposite of the passive transport in diffu-
sion; it is achieved only by the constant expenditure of
metabolic energy. The sodium-potassium pump works
through a series of conformational changes in the trans-
membrane protein:

Step 1. Three sodium ions bind to the cytoplasmic
side of the protein, causing the protein to change its
conformation.

118 Part II Biology of the Cell

 

(@t Glucose-binding
site
Hydrophobic

(Gat Hydrophilic

©,© Charged amino
acids

 

 

 

 

POS (ER

‘ ‘ SS
ee Je
, 29 *
le Aye

=O

FIGURE 6.20

A glucose transport channel. The molecular structure of this
particular glucose transport channel is known in considerable
detail. The protein’s 492 amino acids form a folded chain that
traverses the lipid membrane 12 times. Amino acids with charged
groups are less stable in the hydrophobic region of the lipid
bilayer and are thus exposed to the cytoplasm or the extracellular
fluid. Researchers think the center of the protein consists of five
helical segments with glucose-binding sites (in red) facing
inward. A conformational change in the protein transports
glucose across the membrane by shifting the position of the
glucose-binding sites.

Step 2. In its new conformation, the protein binds a
molecule of ATP and cleaves it into adenosine diphos-
phate and phosphate (ADP + P)). ADP is released, but
the phosphate group remains bound to the protein. The
protein is now phosphorylated.

Step 3. The phosphorylation of the protein induces a
second conformational change in the protein. This
change translocates the three Na* across the membrane,
