Frequency Localization in the
Cochlea

The basilar membrane of the cochlea
consists of elastic fibers of varying
length and stiffness, like the strings of a
musical instrument, embedded in a
gelatinous material. At the base of the
cochlea (near the oval window), the
fibers of the basilar membrane are
short and stiff. At the far end of the
cochlea (the apex), the fibers are 5
times longer and 100 times more flexi-
ble. Therefore, the resonant frequency
of the basilar membrane is higher at
the base than the apex; the base re-
sponds to higher pitches, the apex to
lower.

When a wave of sound energy en-
ters the cochlea from the oval window,
it initiates a traveling up-and-down
motion of the basilar membrane.
However, this wave imparts most of its
energy to that part of the basilar mem-
brane with a resonant frequency near
the frequency of the sound wave, re-
sulting in a maximum deflection of the
basilar membrane at that point (figure
55.14). As a result, the hair cell depo-
larization is greatest in that region,
and the afferent axons from that re-
gion are stimulated to produce action
potentials more than those from other
regions. When these action potentials
arrive in the brain, they are inter-
preted as representing a sound of that
particular frequency, or pitch.

The flexibility of the basilar mem-
brane limits the frequency range of
human hearing to between approxi-
mately 20 and 20,000 cycles per sec-
ond (hertz) in children. Our ability to
hear high-pitched sounds decays pro-
gressively throughout middle age.
Other vertebrates can detect sounds at
frequencies lower than 20 hertz and

much higher than 20,000 hertz. Dogs, for example, can
detect sounds at 40,000 hertz, enabling them to hear
high-pitched dog whistles that seem silent to a human

Malleus Incus Stapes Oval
window

 
 
     
  

Vestibular Cochlear
Basilar canal duct
membrane

Tympanic Ay
High frequency (22,000H2z) "esha Pex

Medium frequency (2000Hz)

 

Low frequency (500Hz)

FIGURE 55.14

Frequency localization in the cochlea. The cochlea is shown unwound, so that the
length of the basilar membrane can be seen. The fibers within the basilar membrane
vibrate in response to different frequencies of sound, related to the pitch of the sound.
Thus, regions of the basilar membrane show maximum vibrations in response to different
sound frequencies. Notice that low-frequency (pitch) sounds vibrate the basilar membrane
more toward the apex, while high frequencies cause vibrations more toward the base.

 

The middle ear ossicles vibrate in response to sound
waves, creating fluid vibrations within the inner ear.
This causes the hair cells to bend, transducing the

listener. : sound into action potentials. The pitch of a sound is

Hair cells are also innervated by efferent axons from the determined by which hair cells (and thus which sensory
brain, and impulses in those axons can make hair cells less neurons) are activated by the vibration of the basilar
sensitive. This central control of receptor sensitivity can in- membrane.

crease an individual's ability to concentrate on a particular

 

auditory signal (for example, a single voice) in the midst of
background noise, which is effectively “tuned out” by the

efferent axons.

1116 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
