56.4 Endocrine glands secrete hormones that regulate many body functions.

 

 

The Thyroid and
Parathyroid Glands

The endocrine glands that are regu-
lated by the anterior pituitary, and
those endocrine glands that are regu-
lated by other means, help to control
metabolism, electrolyte balance, and
reproductive functions. Some of the
major endocrine glands will be con-
sidered in this section.

Thyroxine secretion rate

 

TRH —+ TSH—> Thyroxine

 

 

 

   

 

 

The Thyroid Gland .
The thyroid gland (Greek thyros,

 

2 . :
-20 et -10 =i 0 +5 +10
Days from emergence of forelimb

 

 

“shield”) is shaped like a shield and
lies just below the Adam’s apple in the
front of the neck. We have already
mentioned that the thyroid gland se-
cretes thyroxine and smaller amounts
of triiodothyronine (T3), which stimu-

late oxidative respiration in most cells Rapid growth
in the body and, in so doing, help set
the body’s basal metabolic rate (see

5 FIGURE 56.17

chapter 51). In children, these thyroid
hormones also promote growth and
stimulate maturation of the central
nervous system. Children with under-
active thyroid glands are therefore
stunted in their growth and suffer se-
vere mental retardation, a condition
called cretinism. This differs from pi-
tuitary dwarfism, which results from inadequate GH and is
not associated with abnormal intellectual development.

People who are hypothyroid (whose secretion of thyrox-
ine is too low) can take thyroxine orally, as pills. Only thy-
roxine and the steroid hormones (as in contraceptive pills),
can be taken orally because they are nonpolar and can pass
through the plasma membranes of intestinal epithelial cells
without being digested.

There is an additional function of the thyroid gland that
is unique to amphibians—thyroid hormones are needed for
the metamorphosis of the larvae into adults (figure 56.17).
If the thyroid gland is removed from a tadpole, it will not
change into a frog. Conversely, if an immature tadpole is
fed pieces of a thyroid gland, it will undergo premature
metamorphosis and become a miniature frog!

The thyroid gland also secretes calcitonin, a peptide
hormone that plays a role in maintaining proper levels of
calcium (Ca**) in the blood. When the blood Ca** con-
centration rises too high, calcitonin stimulates the uptake
of Ca** into bones, thus lowering its level in the blood.
Although calcitonin may be important in the physiology
of some vertebrates, its significance in normal human

begin to form.

1140 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

+—Premetamorphosis —> «—— Prometamorphosis ——» «——— Climax ——>

 

#
Reduced growth,

rapid differentiation Rapid differentiation

‘Thyroxine triggers metamorphosis in amphibians. In tadpoles at the premetamorphic
stage, the hypothalamus releases TRH (thyrotropin-releasing hormone), which causes the
anterior pituitary to secrete TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone). TSH then acts on the
thyroid gland, which secretes thyroxine. The hindlimbs then begin to form. As
metamorphosis proceeds, thyroxine reaches its maximal level, after which the forelimbs

physiology is controversial, and it appears less important
in the day-to-day regulation of Ca** levels. A hormone
that plays a more important role in Ca** homeostasis is
secreted by the parathyroid glands, described in the next
section.

The Parathyroid Glands and Calcium

Homeostasis

The parathyroid glands are four small glands attached to
the thyroid. Because of their size, researchers ignored them
until well into this century. The first suggestion that these
organs have an endocrine function came from experiments
on dogs: if their parathyroid glands were removed, the Ca**
concentration in the dogs’ blood plummeted to less than
half the normal value. The Ca** concentration returned to
normal when an extract of parathyroid gland was adminis-
tered. However, if too much of the extract was adminis-
tered, the dogs’ Ca** levels rose far above normal as the
calcium phosphate crystals in their bones was dissolved. It
was clear that the parathyroid glands produce a hormone
that stimulates the release of Ca** from bone.
