   
  
    
   
    

Air sac

Malpighian
tubules —

Rectum

Poison sac

FIGURE 58.11

The Malpighian tubules of insects. (2) The Malpighian
tubules of insects are extensions of the digestive tract that
collect water and wastes from the body’s circulatory system.
() K+ is secreted into these tubules, drawing water with it
osmotically. Much of this water (see arrows) is reabsorbed
across the wall of the hindgut.

open circulatory system. Most of the water and K* is then
reabsorbed into the circulatory system through the ep-
ithelium of the hindgut, leaving only small molecules and
waste products to be excreted from the rectum along with
feces. Malpighian tubules thus provide a very efficient
means of water conservation.

The kidneys of vertebrates, unlike the Malpighian
tubules of insects, create a tubular fluid by filtration of
the blood under pressure. In addition to containing waste
products and water, the filtrate contains many small mol-
ecules that are of value to the animal, including glucose,
amino acids, and vitamins. These molecules and most of
the water are reabsorbed from the tubules into the blood,
while wastes remain in the filtrate. Additional wastes may
be secreted by the tubules and added to the filtrate, and
the final waste product, urine, is eliminated from the

body.

 

Malpighian
tubules

L Hindgut

 

It may seem odd that the vertebrate kidney should filter
out almost everything from blood plasma (except proteins,
which are too large to be filtered) and then spend energy to
take back or reabsorb what the body needs. But selective
reabsorption provides great flexibility, because various ver-
tebrate groups have evolved the ability to reabsorb differ-
ent molecules that are especially valuable in particular habi-
tats. This flexibility is a key factor underlying the successful
colonization of many diverse environments by the verte-
brates.

 

Many invertebrates filter fluid into a system of tubules
and then reabsorb ions and water, leaving waste
products for excretion. Insects create an excretory fluid
by secreting K* into tubules, which draws water
osmotically. The vertebrate kidney produces a filtrate
that enters tubules and is modified to become urine.

 

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1181
