| 56.3 The hypothalamus controls the secretions of the pituitary gland.

The Posterior Pituitary Gland

The pituitary gland hangs by a stalk from the hypothala-
mus of the brain (figure 56.9) posterior to the optic chiasm
(see chapter 54), A microscopic view reveals that the gland
consists of two parts. The anterior portion appears glandu-
Jar and is called the anterior pituitary; the posterior por-
tion appears fibrous and is the posterior pituitary. These
two portions of the pituitary gland have different embry-
onic origins, secrete different hormones, and are regulated
by different control systems.

The Posterior Pituitary Gland

The posterior pituitary appears fibrous because it contains
axons that originate in cell bodies within the hypothalamus
and extend along the stalk of the pituitary as a tract of

fibers. This anatomical relationship results from the way
that the posterior pituitary is formed in embryonic devel-
opment. As the floor of the third ventricle of the brain
forms the hypothalamus, part of this neural tissue grows
downward to produce the posterior pituitary. The hypo-
thalamus and posterior pituitary thus remain intercon-
nected by a tract of axons.

The endocrine role of the posterior pituitary gland first
became evident in 1912, when a remarkable medical case
was reported: a man who had been shot in the head devel-
oped the need to urinate every 30 minutes or so, 24 hours a
day. The bullet had lodged in his pituitary gland. Subse-
quent research demonstrated that removal of this gland
produces the same symptoms. Pituitary extracts were found
to contain a substance that makes the kidneys conserve
water, and in the early 1950s investigators isolated a pep-
tide from the posterior pituitary, antidiuretic hormone

 

FIGURE 56.9

‘The pituitary gland hangs by a short stalk from the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland (the oval structure hanging from the stalk),
shown here enlarged 15 times, regulates hormone production in many of the body’s endocrine glands.

1134 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
