Ammonia, Urea, and Uric Acid

Amino acids and nucleic acids are nitrogen-containing
molecules. When animals catabolize these molecules for
energy or convert them into carbohydrates or lipids, they
produce nitrogen-containing by-products called nitroge-
nous wastes (figure 58.22) that must be eliminated from
the body.

The first step in the metabolism of amino acids and nu-
cleic acids is the removal of the amino (~NH2) group and
its combination with H* to form ammonia (NH3) in the
liver. Ammonia is quite toxic to cells and therefore is safe
only in very dilute concentrations. The excretion of am-
monia is not a problem for the bony fish and tadpoles,
which eliminate most of it by diffusion through the gills
and less by excretion in very dilute urine. In elasmo-
branchs, adult amphibians, and mammals, the nitrogenous
wastes are eliminated in the far less toxic form of urea.
Urea is water-soluble and so can be excreted in large
amounts in the urine. It is carried in the bloodstream
from its place of synthesis in the liver to the kidneys
where it is excreted in the urine.

Reptiles, birds, and insects excrete nitrogenous wastes in
the form of uric acid, which is only slightly soluble in
water. As a result of its low solubility, uric acid precipitates

 

Most
fish some others
NH °

Ammonia Urea

FIGURE 58.22

 

and thus can be excreted using very little water. Uric acid
forms the pasty white material in bird droppings called
guano. The ability to synthesize uric acid in these groups of
animals is also important because their eggs are encased
within shells, and nitrogenous wastes build up as the em-
bryo grows within the egg. The formation of uric acid,
while a lengthy process that requires considerable energy,
produces a compound that crystallizes and precipitates. As
a precipitate, it is unable to affect the embryo’s develop-
ment even though it is still inside the egg.

Mammals also produce some uric acid, but it is a waste
product of the degradation of purine nucleotides (see chap-
ter 3), not of amino acids. Most mammals have an enzyme
called uricase, which converts uric acid into a more soluble
derivative, allantoin. Only humans, apes, and the dalmat-
ian dog lack this enzyme and so must excrete the uric acid.
In humans, excessive accumulation of uric acid in the joints
produces a condition known as gout.

 

The metabolic breakdown of amino acids and nucleic
acids produces ammonia as a by-product. Ammonia is
excreted by bony fish, but other vertebrates convert
nitrogenous wastes into urea and uric acid, which are
less toxic nitrogenous wastes.

 

 

Nitrogenous wastes. When amino acids and nucleic acids are metabolized, the immediate by-product is ammonia, which is quite toxic
but which can be eliminated through the gills of teleost fish. Mammals convert ammonia into urea, which is less toxic. Birds and terrestrial

reptiles convert it instead into uric acid, which is insoluble in water.

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1191
