 

Chapter 57 www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Summary Questions

57.1 Many of the body’s most effective defenses are nonspecific.

USS COn

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

* Nonspecific defenses include physical barriers such as__1. How do macrophages destroy
the skin, phagocytic cells, killer cells, and foreign cells?
complement proteins. 2. How does the complement

system participate in defense

*¢ The inflammatory response aids the mobilization of .
: against infection?

defensive cells at infected sites.

57.2 Specific immune defenses require the recognition of antigens.

FQ (it Aciviy
Cas Human skin anatomy

 

S

 

* Lymphocytes called B cells secrete antibodies and 3. On what types of cells are the
produce the humoral response; lymphocytes called T _two classes of MHC proteins
cells are responsible for cell-mediated immunity. found?

57.3 T cells organize attacks against invading microbes.

* Specific immunity
* Lymphocytes
* Cell mediated

immunity

 

¢ T cells only respond to antigens presented to them by —_—_ 4. In what two ways do
macrophages or other antigen-presenting cells macrophages activate helper T
together with MHC proteins. cells? How do helper T cells

stimulate the proliferation of

* Cytotoxic T cells kill cells that have foreign antigens cytotoxic T cells?

presented together with MHC-I proteins.

57.4 B cells label specific cells for destruction.

* T-cell function

 

 

¢ The antibody molecules consist of two heavy and two 5. How do IgM and IgG

light polypeptide regions arranged like a “Y”; the antibodies differ in triggering
ends of the two arms bind to antigens. destruction of infected cells?
* An individual can produce a tremendous variety of 6. How does the clonal selection

model help to explain active

different antibodies because the genes which produce P
immunity?

those antibodies recombine extensively.
. . ae . 7. How are lymphocytes able to
¢ Active immunity occurs when an individual gains produce millions of different

immunity by prior exposure to a pathogen; passive types of immune receptors?
immunity is produced by the transfer of antibodies
from one individual to another.

 

 

* Clonal selection

* Activity:
Plasma cell production

57.5 All animals exhibit nonspecific immune response but specific ones evolved in vertebrates.

 

¢ The immune system evolved in animals from a 8. Compare insect and
strictly nonspecific immune response in invertebrates mammalian immune defenses.
to the two-part immune defense found in mammals.

57.6 The immune system can be defeated.

 

* Phagocytic cells

 

¢ Flu viruses, trypanosomes, and the protozoan that 9. What might cause an immune
causes malaria are able to evade the immune system attack of self antigens?
by mutating the genes that produce their surface 10. How does HIV defeat
antigens. In autoimmune diseases, the immune human immune defenses?

system targets the body’s own antigens.

1172 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

* Abnormalities
