Active Immunity through Clonal Selection

As we discussed earlier, B and T cells have receptors on
their cell surfaces that recognize and bind to specific anti-
gens. When a particular antigen enters the body, it must,
by chance, encounter the specific lymphocyte with the ap-
propriate receptor in order to provoke an immune re-
sponse. The first time a pathogen invades the body, there
are only a few B or T cells that may have the receptors that
can recognize the invader’s antigens. Binding of the anti-
gen to its receptor on the lymphocyte surface, however,
stimulates cell division and produces a clone (a population of
genetically identical cells). This process is known as clonal
selection. In this first encounter, there are only a few cells
that can mount an immune response and the response is
relatively weak. This is called a primary immune re-
sponse (figure 57.18).

If the primary immune response involves B cells, some
become plasma cells that secrete antibodies, and some be-
come memory cells. Because a clone of memory cells spe-
cific for that antigen develops after the primary response,
the immune response to a second infection by the same
pathogen is swifter and stronger. The next time the body is
invaded by the same pathogen, the immune system is
ready. As a result of the first infection, there is now a large
clone of lymphocytes that can recognize that pathogen (fig-
ure 57.19). This more effective response, elicited by subse-
quent exposures to an antigen, is called a secondary im-
mune response.

Memory cells can survive for several decades, which is
why people rarely contract chicken pox a second time after
they have had it once. Memory cells are also the reason that
vaccinations are effective. The vaccine triggers the primary
response so that if the actual pathogen is encountered later,
the large and rapid secondary response occurs and stops the
infection before it can start. The viruses causing childhood
diseases have surface antigens that change little from year to
year, so the same antibody is effective for decades.

Figure 57.20 summarizes how the cellular and humoral
lines of defense work together to produce the body’s spe-
cific immune response.

 

 

Active immunity is produced by clonal selection and
expansion. This occurs because interaction of an
antigen with its receptor on the lymphocyte surface
stimulates cell division, so that more lymphocytes are
available to combat subsequent exposures to the same
antigen.

 

FIGURE 57.19

The clonal selection theory of active immunity. In response to
interaction with an antigen that binds specifically to its surface
receptors, a B cell divides many times to produce a clone of

B cells. Some of these become plasma cells that secrete antibodies
for the primary response, while others become memory cells that
await subsequent exposures to the antigen for the mounting of a
secondary immune response.

1162 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

This interval
may be years.

‘Amount of antibody —>

 

 

 

 

 

Exposure Exposure
to cowpox to smallpox
Time —>
ee
Primary Secondary
response response
FIGURE 57.18

The development of active immunity. Immunity to smallpox in
Jenner’s patients occurred because their inoculation with cowpox
stimulated the development of lymphocyte clones with receptors
that could bind not only to cowpox but also to smallpox antigens.
As a result of clonal selection, a second exposure, this time to
smallpox, stimulates the immune system to produce large amounts
of the antibody more rapidly than before.

   
  
     
  

B lymphocyte
>

Endoplasmic
reticulum

Memory cells

Development
of clone

 
