 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘The Pancreas After a meal Between meals

The pancreas is located adjacent Blood glucose Blood glucose

to the stomach and is connected : Lice deed '

to the duodenum of the small in- Negative Negative
feedback feedback

testine by the pancreatic duct. It
secretes bicarbonate ions and a va-
riety of digestive enzymes into the
small intestine through this duct
(see chapter 51), and for a long
time the pancreas was thought to
be solely an exocrine gland. In
1869, however, a German medical

 

 

 

student named Paul Langerhans
described some unusual clusters of

 

Insulin secretion increased
Glucagon secretion decreased

 

Insulin secretion decreased
Glucagon secretion increased

 

 

 

 

cells scattered throughout the
pancreas; these clusters came to
be called islets of Langerhans.
Laboratory workers later ob-
served that the surgical removal of
the pancreas caused glucose to ap-
pear in the urine, the hallmark of :
the disease diabetes mellitus. This
suggested that the pancreas,
specifically the islets of Langer-

 

 

 

 

 

hans, might be producing a hor-
mone that prevents this disease.

 

 

Glucose moves from

Glycogen hydrolyzed
to glucose, then
secreted into blood

 

 

 

 

That hormone is insulin, se- blood into cells
creted by the beta (8) cells of the
islets. Insulin was not isolated FIGURE 56.20

until 1922, when two young doc-
tors working in a Toronto hospi-
tal succeeded where many others
had not. On January 11, 1922,
they injected an extract purified
from beef pancreas into a 13-year-old diabetic boy, whose
weight had fallen to 65 pounds and who was not expected
to survive. With that single injection, the glucose level in
the boy’s blood fell 25%. A more potent extract soon
brought the level down to near normal. The doctors had
achieved the first instance of successful insulin therapy.

Two forms of diabetes mellitus are now recognized. Peo-
ple with type I, or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, lack
the insulin-secreting B cells. Treatment for these patients
therefore consists of insulin injections. (Because insulin is a
peptide hormone, it would be digested if taken orally and
must instead be injected into the blood.) In the past, only
insulin extracted from the pancreas of pigs or cattle was
available, but today people with insulin-dependent diabetes
can inject themselves with human insulin produced by ge-
netically engineered bacteria. Active research on the pos-
sibility of transplanting islets of Langerhans holds much
promise of a lasting treatment for these patients. Most di-
abetic patients, however, have type II, or non-insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus. They generally have normal
or even above-normal levels of insulin in their blood, but
their cells have a reduced sensitivity to insulin. These

 

The antagonistic actions of insulin and glucagon on blood glucose. Insulin stimulates the
cellular uptake of blood glucose into skeletal muscles and the liver after a meal. Glucagon stimulates
the hydrolysis of liver glycogen between meals, so that the liver can secrete glucose into the blood.
‘These antagonistic effects help to maintain homeostasis of the blood glucose concentration.

people do not require insulin injections and can usually
control their diabetes through diet and exercise.

The islets of Langerhans produce another hormone; the
alpha (@) cells of the islets secrete glucagon, which acts an-
tagonistically to insulin (figure 56.20). When a person eats
carbohydrates, the blood glucose concentration rises. This
stimulates the secretion of insulin by B cells and inhibits the
secretion of glucagon by the ©. cells. Insulin promotes the
cellular uptake of glucose into liver and muscle cells, where
it is stored as glycogen, and into adipose cells, where it is
stored as fat. Between meals, when the concentration of
blood glucose falls, insulin secretion decreases and
glucagon secretion increases. Glucagon promotes the hy-
drolysis of stored glycogen in the liver and fat in adipose
tissue. As a result, glucose and fatty acids are released into
the blood and can be taken up by cells and used for energy.

 

The B cells of the islets of Langerhans secrete insulin,
and the © cells secrete glucagon. These two hormones
have antagonistic actions on the blood glucose
concentration; insulin lowers and glucagon raises blood
glucose.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1143
