Sensing Muscle Contraction and
Blood Pressure

Mechanoreceptors contain sensory cells with ion channels
that are sensitive to a mechanical force applied to the mem-
brane. These channels open in response to mechanical dis-
tortion of the membrane, initiating a depolarization (recep-
tor potential) that causes the sensory neuron to generate
action potentials.

Muscle Length and Tension

Buried within the skeletal muscles of all vertebrates except
the bony fishes are muscle spindles, sensory stretch recep-
tors that lie in parallel with the rest of the fibers in the
muscle (figure 55.5). Each spindle consists of several thin
muscle fibers wrapped together and innervated by a sensory
neuron, which becomes activated when the muscle, and
therefore the spindle, is stretched. Muscle spindles, to-
gether with other receptors in tendons and joints, are
known as proprioceptors, which are sensory receptors that
provide information about the relative position or move-
ment of the animal’s body parts. The sensory neurons con-
duct action potentials into the spinal cord, where they
synapse with somatic motor neurons that innervate the
muscle. This pathway constitutes the muscle stretch reflex,
including the knee-jerk reflex, previously discussed in chap-
ter 54.

When a muscle contracts, it exerts tension on the ten-
dons attached to it. The Golgi tendon organs, another type

Nerve

   
  
  

   

Skeletal muscle Spindle

sheath

FIGURE 55.5

lt See

e
<a Nig ea
0 Na ae es \

of proprioceptor, monitor this tension; if it becomes too
high, they elicit a reflex that inhibits the motor neurons in-
nervating the muscle. This reflex helps to ensure that mus-
cles do not contract so strongly that they damage the ten-
dons to which they are attached.

Blood Pressure

Blood pressure is monitored at two main sites in the body.
One is the carotid sinus, an enlargement of the left and right
internal carotid arteries, which supply blood to the brain.
The other is the aortic arch, the portion of the aorta very
close to its emergence from the heart. The walls of the
blood vessels at both sites contain a highly branched net-
work of afferent neurons called baroreceptors, which de-
tect tension in the walls. When the blood pressure de-
creases, the frequency of impulses produced by the
baroreceptors decreases. The CNS responds to this re-
duced input by stimulating the sympathetic division of the
autonomic nervous system, causing an increase in heart rate
and vasoconstriction. Both effects help to raise the blood
pressure, thus maintaining homeostasis. A rise in blood
pressure, conversely, reduces sympathetic activity and stim-
ulates the parasympathetic division, slowing the heart and
lowering the blood pressure.

 

Mechanical distortion of the plasma membrane of
mechanoreceptors produces nerve impulses that serve
to monitor muscle length from skeletal muscle spindles
and to monitor blood pressure from baroreceptors
within arteries.

 

Motor Sensory
neurons neurons

 

   

Specialized muscle fibers
(spindle fibers)

A muscle spindle is a stretch receptor embedded within skeletal muscle. Stretching of the muscle elongates the spindle fibers and
stimulates the sensory dendritic endings wrapped around them. This causes the sensory neurons to send impulses to the CNS, where they

synapse with motor neurons.

1108 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
