Vertebrate Photoreceptors

The vertebrate retina contains two kinds of photorecep-
tors, called rods and cones (figure 55.20). Rods are respon-
sible for black-and-white vision when the illumination is
dim, while cones are responsible for high visual acuity
(sharpness) and color vision. Humans have about 100 mil-
lion rods and 3 million cones in each retina. Most of the
cones are located in the central region of the retina known
as the fovea, where the eye forms its sharpest image. Rods
are almost completely absent from the fovea.

Rods and cones have the same basic cellular structure.
An inner segment rich in mitochondria contains numerous
vesicles filled with neurotransmitter molecules. It is con-
nected by a narrow stalk to the outer segment, which is
packed with hundreds of flattened discs stacked on top of
one another. The light-capturing molecules, or photopig-
ments, are located on the membranes of these discs.

In rods, the photopigment is called rhodopsin. It con-
sists of the protein opsin bound to a molecule of cis-retinal
(figure 55.21), which is derived from carotene, a photosyn-
thetic pigment in plants. The photopigments of cones,
called photopsins, are structurally very similar to
rhodopsin. Humans have three kinds of cones, each of
which possesses a photopsin consisting of cis-retinal bound
to a protein with a slightly different amino acid sequence.
These differences shift the absorption maximum—the region
of the electromagnetic spectrum that is best absorbed by
the pigment—(figure 55.22). The absorption maximum of
the cis-retinal in rhodopsin is 500 nanometers (nm); the
absorption maxima of the three kinds of cone photopsins,
in contrast, are 455 nm (blue-absorbing), 530 nm (green-
absorbing), and 625 nm (red-absorbing). These differences
in the light-absorbing properties of the photopsins are re-
sponsible for the different color sensitivities of the three
kinds of cones, which are often referred to as simply blue,
green, and red cones.

Most vertebrates, particularly those that are diurnal (ac-
tive during the day), have color vision, as do many insects.
Indeed, honeybees can see light in the near-ultraviolet
range, which is invisible to the human eye. Color vision re-
quires the presence of more than one photopigment in dif-
ferent receptor cells, but not all animals with color vision
have the three-cone system characteristic of humans and
other primates. Fish, turtles, and birds, for example, have
four or five kinds of cones; the “extra” cones enable these
animals to see near-ultraviolet light. Many mammals (such
as squirrels), on the other hand, have only two types of
cones.

The retina is made up of three layers of cells (figure
55.23): the layer closest to the external surface of the eye-
ball consists of the rods and cones, the next layer contains
bipolar cells, and the layer closest to the cavity of the eye is
composed of ganglion cells. Thus, light must first pass
through the ganglion cells and bipolar cells in order to
reach the photoreceptors! The rods and cones synapse

1120 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

 

Pigment
discs

Outer
segment —4
Connecting
cilium
Inner
segment —| ) FIGURE 55.20

a Rods and cones. The

pigment-containing outer

Mitochondria segment in each of these

! cells is separated from the
Nucleus ) i rest of the cell by a partition
Synaptic_——t”" WT, through which there is only
terminal a narrow passage, the

Rod Cone connective cilium.

 

Light

   

All-trans isomer

FIGURE 55.21

Absorption of light. When light is absorbed by a photopigment,
the 11-cis isomer of retinal, the light-capturing portion of the
pigment undergoes a change in shape: the linear end of the
molecule (at the right in this diagram) rotates about a double bond
(indicated here in red). The resulting isomer is referred to as all-
trans retinal. This change in retinal’s shape initiates a chain of
events that leads to hyperpolarization of the photoreceptor.

with the bipolar cells, and the bipolar cells synapse with
the ganglion cells, which transmit impulses to the brain via
the optic nerve. The flow of sensory information in the
retina is therefore opposite to the path of light through the
retina. It should also be noted that the retina contains two
additional types of neurons, horizontal cells and amacrine
cells. Stimulation of horizontal cells by photoreceptors at
