Cellular Counterattack: The Second
Line of Defense

The surface defenses of the vertebrate body are very effec-
tive but are occasionally breached, allowing invaders to
enter the body. At this point, the body uses a host of non-
specific cellular and chemical devices to defend itself. We
refer to this as the second line of defense. These devices all
have one property in common: they respond to any micro-
bial infection without pausing to determine the invader’s
identity.

Although these cells and chemicals of the nonspecific
immune response roam through the body, there is a central
location for the collection and distribution of the cells of
the immune system; it is called the lymphatic system (see
chapter 52). The lymphatic system consists of a network of
lymphatic capillaries, ducts, nodes and lymphatic organs
(figure 57.2), and although it has other functions involved
with circulation, it also stores cells and other agents used in
the immune response. These cells are distributed through-
out the body to fight infections, and also stored in the
lymph nodes where foreign invaders can be eliminated as

body fluids pass through.

Cells That Kill Invading Microbes

Perhaps the most important of the vertebrate body’s non-
specific defenses are white blood cells called leukocytes that
circulate through the body and attack invading microbes
within tissues. There are three basic kinds of these cells,
and each kills invading microorganisms differently.

Macrophages (“big caters”) are large, irregularly shaped
cells that kill microbes by ingesting them through phagocy-
tosis, much as an amoeba ingests a food particle (figure
57.3). Within the macrophage, the membrane-bound vac-
uole containing the bacterium fuses with a lysosome. Fu-
sion activates lysosomal enzymes that kill the microbe by
liberating large quantities of oxygen free-radicals.
Macrophages also engulf viruses, cellular debris, and dust
particles in the lungs. Macrophages circulate continuously
in the extracellular fluid, and their phagocytic actions sup-
plement those of the specialized phagocytic cells that are
part of the structure of the liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
In response to an infection, monocytes (an undifferentiated
leukocyte) found in the blood squeeze through capillaries
to enter the connective tissues. There, at the site of the in-
fection, the monocytes are transformed into additional
macrophages.

Neutrophils are leukocytes that, like macrophages, in-
gest and kill bacteria by phagocytosis. In addition, neu-
trophils release chemicals (some of which are identical to
household bleach) that kill other bacteria in the neighbor-

hood as well as neutrophils themselves.

   

Lymphatic vessels

FIGURE 57.2

The lymphatic system. The lymphatic system consists of
lymphatic vessels, lymph nodes, and lymphatic organs, including
the spleen and thymus gland.

 

FIGURE 57.3

A macrophage in action (1800x). In this scanning electron
micrograph, a macrophage is “fishing” with long, sticky
cytoplasmic extensions. Bacterial cells that come in contact with
the extensions are drawn toward the macrophage and engulfed.

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1149
