6.4 Bulk transport utilizes endocytosis.

Bulk Passage Into and
Out of the Cell

Endocytosis

The lipid nature of their biological membranes raises a
second problem for cells. The substances cells use as fuel
are for the most part large, polar molecules that cannot
cross the hydrophobic barrier a lipid bilayer creates. How
do organisms get these substances into their cells? One
process many single-celled eukaryotes employ is endocy-
tosis (figure 6.17). In this process the plasma membrane
extends outward and envelops food particles. Cells use
three major types of endocytosis: phagocytosis, pinocyto-
sis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis.

Phagocytosis and Pinocytosis. If the material the cell
takes in is particulate (made up of discrete particles), such
as an organism or some other fragment of organic matter
(figure 6.172), the process is called phagocytosis (Greek
phagein, “to eat” + cytos, “cell”). If the material the cell takes
in is liquid (figure 6.175), it is called pinocytosis (Greek
pinein, “to drink”). Pinocytosis is common among animal
cells. Mammalian egg cells, for example, “nurse” from sur-
rounding cells; the nearby cells secrete nutrients that the
maturing egg cell takes up by pinocytosis. Virtually all eu-
karyotic cells constantly carry out these kinds of endocyto-
sis, trapping particles and extracellular fluid in vesicles and
ingesting them. Endocytosis rates vary from one cell type
to another. They can be surprisingly high: some types of
white blood cells ingest 25% of their cell volume each
hour!

Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis. Specific molecules
are often transported into eukaryotic cells through
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Molecules to be trans-
ported first bind to specific receptors on the plasma mem-
brane. The transport process is specific because only that
molecule has a shape that fits snugly into the receptor. The
plasma membrane of a particular kind of cell contains a
characteristic battery of receptor types, each for a different
kind of molecule.

The interior portion of the receptor molecule resembles
a hook that is trapped in an indented pit coated with the
protein clathrin. The pits act like molecular mousetraps,
closing over to form an internal vesicle when the right mol-
ecule enters the pit (figure 6.18). The trigger that releases
the trap is a receptor protein embedded in the membrane
of the pit, which detects the presence of a particular target
molecule and reacts by initiating endocytosis. The process
is highly specific and very fast.

One type of molecule that is taken up by receptor-
mediated endocytosis is called a low density lipoprotein
(LDL). The LDL molecules bring cholesterol into the cell

116 Part II _ Biology of the Cell

Plasma membrane

   

(@) Phagocytosis

Plasma membrane

 

©) Pinocytosis

FIGURE 6.17
Endocytosis. Both phagocytosis (2) and pinocytosis (#) are forms
of endocytosis.

where it can be incorporated into membranes. Cholesterol
plays a key role in determining the stiffness of the body’s
membranes. In the human genetic disease called hyper-
cholesteremia, the receptors lack tails and so are never
caught in the clathrin-coated pits and, thus, are never
taken up by the cells. The cholesterol stays in the blood-
stream of affected individuals, coating their arteries and
leading to heart attacks.

Fluid-phase endocytosis is the receptor-mediated
pinocytosis of fluids. It is important to understand that en-
docytosis in itself does not bring substances directly into
the cytoplasm of a cell. The material taken in is still sepa-
rated from the cytoplasm by the membrane of the vesicle.
