5! .5 The peripheral nervous system consists of sensory and motor neurons.

Components of the Peripheral
Nervous System

The peripheral nervous system consists of nerves and gan-
glia. Nerves are cablelike collections of axons (figure
54.34), usually containing both sensory and motor neurons.
Ganglia are aggregations of neuron cell bodies located out-
side the central nervous system.

At its origin, a spinal nerve separates into sensory and
motor components. The axons of sensory neurons enter
the dorsal surface of the spinal cord and form the dorsal
root of the spinal nerve, whereas motor axons leave from
the ventral surface of the spinal nerve and form the ventral
root of the spinal nerve. The cell bodies of sensory neurons
are grouped together outside each level of the spinal cord
in the dorsal root ganglia. The cell bodies of somatic
motor neurons, on the other hand, are located within the
spinal cord and so are not located in ganglia.

Somatic motor neurons stimulate skeletal muscles to
contract, and autonomic motor neurons innervate invol-
untary effectors—smooth muscles, cardiac muscle, and
glands. A comparison of the somatic and autonomic ner-
vous systems is provided in table 54.4 and each will be
discussed in turn. Somatic motor neurons stimulate the
skeletal muscles of the body to contract in response to
conscious commands and as part of reflexes that do not
require conscious control. Conscious control of skeletal
muscles is achieved by activation of tracts of axons that
descend from the cerebrum to the appropriate level of the
spinal cord. Some of these descending axons will stimulate
spinal cord motor neurons directly, while others will acti-
vate interneurons that in turn stimulate the spinal motor
neurons. When a particular muscle is stimulated to con-
tract, however, its antagonist must be inhibited. In order
to flex the arm, for example, the flexor muscles must be
stimulated while the antagonistic extensor muscle is in-
hibited (see figure 50.6). Descending motor axons pro-
duce this necessary inhibition by causing hyperpolariza-
tions (IPSPs) of the spinal motor neurons that innervate
the antagonistic muscles.

 

A spinal nerve contains sensory neurons that enter the
dorsal root and motor neurons that enter the ventral
root of the nerve. Somatic motor neurons innervate
skeletal muscles and stimulate the muscles to contract.

 

1098 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

FIGURE 54.34

Nerves in the peripheral nervous system. Photomicrograph
(1600x) showing a cross section of a bullfrog nerve. The nerve is a
bundle of axons bound together by connective tissue. Many
myelinated axons are visible, each looking somewhat like a
doughnut.

Table 54.4 Comparison of the Somatic and Autonomic
Nervous Systems

Characteristic Somatic Autonomic
Effectors Skeletal muscle Cardiac muscle
Smooth muscle
Gastrointestinal
tract
Blood vessels
Airways
Exocrine glands
Effect on motor Excitation Excitation or
nerves inhibition
Innervation of Always single Typically dual
effector cells
Number ofneurons One Two
in path to effector
Neurotransmitter Acetylcholine Acetylcholine
Norepinephrine
