56.2 _ Lipophilic and polar hormones regulate their target cells by different means.

Hormones That Enter Cells

As we mentioned previously, hormones can be divided
into those that are lipophilic (lipid-soluble) and those
that are hydrophilic (water-soluble). The lipophilic
hormones—all of the steroid hormones (figure 56.4) and
thyroxine—as well as other lipophilic regulatory mole-
cules (including the retinoids, or vitamin A) can easily
enter cells. This is because the lipid portion of the cell
membrane does not present a barrier to the entry of
lipophilic regulators. Therefore, all lipophilic regulatory
molecules have a similar mechanism of action. Water-
soluble hormones, in contrast, cannot pass through cell
membranes. They must regulate their target cells
through different mechanisms.

Steroid hormones are lipids themselves and thus
lipophilic; thyroxine is lipophilic because it is derived
from a nonpolar amino acid. Because these hormones are
not water-soluble, they don’t dissolve in plasma but rather
travel in the blood attached to protein carriers. When the
hormones arrive at their target cells, they dissociate from
their carriers and pass through the plasma membrane of

Chromosome
mRNA

Nucleus

FIGURE 56.5

Protein

CH,OH
|

cH c=0
HO '3.--OH

CH;

Cortisol (hydrocortisone)

FIGURE 56.4

Chemical structures of some
steroid hormones. Steroid
hormones are derived from the
blood lipid cholesterol. The
hormones shown, cortisol,
estradiol, and testosterone,
differ only slightly in chemical
structure yet have widely
different effects on the body.
Steroid hormones are secreted
by the adrenal cortex, testes,
ovaries, and placenta.

    
 
     
 

Blood plasma

HO
Estradiol - 178

Testosterone

Protein
carrier

 

 
    
   

@) Steroid hormone (S)
passes through plasma
membrane.

@) Inside target cell, the
steroid hormone binds to a
specific receptor protein in
the cytoplasm or nucleus.

@ Hormone-receptor
complex enters the
nucleus and binds to
DNA, causing gene
transcription.

@ Protein synthesis
is induced.

©) Protein is produced.

Interstitial
fluid

The mechanism of steroid hormone action. Steroid hormones are lipid-soluble and thus readily diffuse through the plasma membrane
of cells. They bind to receptor proteins in either the cytoplasm or nucleus (not shown). If the steroid binds to a receptor in the cytoplasm,
the hormone-receptor complex moves into the nucleus. The hormone-receptor complex then binds to specific regions of the DNA,

stimulating the production of messenger RNA (mRNA).
1130 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
