The Endocrine
System

Concept Outline

56.1 Regulation is often accomplished by chemical
messengers.

‘Types of Regulatory Molecules. Regulatory molecules
may function as neurotransmitters, hormones, or as organ-
specific regulators.

Endocrine Glands and Hormones. Endocrine glands
secrete molecules called hormones into the blood.
Paracrine Regulation. Paracrine regulators act within
organs that produce them.

56.2 Lipophilic and polar hormones regulate their
target cells by different means.

Hormones That Enter Cells. Steroid and thyroid
hormones act by entering target cells and stimulating
specific genes.

Hormones That Do Not Enter Cells. All other
hormones bind to receptors on the cell surface and activate
second-messenger molecules within the target cells.

56.3 The hypothalamus controls the secretions of the
pituitary gland.
‘The Posterior Pituitary Gland. ‘The posterior pituitary
receives and releases hormones from the hypothalamus.
‘The Anterior Pituitary Gland. ‘The anterior pituitary
produces a variety of hormones under stimulation from
hypothalamic releasing hormones.

56.4 Endocrine glands secrete hormones that regulate
many body functions.
‘The Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands. ‘The thyroid
hormones regulate metabolism; the parathyroid glands
regulate calcium balance.
The Adrenal Glands. The adrenal medulla secretes
epinephrine during the fight-or-flight reaction, while the
adrenal cortex secretes steroid hormones that regulate
glucose and mineral balance.
‘The Pancreas. The islets of Langerhans in the pancreas
secrete insulin, which acts to lower blood glucose, and
glucagon, which acts to raise blood glucose.
Other Endocrine Glands. ‘The gonads, pineal gland,
thymus, kidneys, and other organs secrete important
hormones that have a variety of functions.

 

FIGURE 56.1

The endocrine system controls when animals breed. These
Japanese macaques live in a close-knit community whose
members cooperate to ensure successful breeding and raising of
offspring. Not everybody breeds at the same time because
hormone levels vary among individuals.

ihe tissues and organs of the vertebrate body cooperate

to maintain homeostasis of the body’s internal envi-
ronment and control other body functions such as repro-
duction. Homeostasis is achieved through the actions of
many regulatory mechanisms that involve all the organs of
the body. Two systems, however, are devoted exclusively to
the regulation of the body organs: the nervous system and
the endocrine system (figure 56.1). Both release regulatory
molecules that control the body organs by first binding to
receptor proteins in the cells of those organs. In this chap-
ter we will examine these regulatory molecules, the cells
and glands that produce them, and how they function to
regulate the body’s activities.

1125
