Gravity and Angular Acceleration.

Most invertebrates can orient themselves
with respect to gravity due to a sensory
structure called a statocyst. Statocysts
generally consist of ciliated hair cells
with the cilia embedded in a gelatinous
membrane containing crystals of calcium
carbonate. These “stones,” or statoliths,
increase the mass of the gelatinous mem-
brane so that it can bend the cilia when
the animal’s position changes. If the ani-
mal tilts to the right, for example, the
statolith membrane will bend the cilia on
the right side and activate associated sen-
sory neurons.

A similar structure is found in the
membranous labyrinth of the inner ear
of vertebrates. The labyrinth is a system
of fluid-filled membranous chambers
and tubes that constitute the organs of
equilibrium and hearing in vertebrates.
This membranous labyrinth is sur-
rounded by bone and perilymph, which
is similar in ionic content to interstitial
fluid. Inside, the chambers and tubes are
filled with endolymph fluid, which is
similar in ionic content to intracellular
fluid. Though intricate, the entire struc-
ture is very small; in a human, it is about
the size ofa pea.

The receptors for gravity in verte-
brates consist of two chambers of the
membranous labyrinth called the utricle
and saccule (figure 55.10). Within these
structures are hair cells with stereocilia
and a kinocilium, similar to those in the
lateral line system of fish. The hairlike
processes are embedded within a gelati-
nous membrane containing calcium car-

Semicircular canals

      
 

(b)

bonate crystals; this is known as an FIGURE 55.10
otolith membrane, because of its location The structure of the utricle and saccule. (a) The relative positions of the utricle and

saccule within the membranous labyrinth of the human inner ear. () Enlargement of a
section of the utricle or saccule showing the otoliths embedded in the gelatinous matrix

in the inner ear (oto is derived from the
Greek word for ear). Because the otolith
organ is oriented differently in the utri-
cle and saccule, the utricle is more sensi-

1112 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

that covers the hair cells.

Utricle (horizontal
acceleration)

Saccule (vertical
acceleration) =~

 

 

Cochlear nerve

Cochlea

Cochlear duct

Gelatinous
matrix

Hair
cells

Supporting
cells
