57.5 All animals exhibit nonspecific immune response but specific ones

evolved in vertebrates.

Evolution of the Immune System

All organisms possess mechanisms to protect themselves
from the onslaught of smaller organisms and viruses. Bac-
teria defend against viral invasion by means of restriction en-
donucleases, enzymes that degrade any foreign DNA lacking
the specific pattern of DNA methylation characteristic of
that bacterium. Multicellular organisms face a more diffi-
cult problem in defense because their bodies often take up
whole viruses, bacteria, or fungi instead of naked DNA.

Invertebrates

Invertebrate animals solve this problem by marking the sur-
faces of their cells with proteins that serve as “self” labels.
Special amoeboid cells in the invertebrate attack and engulf
any invading cells that lack such labels. By looking for the
absence of specific markers, invertebrates employ a negative
test to recognize foreign cells and viruses. This method pro-
vides invertebrates with a very effective surveillance system,
although it has one great weakness: any microorganism or
virus with a surface protein resembling the invertebrate self
marker will not be recognized as foreign. An invertebrate
has no defense against such a “copycat” invader.

In 1882, Russian zoologist Elie Metchnikoff became the
first to recognize that invertebrate animals possess immune
defenses. On a beach in Sicily, he collected the tiny transpar-
ent larva of a common starfish. Carefully he pierced it with a
rose thorn. When he looked at the larva the next morning,
he saw a host of tiny cells covering the surface of the thorn as
if trying to engulf it (figure 57.24). The cells were attempt-
ing to defend the larva by ingesting the invader by phagocy-
tosis (described in chapter 6). For this discovery of what
came to be known as the cellular immune response,
Metchnikoff was awarded the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiol-
ogy or Medicine, along with Paul Ehrlich for his work on
the other major part of the immune defense, the antibody or
humoral immune response. The invertebrate immune re-
sponse shares several elements with the vertebrate one.

 

Phagocytes. All animals possess phagocytic cells that at-
tack invading microbes. These phagocytic cells travel
through the animal’s circulatory system or circulate within
the fluid-filled body cavity. In simple animals like sponges
that lack either a circulatory system or a body cavity, the
phagocytic cells circulate among the spaces between cells.

Distinguishing Self from Nonself. The ability to rec-
ognize the difference between cells of one’s own body and
those of another individual appears to have evolved early
in the history of life. Sponges, thought to be the oldest
animals, attack grafts from other sponges, as do insects
and starfish. None of these invertebrates, however, exhibit

1166 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

FIGURE 57.24

Discovering the cellular immune response in invertebrates.
In a Nobel-Prize-winning experiment, the Russian zoologist
Metchnikoff pierced the larva of a starfish with a rose thorn and
the next day found tiny phagocytic cells covering the thorn.

any evidence of immunological memory; apparently, the
antibody-based humoral immune defense did not evolve
until the vertebrates.

Complement. While invertebrates lack complement,
many arthropods (including crabs and a variety of insects)
possess an analogous nonspecific defense called the
prophenyloxidase (proPO) system. Like the vertebrate
complement defense, the proPO defense is activated as a
cascade of enzyme reactions, the last of which converts the
inactive protein prophenyloxidase into the active enzyme
phenyloxidase. Phenyloxidase both kills microbes and aids
in encapsulating foreign objects.

Lymphocytes. Invertebrates also lack lymphocytes, but
annelid earthworms and other invertebrates do possess
lymphocyte-like cells that may be evolutionary precursors
of lymphocytes.

Antibodies. All invertebrates possess proteins called
lectins that may be the evolutionary forerunners of anti-
bodies. Lectins bind to sugar molecules on cells, making
the cells stick to one another. Lectins isolated from sea
urchins, mollusks, annelids, and insects appear to tag invad-
ing microorganisms, enhancing phagocytosis. The genes
encoding vertebrate antibodies are part of a very ancient
gene family, the immunoglobulin superfamily. Proteins in
