 

(@)

FIGURE 57.11

 

Cytotoxic T cells destroy cancer cells. (a) The cytotoxic T cell (orange) comes into contact with a cancer cell (pink). (b) The T cell
recognizes that the cancer cell is “nonself” and causes the destruction of the cancer.

the macrophages, they secrete the cytokines known as
macrophage colony-stimulating factor and gamma inter-
feron, which promote the activity of macrophages. In addi-
tion, the helper T cells secrete interleukin-2, which stimu-
lates the proliferation of cytotoxic T cells that are specific
for the antigen. (Interleukin-2 also stimulates B cells, as we
will see in the next section.) Cytotoxic T cells can destroy
infected cells only if those cells display the foreign antigen
together with their MHC-I proteins (see figure 57.10).

T Cells in Transplant Rejection and Surveillance
against Cancer

Cytotoxic T cells will also attack any foreign version of
MHC-Las if it signaled a virus-infected cell. Therefore, even
though vertebrates did not evolve the immune system as a de-
fense against tissue transplants, their immune systems will at-
tack transplanted tissue and cause graft rejection. Recall that
the MHC proteins are polymorphic, but because of their ge-
netic basis, the closer that two individuals are related, the less
variance in their MHC proteins and the more likely they will
tolerate each other’s tissues—this is why relatives are often
sought for kidney transplants. The drug cyclosporin inhibits
graft rejection by inactivating cytotoxic T cells.

As tumors develop, they reveal surface antigens that can
stimulate the immune destruction of the tumor cells. Tumor
antigens activate the immune system, initiating an attack pri-
marily by cytotoxic T cells (figure 57.11) and natural killer
cells. The concept of immunological surveillance against

cancer was introduced in the early 1970s to describe the pro-
posed role of the immune system in fighting cancer.

The production of human interferons by genetically en-
gineered bacteria has made large amounts of these sub-
stances available for the experimental treatment of cancer.
Thus far, interferons have proven to be a useful addition to
the treatment of particular forms of cancer, including some
types of lymphomas, renal carcinoma, melanoma, Kaposi’s
sarcoma, and breast cancer.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2), which activates both cytotoxic T cells
and B cells, is now also available for therapeutic use through
genetic-engincering techniques. Particular lymphocytes from
cancer patients have been removed, treated with IL-2, and
given back to the patients together with IL-2 and gamma in-
terferon. Scientists are also attempting to identify specific
antigens and their genes that may become uniquely expressed
in cancer cells, in an effort to help the immune system to bet-
ter target cancer cells for destruction.

 

Helper T cells are only activated when a foreign antigen
is presented together with MHC antigens by a
macrophage or other antigen-presenting ceils. The
helper T cells are also stimulated by interleukin-1
secreted by the macrophages, and, when activated,
secrete a number of lymphokines. Interleukin-2,
secreted by helper T cells, activates both cytotoxic

T cells and B cells. Cytotoxic T cells destroy infected
cells, transplanted cells, and cancer cells by cell-
mediated attack.

 

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1157
