Antibodies in Medical
Diagnosis
Blood Typing

The blood type denotes the class of
antigens found on the red blood cell
surface. Red blood cell antigens are
clinically important because their types
must be matched between donors and
recipients for blood transfusions. There
are several groups of red blood cell
antigens, but the major group is known
as the ABO system. In terms of the
antigens present on the red blood cell
surface, a person may be type A (with
only A antigens), type B (with only B
antigens), type AB (with both A and B
antigens), or type O (with neither A nor
B antigens).

The immune system is tolerant to its
own red blood cell antigens. A person
who is type A, for example, does not
produce anti-A antibodies. Surpris-
ingly, however, people with type A
blood do make antibodies against the B
antigen, and conversely, people with
blood type B make antibodies against
the A antigen. This is believed to result
from the fact that antibodies made in
response to some common bacteria
cross-react with the A or B antigens. A
person who is type A, therefore, ac-
quires antibodies that can react with B
antigens by exposure to these bacteria
but does not develop antibodies that
can react with A antigens. People who are type AB develop
tolerance to both antigens and thus do not produce either
anti-A or anti-B antibodies. Those who are type O, in con-
trast, do not develop tolerance to either antigen and, there-
fore, have both anti-A and anti-B antibodies in their
plasma.

If type A blood is mixed on a glass slide with serum from
a person with type B blood, the anti-A antibodies in the
serum will cause the type A red blood cells to clump to-
gether, or agglutinate (figure 57.21). These tests allow the
blood types to be matched prior to transfusions, so that ag-
glutination will not occur in the blood vessels, where it
could lead to inflammation and organ damage.

Donor's blood
Type A

Type B

Type AB

FIGURE 57.21

Rh Factor. Another group of antigens found in most
red blood cells is the Rb factor (Rh stands for rhesus mon-
key, in which these antigens were first discovered). Peo-
ple who have these antigens are said to be Rh-positive,
whereas those who do not are Rh-negative. There are
fewer Rh-negative people because this condition is reces-
sive to Rh-positive. The Rh factor is of particular signifi-

1164 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

  

Recipient's blood
Type A serum Type Bserum
(anti-B) (Anti-A)
Agglutinated
Om
.
*
ae

  

Agglutinated

Agglutinated

Blood typing. Agglutination of the red blood cells is seen when blood types are mixed with
sera containing antibodies against the ABO antigens. Note that no agglutination would be
seen if type O blood (not shown) were used.

cance when Rh-negative mothers give birth to Rh-
positive babies.

Because the fetal and maternal blood are normally kept
separate across the placenta (see chapter 60), the Rh-negative
mother is not usually exposed to the Rh antigen of the fetus
during the pregnancy. At the time of birth, however, a vari-
able degree of exposure may occur, and the mother’s im-
mune system may become sensitized and produce antibod-
ies against the Rh antigen. If the woman does produce
antibodies against the Rh factor, these antibodies can cross
the placenta in subsequent pregnancies and cause hemolysis
of the Rh-positive red blood cells of the fetus. The baby is
therefore born anemic, with a condition called erytbroblasto-
sis fetalis, or hemolytic disease of the newborn.

Erythroblastosis fetalis can be prevented by injecting the
Rh-negative mother with an antibody preparation against
the Rh factor within 72 hours after the birth of each Rh-
positive baby. This is a type of passive immunization in
which the injected antibodies inactivate the Rh antigens
and thus prevent the mother from becoming actively im-
munized to them.
