58.1

The Need to Maintain

Homeostasis

. . Perturbing
As the animal body has evolved, special- factor

ization has increased. Each cell is a so-
phisticated machine, finely tuned to
carry out a precise role within the body.
Such specialization of cell function is
possible only when extracellular condi-
tions are kept within narrow limits.
Temperature, pH, the concentrations of
glucose and oxygen, and many other fac-
tors must be held fairly constant for cells
to function efficiently and interact prop-
erly with one another.

Homeostasis may be defined as the
dynamic constancy of the internal envi-
ronment. The term dynamic is used be-
cause conditions are never absolutely
constant, but fluctuate continuously
within narrow limits. Homeostasis is
essential for life, and most of the regu-
latory mechanisms of the vertebrate
body that are not devoted to reproduc-
tion are concerned with maintaining
homeostasis.

 
   

Stimulus
Deviation from
set point

 

FIGURE 58.2

Negative Feedback Loops

To maintain internal constancy, the vertebrate body must
have sensors that are able to measure each condition of the
internal environment (figure 58.2). These constantly moni-
tor the extracellular conditions and relay this information
(usually via nerve signals) to an integrating center, which
contains the “set point” (the proper value for that condi-
tion). This set point is analogous to the temperature setting
on a house thermostat. In a similar manner, there are set
points for body temperature, blood glucose concentration,
the tension on a tendon, and so on. The integrating center
is often a particular region of the brain or spinal cord, but
in some cases it can also be cells of endocrine glands. It re-
ceives messages from several sensors, weighing the relative
strengths of each sensor input, and then determines
whether the value of the condition is deviating from the set
point. When a deviation in a condition occurs (the “stimu-
lus”), the integrating center sends a message to increase or
decrease the activity of particular effectors. Effectors are
generally muscles or glands, and can change the value of
the condition in question back toward the set point value
(the “response”).

To return to the idea of a home thermostat, suppose you
set the thermostat at a set point of 70°F. If the temperature
of the house rises sufficiently above the set point, the ther-
mostat (equivalent to an integrating center) receives this

1174 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

    

The regulatory systems of the body maintain homeostasis.

 

 

 

 

 

    
 
   
  
 

 

  

Response

‘iia Return to

! set point

'

I

Negative Effector
feedback loop Causes changes
completed to compensate
3 for deviation

'

1

\

1

'

leone nee e eee

Integrating
Sensor center
Constantly © ———>] Compares
monitors conditions to
conditions set point

 

 

 

A generalized diagram of a negative feedback loop. Negative feedback loops maintain
a state of homeostasis, or dynamic constancy of the internal environment, by correcting
deviations from a set point.

input from a temperature sensor, like a thermometer (a
sensor) within the wall unit. It compares the actual temper-
ature to its set point. When these are different, it sends a
signal to an effector. The effector in this case may be an air
conditioner, which acts to reverse the deviation from the
set point.

In a human, if the body temperature exceeds the set
point of 37°C, sensors in a part of the brain detect this de-
viation. Acting via an integrating center (also in the brain),
these sensors stimulate effectors (including sweat glands)
that lower the temperature (figure 58.3). One can think of
the effectors as “defending” the set points of the body
against deviations. Because the activity of the effectors is
influenced by the effects they produce, and because this
regulation is in a negative, or reverse, direction, this type of
control system is known as a negative feedback loop.

The nature of the negative feedback loop becomes clear
when we again refer to the analogy of the thermostat and
air conditioner. After the air conditioner has been on for
some time, the room temperature may fall significantly
below the set point of the thermostat. When this occurs,
the air conditioner will be turned off. The effector (air con-
ditioner) is turned on by a high temperature; and, when ac-
tivated, it produces a negative change (lowering of the tem-
perature) that ultimately causes the effector to be turned
off. In this way, constancy is maintained.
