Facilitated Diffusion

Carriers, another class of membrane
proteins, transport ions as well as
other solutes like sugars and amino
acids across the membrane. Like
channels, carriers are specific for a
certain type of solute and can trans-
port substances in either direction
across the membrane. Unlike chan-
nels, however, they facilitate the
movement of solutes across the mem-
brane by physically binding to them
on one side of the membrane and re-
leasing them on the other. Again, the
direction of the solute’s net movement
simply depends on its concentration
gradient across the membrane. If the
concentration is greater in the cyto-
plasm, the solute is more likely to
bind to the carrier on the cytoplasmic
side of the membrane and be released

FIGURE 6.13

on the extracellular side. This will cause a net movement
from inside to outside. If the concentration is greater in
the extracellular fluid, the net movement will be from out-
side to inside. Thus, the net movement always occurs from
areas of high concentration to low, just as it does in simple
diffusion, but carriers facilitate the process. For this rea-
son, this mechanism of transport is sometimes called facil-

itated diffusion (figure 6.13).

Facilitated Diffusion in Red Blood Cells

Several examples of facilitated diffusion by carrier proteins
can be found in the membranes of vertebrate red blood
cells (RBCs). One RBC carrier protein, for example, trans-
ports a different molecule in each direction: Cl in one di-
rection and bicarbonate ion (HICO3)) in the opposite direc-
tion. As you will learn in chapter 52, this carrier is
important in transporting carbon dioxide in the blood.

Asecond important facilitated diffusion carrier in RBCs
is the glucose transporter. Red blood cells keep their inter-
nal concentration of glucose low through a chemical trick:
they immediately add a phosphate group to any entering
glucose molecule, converting it to a highly charged glucose
phosphate that cannot pass back across the membrane.
This maintains a steep concentration gradient for glucose,
favoring its entry into the cell. The glucose transporter that
carries glucose into the cell does not appear to form a
channel in the membrane for the glucose to pass through.
Instead, the transmembrane protein appears to bind the
glucose and then flip its shape, dragging the glucose
through the bilayer and releasing it on the inside of the
plasma membrane. Once it releases the glucose, the glucose
transporter reverts to its original shape. It is then available
to bind the next glucose molecule that approaches the out-
side of the cell.

8
oN"

Outside of cell B i

 

Inside of cell

Facilitated diffusion is a carrier-mediated transport process. Molecules bind to a
receptor on the extracellular side of the cell and are conducted through the plasma
membrane by a membrane protein.

Transport through Selective Channels Saturates

A characteristic feature of transport through selective chan-
nels is that its rate is saturable. In other words, if the con-
centration gradient of a substance is progressively in-
creased, its rate of transport will also increase to a certain
point and then level off. Further increases in the gradient
will produce no additional increase in rate. The explanation
for this observation is that there are a limited number of
carriers in the membrane. When the concentration of the
transported substance rises high enough, all of the carriers
will be in use and the capacity of the transport system will
be saturated. In contrast, substances that move across the
membrane by simple diffusion (diffusion through channels
in the bilayer without the assistance of carriers) do not
show saturation.

Facilitated diffusion provides the cell with a ready way
to prevent the buildup of unwanted molecules within the
cell or to take up needed molecules, such as sugars, that
may be present outside the cell in high concentrations. Fa-
cilitated diffusion has three essential characteristics:

1. It is specific. Any given carrier transports only cer-
tain molecules or ions.

2. It is passive. The direction of net movement is de-
termined by the relative concentrations of the trans-
ported substance inside and outside the cell.

3. It saturates. If all relevant protein carriers are in
use, increases in the concentration gradient do not in-
crease the transport rate.

 

Facilitated diffusion is the transport of molecules and
ions across a membrane by specific carriers in the
direction of lower concentration of those molecules or
ions.

 

Chapter 6 Membranes 113
