55.1

Categories of Sensory Receptors
and Their Actions

Sensory information is conveyed to the CNS and perceived
in a four-step process (figure 55.2): (1) stimulation—a physi-
cal stimulus impinges on a sensory neuron or an accessory
structure; (2) transduction—the stimulus energy is used to
produce electrochemical nerve impulses in the dendrites of
the sensory neuron; (3) transmission—the axon of the sen-
sory neuron conducts action potentials along an afferent
pathway to the CNS; and (4) interpretation—the brain cre-
ates a sensory perception from the electrochemical events
produced by afferent stimulation. We actually see (as well
as hear, touch, taste, and smell) with our brains, not with
our sense organs.

Sensory receptors differ with respect to the nature of
the environmental stimulus that best activates their sen-
sory dendrites. Broadly speaking, we can recognize three
classes of environmental stimuli: (1) mechanical forces,
which stimulate mechanoreceptors; (2) chemicals,
which stimulate chemoreceptors; and (3) electromag-
netic and thermal energy, which stimulate a variety of re-
ceptors, including the photoreceptors of the eyes
(table 55.1).

The simplest sensory receptors are free nerve endings that
respond to bending or stretching of the sensory neuron
membrane, to changes in temperature, or to chemicals like
oxygen in the extracellular fluid. Other sensory receptors
are more complex, involving the association of the sensory
neurons with specialized epithelial cells.

Sensing the External and Internal Environments

Exteroceptors are receptors that sense stimuli that arise
in the external environment. Almost all of a vertebrate’s
exterior senses evolved in water before vertebrates in-
vaded the land. Consequently, many senses of terrestrial
vertebrates emphasize stimuli that travel well in water,
using receptors that have been retained in the transition
from the sea to the land. Mammalian hearing, for exam-
ple, converts an airborne stimulus into a waterborne one,
using receptors similar to those that originally evolved in
the water. A few vertebrate sensory systems that function
well in the water, such as the electrical organs of fish, can-
not function in the air and are not found among terrestrial
vertebrates. On the other hand, some land-dwellers have
sensory systems, such as infrared receptors, that could not
function in the sea.

Sensory systems can provide several levels of informa-
tion about the external environment. Some sensory sys-

1104 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Animals employ a wide variety of sensory receptors.

 

Stimulus

 

 

Transduction of stimulus
into electrochemical impulse
in sensory receptor

 

 

Transmission of
action potential
in sensory neuron

 

 

Interpretation of stimulus
in central nervous
system

 

 

 

FIGURE 55.2

The path of sensory information. Sensory stimuli must be
transduced into electrochemical nerve impulses that are
conducted to the brain for interpretation.

Table 55.1 Classes of Environmental Stimuli

Mechanical Electromagnetic
Forces Chemicals Energy

Pressure Taste Light

Gravity Smell Heat

Inertia Humidity Electricity

Sound Magnetism
Touch

Vibration

tems provide only enough information to determine that
an object is present; they call the animal’s attention to
the object but give little or no indication of where it is lo-
cated. Other sensory systems provide information about
the location of an object, permitting the animal to move
toward it. Still other sensory systems enable the brain to
construct a three-dimensional image of an object and its
surroundings.

Interoceptors sense stimuli that arise from within the
body. These internal receptors detect stimuli related to
