Antagonistic Effectors and Positive
Feedback

The negative feedback mechanisms that maintain home-
ostasis often oppose each other to produce a finer degree of
control. In a few cases positive feedback mechanisms,
which push a change further in the same direction, are used

by the body.

Antagonistic Effectors

Most factors in the internal environment are controlled by
several effectors, which often have antagonistic actions.
Control by antagonistic effectors is sometimes described as
“push-pull,” in which the increasing activity of one effector
is accompanied by decreasing activity of an antagonistic ef-
fector. This affords a finer degree of control than could be
achieved by simply switching one effector on and off.
Room temperature can be maintained, for example, by
simply turning an air conditioner on and off, or by just turn-
ing a heater on and off. A much more stable temperature,
however, can be achieved if the air conditioner and heater
are both controlled by a thermostat (figure 58.6). Then the
heater is turned on when the air conditioner shuts off, and
vice versa. Antagonistic effectors are similarly involved in the
control of body temperature and blood glucose. Whereas in-
sulin, for example, lowers blood glucose following a meal,
other hormones act to raise the blood glucose concentration
between meals, especially when a person is exercising. The
heart rate is similarly controlled by antagonistic effectors.
Stimulation of one group of nerve fibers increases the heart
rate, while stimulation of another group slows the heart rate.

Positive Feedback Loops

Feedback loops that accentuate a disturbance are called
positive feedback loops. In a positive feedback loop, pertur-
bations cause the effector to drive the value of the con-
trolled variable even farther from the set point. Hence, sys-
tems in which there is positive feedback are highly
unstable, analogous to a spark that ignites an explosion.
They do not help to maintain homeostasis. Nevertheless,
such systems are important components of some physiolog-
ical mechanisms. For example, positive feedback occurs in
blood clotting, where one clotting factor activates another
in a cascade that leads quickly to the formation of a clot.
Positive feedback also plays a role in the contractions of the
uterus during childbirth (figure 58.7). In this case, stretch-
ing of the uterus by the fetus stimulates contraction, and
contraction causes further stretching; the cycle continues
until the fetus is expelled from the uterus. In the body,
most positive feedback systems act as part of some larger
mechanism that maintains homeostasis. In the examples
we've described, formation of a blood clot stops bleeding
and hence tends to keep blood volume constant, and expul-
sion of the fetus reduces the contractions of the uterus.

      
       

Set point Set point

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

forheating for cooling
| 1
yt =
35.6873 78 83
Sensor
Thermostat y
. Air
aaa conditioner
Effectors
FIGURE 58.6

Room temperature is maintained by antagonistic effectors. If
a thermostat senses a low temperature, the heater is turned on and
the air conditioner is turned off. If the temperature is too high,

the air conditioner is activated, and the heater is turned off.

 

 

Integrating
centers in brain [7

 

 

 

Increased neural
a = i
and hormonal signals

Continued increased

neural stimulation
Nec

 

Increased contraction
force and frequency
in smooth
muscles of uterus

Receptors detect
increased stretch

 

 

The fetus is
pushed against ®
® | the uterine opening,

causing the inferior
uterus to stretch

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 58.7

An example of positive feedback during childbirth. This is one
of the few examples of positive feedback that operate in the
vertebrate body.

 

Antagonistic effectors that act antagonistically to each
other are more effective than effectors that act alone.
Positive feedback mechanisms accentuate changes and
have limited functions in the body.

 

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1177
