the cell (figure 56.5). Some steroid hormones then bind to
very specific receptor proteins in the cytoplasm, and then
move as a hormone-receptor complex into the nucleus.
Other steroids travel directly into the nucleus before en-
countering their receptor proteins. Whether the steroid
finds its receptor in the nucleus or translocates with its re-
ceptor to the nucleus from the cytoplasm, the rest of the
story is the same.

The hormone receptor, activated by binding to the
lipophilic hormone, is now also able to bind to specific re-
gions of the DNA. These DNA regions are known as the
hormone response elements. The binding of the hormone-
receptor complex has a direct effect on the level of tran-
scription at that site by activating genetic transcription.
This produces messenger RNA (mRNA), which then codes
for the production of specific proteins. These proteins
often have enzymatic activity that changes the metabolism
of the target cell in a specific fashion.

 
  
 
 
  
  

Cytoplasm ~
Triiodothyronine

 

FIGURE 56.6
The mechanism of thyroxine action. Thyroxine contains four iodines. When it enters the target cell, thyroxine is changed into
triiodothyronine, with three iodines. This hormone moves into the nucleus and binds to nuclear receptors. The hormone-receptor
complex then binds to regions of the DNA and stimulates gene transcription.

The thyroid hormone’s mechanism of action resembles
that of the steroid hormones. Thyroxine contains four
iodines and so is often abbreviated T4 (for tetraiodothyro-
nine). The thyroid gland also secretes smaller amounts of a
similar molecule that has only three iodines, called tri-
iodothyronine (and abbreviated T3). Both hormones enter
target cells, but all of the Ty that enters is changed into T3
(figure 56.6). Thus, only the T; form of the hormone enters
the nucleus and binds to nuclear receptor proteins. The
hormone-receptor complex, in turn, binds to the appropri-
ate hormone response elements on DNA.

 

The lipophilic hormones pass through the target cell’s
plasma membrane and bind to intracellular receptor
proteins. The hormone-receptor complex then binds to
specific regions of DNA, thereby activating genes and
regulating the target cells.

 

Blood plasma

@— hyroxine

 

Protein
carrier

Plasma membrane

Interstitial
fluid

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1131
