57.3 T cells organize attacks against invading microbes.

T cells: The Cell-Mediated

Immune Response

The cell-mediated immune response, carried out by
T cells, protects the body from virus infection and cancer,
killing abnormal or virus-infected body cells.

Once a helper T cell that initiates this response is pre-
sented with foreign antigen together with MHC proteins
by a macrophage or other antigen-presenting cell, a com-
plex series of steps is initiated. An integral part of this
process is the secretion of autocrine regulatory molecules
known generally as cytokines, or more specifically as lym-
phokines if they are secreted by lymphocytes.

When a cytokine is first discovered, it is named according
to its biological activity (such as B cell-stimulating factor).
However, because each cytokine has many different actions,
such names can be misleading. Scientists have thus agreed to

Processed
viral antigen

 
   
  
 
  
   

 

     

receptor

  
   

that fits the '

a particular

Macrophage antigen :
Interleukin-2

'

‘

:

‘

:

:

:

:

‘

MHC-I protein '

Viral antigen :

ep i

& i

Antigen-presenting cell Y

/ Proliferation

Cytotoxic T cell

FIGURE 57.10

  
   
 
   

use the name interleukin, followed by a number, to indicate
a cytokine whose amino acid sequence has been determined.
Interleukin-1, for example, is secreted by macrophages and
can activate the T cell system. B cell-stimulating factor,
now called interleukin-4, is secreted by T cells and is re-
quired for the proliferation and clone development of B cells.
Interleukin-2 is released by helper T cells and, among its ef-
fects, is required for the activation of cytotoxic T lympho-
cytes. We will consider the actions of the cytokines as we
describe the development of the T cell immune response.

Cell Interactions in the T Cell Response

When macrophages process the foreign antigens, they se-
crete interleukin-1, which stimulates cell division and pro-
liferation of T cells (figure 57.10). Once the helper T cells
have been activated by the antigens presented to them by

Helper T cell

 

 

Infected cell Oo

destroyed by
cytotoxic T cell

The T cell immune defense. After a macrophage has processed an antigen, it releases interleukin-1, signaling helper T cells to bind to
the antigen-MHC protein complex. This triggers the helper T cell to release interleukin-2, which stimulates the multiplication of
cytotoxic T cells. In addition, proliferation of cytotoxic T cells is stimulated when a T cell with a receptor that fits the antigen displayed by
an antigen-presenting cell binds to the antigen-MHC protein complex. Body cells that have been infected by the antigen are destroyed by
the cytotoxic T cells. As the infection subsides, suppressor T cells “turn off” the immune response.

1156 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
