Antibodies
Structure of Antibodies

Each antibody molecule consists of two identical short
polypeptides, called light chains, and two identical long
polypeptides, called heavy chains (figure 57.15). The four
chains in an antibody molecule are held together by disul-
fide (-S—S—) bonds, forming a Y-shaped molecule (fig-
ure 57.16).

Comparing the amino acid sequences of different anti-
body molecules shows that the specificity of antibodies
for antigens resides in the two arms of the Y, which have
a variable amino acid sequence. The amino acid sequence
of the polypeptides in the stem of the Y is constant
within a given class of immunoglobulins. Most of the se-
quence variation between antibodies of different speci-
ficity is found in the variable region of each arm. Here, a
cleft forms that acts as the binding site for the antigen.
Both arms always have exactly the same cleft and so bind
to the same antigen.

Antibodies with the same variable
segments have identical clefts and
therefore recognize the same antigen,
but they may differ in the stem por-
tions of the antibody molecule. The
stem is formed by the so-called “con-
stant” regions of the heavy chains. In
mammals there are five different
classes of heavy chain that form five
classes of immunoglobulins: IgM, IgG,
IgA, IgD, and IgE. We have already
discussed the roles of IgM and IgG an-
tibodies in the humoral immune re-
sponse.

IgE antibodies bind to mast cells.
The heavy-chain stems of the IgE an-

Light chains

    

Antigen-binding
site

Antigen-binding
site

Carbohydrate

4
Heavy chains
£ chain

 

FIGURE 57.15

The structure of an antibody molecule. In this molecular model
of an antibody molecule, each amino acid is represented by a small
sphere. The heavy chains are colored blue; the light chains are red.
‘The four chains wind about one another to form a Y shape, with
two identical antigen-binding sites at the arms of the Y and a stem
region that directs the antibody to a particular portion of the
immune response.

 

|__ Antibody
molecule

|_ Bell
receptor

 

 

tibody molecules insert into receptors
on the mast cell plasma membrane, in
effect creating B receptors on the mast

 

{SS $-S bridges

Constant region
eee Variable region

  

Cell
membrane

 

 

 

cell surface. When these cells en-
counter the specific antigen recog-
nized by the arms of the antibody, they
initiate the inflammatory response by
releasing histamine. The resulting va-
sodilation and increased capillary per-
meability enable lymphocytes,
macrophages, and complement pro-
teins to more easily reach the site where the mast cell en-
countered the antigen. The IgE antibodies are involved
in allergic reactions and will be discussed in more detail
in a later section.

IgA antibodies are present in secretions such as milk,
mucus, and saliva. In milk, these antibodies are thought to
provide immune protection to nursing infants, whose own
immune systems are not yet fully developed.

FIGURE 57.16

1160 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Structure of an antibody as a B cell receptor. The receptor molecules are
characterized by domains of about 100 amino acids (represented as loops) joined by
—S—S— covalent bonds. Each receptor has a constant region (purple) and a variable
region (yellow). The receptor binds to antigens at the ends of its two variable regions.

Antibody Diversity

The vertebrate immune system is capable of recognizing
as foreign millions nonself molecule presented to it. Al-
though vertebrate chromosomes contain only a few hun-
dred receptor-encoding genes, it is estimated that human
B cells can make between 10° and 10° different antibody
molecules. How do vertebrates generate millions of dif-
ferent antigen receptors when their chromosomes con-
