Visual Processing in the Vertebrate
Retina

Action potentials propagated along the axons of ganglion
cells are relayed through structures called the lateral
geniculate nuclei of the thalamus and projected to the oc-
cipital lobe of the cerebral cortex (figure 55.24). There
the brain interprets this information as light in a specific
region of the eye’s receptive field. The pattern of activity
among the ganglion cells across the retina encodes a
point-to-point map of the receptive field, allowing the
retina and brain to image objects in visual space. In addi-
tion, the frequency of impulses in each ganglion cell pro-
vides information about the light intensity at each point,
while the relative activity of ganglion cells connected
(through bipolar cells) with the three types of cones pro-
vides color information.

The relationship between receptors, bipolar cells, and
ganglion cells varies in different parts of the retina. In the
fovea, each cone makes a one-to-one connection with a
bipolar cell, and each bipolar cell synapses, in turn, with
one ganglion cell. This point-to-point relationship is re-
sponsible for the high acuity of foveal vision. Outside the
fovea, many rods can converge on a single bipolar cell,
and many bipolar cells can converge on a single ganglion
cell. This convergence permits the summation of neural
activity, making the area of the retina outside of the fovea
more sensitive to dim light than the fovea, but at the ex-
pense of acuity and color vision. This is why dim objects,
such as faint stars at night, are best seen when you don’t
look directly at them. It has been said that we use the pe-
riphery of the eye as a detector and the fovea as an
inspector.

Color blindness is due to an inherited lack of one or
more types of cones. People with normal color vision are
trichromats; those with only two types of cones are dichro-
mats. People with this condition may lack red cones (have
protanopia), for example, and have difficulty distinguishing
red from green. Men are far more likely to be color blind
than women, because the trait for color blindness is carried
on the X chromosome; men have only one X chromosome
per cell, whereas women have two X chromosomes and so
can carry the trait in a recessive state.

Binocular Vision.

Primates (including humans) and most predators have
two eyes, one located on each side of the face. When
both eyes are trained on the same object, the image that
each sees is slightly different because each eye views the
object from a different angle. This slight displacement of
the images (an effect called parallax) permits binocular
vision, the ability to perceive three-dimensional images
and to sense depth. Having their eyes facing forward
maximizes the field of overlap in which this stereoscopic
vision occurs.

1122 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Right eye
Lens
Retina

Optic
nerve

Optic
tract

   

Lateral Lateral
geniculate geniculate
nucleus nucleus
Occipital lobe Occipital lobe

of cerebrum of cerebrum

(visual cortex) (visual cortex)

FIGURE 55.24

‘The pathway of visual information. Action potentials in the
optic nerves are relayed from the retina to the lateral geniculate
nuclei, and from there to the visual cortex of the occipital lobes.
Notice that the medial fibers of the optic nerves cross to the other
side at the optic chiasm, so that each hemisphere of the cerebrum
receives input from both eyes.

In contrast, prey animals generally have eyes located to
the sides of the head, preventing binocular vision but en-
larging the overall receptive field. Depth perception is less
important to prey than detection of potential enemies
from any quarter. The eyes of the American Woodcock,
for example, are located at exactly opposite sides of its
skull so that it has a 360-degree field of view without turn-
ing its head! Most birds have laterally placed eyes and, as
an adaptation, have two foveas in each retina. One fovea
provides sharp frontal vision, like the single fovea in the
retina of mammals, and the other fovea provides sharper
lateral vision.

 

The axons of ganglion cells transmit action potentials to
the thalamus, which in turn relays visual information to
the occipital lobe of the brain. The fovea provides high
visual acuity, whereas the retina outside the fovea
provides high sensitivity to dim light. Binocular vision
with overlapping visual fields provides depth
perception.

 
