55.5 Some vertebrates use heat, electricity, or magnetism for orientation.

Diversity of Sensory Experiences

Vision is the primary sense used by all vertebrates that live
in a light-filled environment, but visible light is by no
means the only part of the electromagnetic spectrum that
vertebrates use to sense their environment.

Heat

Electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths longer than
those of visible light is too low in energy to be detected by
photoreceptors. Radiation from this infrared (“below red”)
portion of the spectrum is what we normally think of as ra-
diant heat. Heat is an extremely poor environmental stimu-
lus in water because water has a high thermal capacity and
readily absorbs heat. Air, in contrast, has a low thermal ca-
pacity, so heat in air is a potentially useful stimulus. How-
ever, the only vertebrates known to have the ability to sense
infrared radiation are the snakes known as pit vipers.

The pit vipers possess a pair of heat-detecting pit organs
located on either side of the head between the eye and the
nostril (figure 55.25). The pit organs permit a blindfolded
rattlesnake to accurately strike at a warm, dead rat. Each pit
organ is composed of two chambers separated by a mem-
brane. The infrared radiation falls on the membrane and
warms it. Thermal receptors on the membrane are stimu-
lated. The nature of the pit organ’s thermal receptor is not
known; it probably consists of temperature-sensitive neu-
rons innervating the two chambers. The two pit organs ap-
pear to provide stereoscopic information, in much the same
way that two eyes do. Indeed, the information transmitted
from the pit organs is processed by the visual center of the
snake brain.

Electricity

While air does not readily conduct an electrical current,
water is a good conductor. All aquatic animals generate
electrical currents from contractions of their muscles. A
number of different groups of fishes can detect these elec-
trical currents. The electrical fish even have the ability to
produce electrical discharges from specialized electrical or-
gans. Electrical fish use these weak discharges to locate
their prey and mates and to construct a three-dimensional
image of their environment even in murky water.

The elasmobranchs (sharks, rays, and skates) have elec-
troreceptors called the ampullae of Lorenzini. The recep-
tor cells are located in sacs that open through jelly-filled
canals to pores on the body surface. The jelly is a very
good conductor, so a negative charge in the opening of
the canal can depolarize the receptor at the base, causing
the release of neurotransmitter and increased activity of
sensory neurons. This allows sharks, for example, to de-
tect the electrical fields generated by the muscle contrac-

 

Pit

Outer: Inner
chamber Membrane chamber

FIGURE 55.25

“Seeing” heat. The depression between the nostril and the eye of
this rattlesnake opens into the pit organ. In the cutaway portion of
the diagram, you can see that the organ is composed of two
chambers separated by a membrane. Snakes known as pit vipers
have this unique ability to sense infrared radiation (heat).

tions of their prey. Although the ampullae of Lorenzini
were lost in the evolution of teleost fish (most of the bony
fish), electroreception reappeared in some groups of
teleost fish that use sensory structures analogous to the
ampullae of Lorenzini. Electroreceptors evolved yet an-
other time, independently, in the duck-billed platypus, an
egg-laying mammal. The receptors in its bill can detect
the electrical currents created by the contracting muscles
of shrimp and fish, enabling the mammal to detect its
prey at night and in muddy water.

Magnetism

Eels, sharks, bees, and many birds appear to navigate
along the magnetic field lines of the earth. Even some
bacteria use such forces to orient themselves. Birds kept
in blind cages, with no visual cues to guide them, will
peck and attempt to move in the direction in which they
would normally migrate at the appropriate time of the
year. They will not do so, however, if the cage is shielded
from magnetic fields by steel. Indeed, if the magnetic field
of a blind cage is deflected 120° clockwise by an artificial
magnet, a bird that normally orients to the north will ori-
ent toward the east-southeast. There has been much spec-
ulation about the nature of the magnetic receptors in
these vertebrates, but the mechanism is still very poorly
understood.

 

Pit vipers can locate warm prey by infrared radiation
(heat), and many aquatic vertebrates can locate prey and
ascertain the contours of their environment by means of
electroreceptors.

 

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1123
