 

FIGURE 58.24

 

 

 

 

 

Low blood Low blood
A lowering of blood volume i777] voume [io | tow
activates the renin-angiotensin- 1 @
aldosterone system. (1) Low 1 ®@ | Saar
blood volume accompanies a ' Angiotensinogen
decrease in blood Nat levels. Vo ; Juxtaglomerular
(2) Reduced blood flow past the ‘Negative Distal apparatus

feedback convoluted

juxtaglomerular apparatus triggers
(3) the release of renin into the
blood, which catalyzes the
production of angiotensin I from
angiotensinogen. (4) Angiotensin
T converts into an active form,
angiotensin IT. (5) Angiotensin IT
stimulates blood vessel
constriction and (6) the release of

tubule

Afferent
arteriole

       

Glomerulus

Efferent

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sh

 

 

@

 

Angiotensin II

le

 

 

Proximal
convoluted
tubule

 

Adrenal
cortex

 

 

 

 

 

 

'

'

'

'

'

'

'

'

'

'

' :
aldosterone from the adrenal 1 arteriole
cortex. (7) Aldosterone stimulates 1 Bowman's
the reabsorption of Na* in the ' capsule

'
distal convoluted tubules. 1 i
(8) Increased Nat reabsorption is 1 !
followed by the reabsorption of ' Loop
Ck and water. (9) This increases ' of Henle |
blood volume. An increase in ' ©
blood volume may also trigger the 1 ‘Aldosterone
release of atrial natriuretic 1
hormone that inhibits the release 1

v ' -

of aidosterone. These two ; Kidney
systems work together to

1
maintain homeostasis. . creased Nac i @®

--- and H,O |
reabsorption

 

 

 

tion of Nat is followed by Cl- and by water, so aldosterone
has the net effect of promoting the retention of both salt
and water. It thereby helps to maintain blood volume and
pressure.

The secretion of aldosterone in response to a de-
creased blood level of Nat is indirect. Because a fall in
blood Na* is accompanied by a decreased blood volume,
there is a reduced flow of blood past a group of cells
called the juxtaglomerular apparatus, located in the re-
gion of the kidney between the distal convoluted tubule
and the afferent arteriole (figure 58.24). The juxta-
glomerular apparatus responds by secreting the enzyme
renin into the blood, which catalyzes the production of
the polypeptide angiotensin I from the protein an-
giotensinogen (see chapter 52). Angiotensin I is then
converted by another enzyme into angiotensin II, which
stimulates blood vessels to constrict and the adrenal cor-
tex to secrete aldosterone. Thus, homeostasis of blood
volume and pressure can be maintained by the activation
of this renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.

In addition to stimulating Na* reabsorption, aldosterone
also promotes the secretion of K* into the distal convoluted
tubules. Consequently, aldosterone lowers the blood K*

concentration, helping to maintain constant blood K* levels
in the face of changing amounts of K* in the diet. People
who lack the ability to produce aldosterone will die if un-
treated because of the excessive loss of salt and water in the
urine and the buildup of K* in the blood.

The action of aldosterone in promoting salt and water
retention is opposed by another hormone, atrial natriuretic
hormone (ANH, see chapter 52). This hormone is secreted
by the right atrium of the heart in response to an increased
blood volume, which stretches the atrium. Under these
conditions, aldosterone secretion from the adrenal cortex
will decrease and atrial natriuretic hormone secretion will
increase, thus promoting the excretion of salt and water in
the urine and lowering the blood volume.

 

ADH stimulates the insertion of water channels into the
cells of the collecting duct, making the collecting duct
more permeable to water. Thus, ADH stimulates the
reabsorption of water and the excretion of a hypertonic
urine. Aldosterone promotes the reabsorption of NaCl
and water across the distal convoluted tubule, as well as
the secretion of K* into the tubule. ANH decreases
NaCl reabsorption.

 

Chapter 58 Maintaining the Internal Environment 1193
