57

The Immune System

 

Concept Outline

57.1 Many of the body’s most effective defenses are
nonspecific.

Skin: The First Line of Defense. The skin provides a
barrier and chemical defenses against foreign bodies.
Cellular Counterattack: The Second Line of Defense.
Neutrophils and macrophages kill through phagocytosis;
natural killer cells kill by making pores in cells.

The Inflammatory Response. Histamines, phagocytotic
cells, and fever may all play a role in local inflammations.

57.2 Specific immune defenses require the recognition
of antigens.

‘The Immune Response: The Third Line of Defense.
Lymphocytes target specific antigens for attack.

Cells of the Specific Immune System. _B cells and T cells
serve different functions in the immune response.
Initiating the Immune Response. T cells must be
activated by an antigen-presenting cell.

57.3 T cells organize attacks against invading microbes.

T cells: The Cell-Mediated Immune Response. _T cells
respond to antigens when presented by MHC proteins.

57.4 B cells label specific cells for destruction.

B Cells: The Humoral Immune Response. Antibodies
secreted by B cells label invading microbes for destruction.
Antibodies. Genetic recombination generates millions of
B cells, each specialized to produce a particular antibody.
Antibodies in Medical Diagnosis. Antibodies react
against certain blood types and pregnancy hormones.

57.5 All animals exhibit nonspecific immune response
but specific ones evolved in vertebrates.

Evolution of the Immune System. Invertebrates possess
immune elements analogous to those of vertebrates.

57.6 The immune system can be defeated.

T Cell Destruction: AIDS. The AIDS virus suppresses
the immune system by selectively destroying helper T cells.
Antigen Shifting. Some microbes change their surface
antigens and thus evade the immune system.
Autoimmunity and Allergy. The immune system
sometimes causes disease by attacking its own antigens.

 

FIGURE 57.1

The influenza epidemic of 1918-1919 killed 22 million
people in 18 months. With 25 million Americans infected, the
Red Cross often worked around the clock.

Ww you consider how animals defend themselves, it
is natural to think of turtles, armadillos, and other
animals covered like tanks with heavy plates of armor.
However, armor offers no protection against the greatest
dangers vertebrates face—microorganisms and viruses. We
live in a world awash with attackers too tiny to see with the
naked eye, and no vertebrate could long withstand their
onslaught unprotected. We survive because we have
evolved a variety of very effective defenses against this con-
stant attack. As we review these defenses, it is important to
keep in mind that they are far from perfect. Some 22 mil-
lion Americans and Europeans died from influenza over an
18-month period in 1918-1919 (figure 57.1), and more
than 3 million people will die of malaria this year. Attempts
to improve our defenses against infection are among the
most active areas of scientific research today.

1147
