Natural killer cells do not attack invading microbes di-
rectly. Instead, they kill cells of the body that have been
infected with viruses. They kill not by phagocytosis, but
rather by creating a hole in the plasma membrane of the
target cell (figure 57.4). Proteins, called perforins, are re-
leased from the natural killer cells and insert into the
membrane of the target cell, forming a pore. This pore al-
lows water to rush into the target cell, which then swells
and bursts. Natural killer cells also attack cancer cells,
often before the cancer cells have had a chance to develop
into a detectable tumor. The vigilant surveillance by nat-
ural killer cells is one of the body’s most potent defenses
against cancer.

Proteins That Kill Invading Microbes

The cellular defenses of vertebrates are enhanced by a very
effective chemical defense called the complement system.
This system consists of approximately 20 different proteins
that circulate freely in the blood plasma. When they en-
counter a bacterial or fungal cell wall, these proteins aggre-
gate to form a membrane attack complex that inserts itself
into the foreign cell’s plasma membrane, forming a pore
like that produced by natural killer cells (figure 57.5).
Water enters the foreign cell through this pore, causing the
cell to swell and burst. Aggregation of the complement
proteins is also triggered by the binding of antibodies to in-
vading microbes, as we will see in a later section.

The proteins of the complement system can augment
the effects of other body defenses. Some amplify the in-
flammatory response (discussed next) by stimulating hista-
mine release; others attract phagocytes to the area of infec-
tion; and still others coat invading microbes, roughening
the microbes’ surfaces so that phagocytes may attach to
them more readily.

Another class of proteins that play a key role in body de-
fense are interferons. There are three major categories of
interferons: alpha, beta, and gamma. Almost all cells in the
body make alpha and beta interferons. These polypeptides
act as messengers that protect normal cells in the vicinity of
infected cells from becoming infected. Though viruses are
still able to penetrate the neighboring cells, the alpha and
beta interferons prevent viral replication and protein as-
sembly in these cells. Gamma interferon is produced only
by particular lymphocytes and natural killer cells. The se-
cretion of gamma interferon by these cells is part of the im-
munological defense against infection and cancer, as we
will describe later.

 

A patrolling army of macrophages, neutrophils, and
natural killer cells attacks and destroys invading viruses
and bacteria and eliminates infected cells. In addition, a
system of proteins called complement may be activated
to destroy foreign cells, and body cells infected with a
virus secrete proteins called interferons that protect
neighboring cells.

 

1150 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

= ’
Killer cell Perforin Poo
e@ e9@

eo

   
   

Vesicle

Cell membrane

Target cell

FIGURE 57.4

How natural killer cells kill target cells. The initial event, the
tight binding of the killer cell to the target cell, causes vesicles
loaded with perforin molecules within the killer cell to move to the
plasma membrane and disgorge their contents into the
intercellular space over the target cell. The perforin molecules
insert into the plasma membrane of the target cell like staves of a
barrel, forming a pore that admits water and ruptures the cell.

 

Complement
proteins

FIGURE 57.5
How complement creates a hole in a cell membrane. As the
diagram shows, the complement proteins form a complex
transmembrane pore resembling the perforin-lined pores formed
by natural killer cells.
