Initiating the Immune Response

To understand how the third line of defense works, imag-
ine you have just come down with the flu. Influenza viruses
enter your body in small water droplets inhaled into your
respiratory system. If they avoid becoming ensnared in the
mucus lining the respiratory membranes (first line of de-
fense), and avoid consumption by macrophages (second
line of defense), the viruses infect and kill mucous mem-
brane cells.

At this point macrophages initiate the immune de-
fense. Macrophages inspect the surfaces of all cells they
encounter. The surfaces of most vertebrate cells possess
glycoproteins produced by a group of genes called the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC). These gly-
coproteins are called MHC proteins or, specifically in
humans, human leukocyte antigens (HLA). The genes
encoding the MHC proteins are highly polymorphic
(have many forms); for example, the human MHC pro-
teins are specified by genes that are the most polymor-
phic known, with nearly 170 alleles each. Only rarely will
two individuals have the same combination of alleles, and
the MHC proteins are thus different for each individual,
much as fingerprints are. As a result, the MHC proteins
on the tissue cells serve as self markers that enable the in-
dividual’s immune system to distinguish its cells from
foreign cells, an ability called self-versus-nonself

EE MHC protein

O

 

 

(a) Body cell

 

 

(c) Antigen-presenting cell

1154 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

recognition. T cells of the immune system will recog-
nize a cell as self or nonself by the MHC proteins present
on the cell surface.

When a foreign particle, such as a virus, infects the
body, it is taken in by cells and partially digested. Within
the cells, the viral antigens are processed and moved to the
surface of the plasma membrane. The cells that perform
this function are known as antigen-presenting cells (fig-
ure 57.8). At the membrane, the processed antigens are
complexed with the MHC proteins. This enables T cells to
recognize antigens presented to them associated with the
MHC proteins.

There are two classes of MHC proteins. MHC-I is
present on every nucleated cell of the body. MHC-II,
however, is found only on macrophages, B cells, and a
subtype of T cells called CD4* T cells (table 57.2). These
three cell types work together in one form of the immune
response, and their MHC-II markers permit them to rec-
ognize one another. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which act
to destroy infected cells as previously described, can only
interact with antigens presented to them with MHC-I
proteins. Helper T lymphocytes, whose functions will
soon be described, can interact only with antigens pre-
sented with MHC-II proteins. These restrictions result
from the presence of coreceptors, which are proteins as-
sociated with the T cell receptors. The coreceptor known
as CD8 is associated with the cytotoxic T cell receptor
(these cells can therefore be indicated
as CD8*). The CD8 coreceptor can in-
teract only with the MHC-I proteins of
an infected cell. The coreceptor known
as CD4 is associated with the helper T
cell receptor (these cells can thus be in-
dicated as CD4*) and interacts only
with the MHC-II proteins of another
lymphocyte (figure 57.9).

Antigen

(b) Foreign microbe

FIGURE 57.8

Antigens are presented on MHC
proteins. (a) Cells of the body have MHC
proteins on their surfaces that identify
them as “self” cells. Immune system cells
do not attack these cells. (4) Foreign cells
or microbes have antigens on their
surfaces. B cells are able to bind directly
to free antigens in the body and initiate an
attack on a foreign invaded. (c) T cells can
bind to antigens only after the antigens
are processed and complexed with MHC
proteins on the surface of an antigen-
presenting cell.

Processed
antigen
