Table 56.1 Principal Endocrine Glands and Their Hormones

Endocrine Gland Target Chemical
and Hormone Tissue Principal Actions Nature
ADRENAL MEDULLA
Epinephrine (adrenaline) and Smooth muscle, Initiate stress responses; raise heart rate, blood Amino acid
norepinephrine (noradrenaline) cardiac muscle, pressure, metabolic rate; dilate blood vessels; derivatives
blood vessels mobilize fat; raise blood glucose level
ADRENAL CORTEX
Aldosterone Kidney tubules Maintains proper balance of Nat and K+ ions Steroid
Cortisol Many organs Adaptation to long-term stress; raises blood glucose Steroid
level; mobilizes fat
PANCREAS
Insulin Liver, skeletal Lowers blood glucose level; stimulates storage of Peptide
muscles, adipose glycogen in liver (51 amino acids)
tissue
Glucagon Liver, adipose tissue Raises blood glucose level; stimulates breakdown of Peptide
glycogen in liver (29 amino acids)
OVARY
Estradiol General Stimulates development of secondary sex Steroid
characteristics in females
Female reproductive Stimulates growth of sex organs at puberty and
structures monthly preparation of uterus for pregnancy
Progesterone ‘Uterus Completes preparation for pregnancy Steroid
Mammary glands Stimulates development
‘TESTIS
Testosterone Many organs Stimulates development of secondary sex Steroid
characteristics in males and growth spurt at puberty
Male reproductive Stimulates development of sex organs; stimulates
structures spermatogenesis
PINEAL GLAND
Melatonin Gonads, pigment Function not well understood; influences Amino acid
cells pigmentation in some vertebrates; may control derivative

biorhythms in some animals; may influence
onset of puberty in humans

role in ovulation. Excessive prostaglandin production
may be involved in premature labor, endometriosis,
or dysmenorrhea (painful menstrual cramps).

3. Digestive system. Prostaglandins produced by the
stomach and intestines may inhibit gastric secretions
and influence intestinal motility and fluid absorption.

4. Respiratory system. Some prostaglandins cause
constriction, whereas others cause dilation of blood
vessels in the lungs and of bronchiolar smooth muscle.

5. Circulatory system. Prostaglandins are needed for
proper function of blood platelets in the process of
blood clotting.

6. Urinary system. Prostaglandins produced in the
renal medulla cause vasodilation, resulting in increased
renal blood flow and increased excretion of urine.

The synthesis of prostaglandins are inhibited by aspirin.
Aspirin is the most widely used of the nonsteroidal anti-

inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a class of drugs that also in-
cludes indomethacin and ibuprofen. These drugs produce
their effects because they specifically inhibit the enzyme
cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2), needed to produce prostaglandins
from arachidonic acid. Through this action, the NSAIDs
inhibit inflammation and associated pain. Unfortunately,
NSAIDs also inhibit another similar enzyme, cox-1, which
helps maintain the wall of the digestive tract, and in so
doing can produce severe unwanted side effects, including
gastric bleeding and prolonged clotting time. A new kind of
pain reliever, celecoxib (Celebrex), inhibits cox-2 but not
cox-1, a potentially great benefit to arthritis sufferers and
others who must use pain relievers regularly.

 

The neural and endocrine control systems are
supplemented by paracrine regulators, including the
prostaglandins, which perform many diverse functions.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1129
