FIGURE 56.8
‘The IP;/Ca** second-messenger

system. (1) The hormone epinephrine ~

binds to specific receptor proteins on
the cell surface. (2) Acting through G
proteins, the hormone-bound receptor
activates the enzyme phospholipase C,
which converts membrane
phospholipids into inositol
trisphosphate (IP3). (3) IP; diffuses
through the cytoplasm and binds to
receptors on the endoplasmic
reticulum. (4) The binding of IP; to its
receptors stimulates the endoplasmic
reticulum to release Ca** into the
cytoplasm. (5) Some of the released
Ca* binds to a regulatory protein called
calmodulin. (6) The Cat*/calmodulin
complex activates other intracellular
proteins, ultimately producing the
effects of the hormone.

Receptor
protein

 

Calmodulin

 

Hormone
effects ©

 

 

 

trisphosphate (IP3). IP3 diffuses into the cytoplasm from
the plasma membrane and binds to receptors located on the
surface of the endoplasmic reticulum.

Recall from chapter 5 that the endoplasmic reticulum
is a system of membranous sacs and tubes that serves a
variety of functions in different cells. One of its functions
is to accumulate Ca** by actively transporting Ca** out of
the cytoplasm. Other pumps transport Ca** from the cy-
toplasm through the plasma membrane to the extracellu-
lar fluid. These two mechanisms keep the concentration
of Ca** in the cytoplasm very low. Consequently, there is
an extremely steep concentration gradient for Ca** be-
tween the cytoplasm and the inside of the endoplasmic
reticulum, and between the cytoplasm and the extracellu-
lar fluid.

When IP; binds to its receptors on the endoplasmic
reticulum, it stimulates the endoplasmic reticulum to re-
lease its stored Ca**. Calcium channels in the plasma
membrane may also open, allowing Ca** to diffuse into
the cell from the extracellular fluid. Some of the Ca** that
has suddenly entered the cytoplasm then binds to a pro-
tein called calmodulin, which has regulatory functions
analogous to those of cyclic AMP. One of the actions of
calmodulin is to activate another type of protein kinase,
resulting in the phosphorylation of a different set of cellu-
lar proteins.

What is the advantage of having multiple second-
messenger systems? Consider the antagonistic actions of ep-
inephrine and insulin on liver cells. Epinephrine uses cAMP
as a second messenger to promote the hydrolysis of glyco-
gen to glucose, while insulin stimulates the synthesis of
glycogen from glucose. Clearly, insulin cannot use cAMP as
a second messenger. Although the exact mechanism of in-

Epinephrine

     
  

Phospholipase C Plasma

membrane

  

sulin’s action is still not well understood, insulin may act in
part through the IP3/Ca** second-messenger system.

Not all large polar hormones act by increasing the con-
centration of a second messenger in the cytoplasm of the
target cell. Others cause a change in the shape of a mem-
brane protein called an ion channel (see chapters 6 and 54).
Tf these channels are normally “closed,” then a change in
shape will open them allowing a particular ion to enter or
leave the cell depending on its concentration gradient. If an
ion channel is normally open, a chemical messenger can
cause it to close. For example, some hormones open Ca**
channels on smooth muscle cell membranes; other hor-
mones close them. This will increase or decrease, respec-
tively, the amount of muscle contraction.

The molecular mechanism for changing the shape of an
ion channel is similar to that for activating a second mes-
senger. The hormone first binds to a receptor protein on
the outer surface of the target cell. This receptor protein
may then use a G protein to signal the ion channel to
change shape.

Although G proteins play a major role in many hormone
functions they don’t seem to be necessary for all identified
actions of hormones on target cells. In the cases where G
proteins are not involved, the receptor protein is connected
directly to the enzyme or ion channel.

 

The water-soluble hormones cannot pass through the
plasma membrane; they must rely on second
messengers within the target cells to mediate their
actions. Such second messengers include cyclic AMP
(cAMP), inositol trisphosphate (IP3), and Ca**. In many
cases, the second messengers activate previously
inactive enzymes.

 

Chapter 56 The Endocrine System 1133
