Chapter 56

Summary

BIOLOGY

 

Questions

56.1 Regulation is often accomplished by chemical messengers.

www.mhhe.com/raven6ch/resource28.mhtml

Media Resources

 

*¢ Endocrine glands secrete hormones into the blood,
which are then transported to target cells.

* Hormones may be lipophilic, such as the steroid
hormones and thyroxine, or polar, such as amine,
polypeptide, and glycoprotein hormones.

¢ Prostaglandins and other paracrine regulatory
molecules are produced by one cell type and regulate
different cells within the same organ.

1. What is the definition of a
hormone? How do hormones
reach their target cells? Why are
only certain cells capable of
being target cells for a particular
hormone?

2. How do hormones and

paracrine regulators differ from
one another?

56.2 Lipophilic and polar hormones regulate their target cells by different means.

© Art Activity:
-Endocrine System

* Endocrine System
Regulation

  

 

¢ Lipid-soluble hormones enter their target cells, bind
to intracellular receptor proteins, and the complex
then binds to hormone response elements on the
DNA, activating specific genes.

* Polar hormones do not enter their target cells, but
instead bind to receptor proteins on the cell
membrane and activate second-messenger systems or
control ion channels.

3. How does epinephrine result
in the production of cAMP in its
target cells? How does cAMP
bring about specific changes
inside target cells?

56.3 The hypothalamus controls the secretions of the pituitary gland.

 

* Peptide Hormone
*Activity:

—Peptide Hormones
—Steroid Hormones
* Types of Hormones

 

¢ Axons from neurons in the hypothalamus enter the
posterior pituitary, carrying ADH and oxytocin; the
posterior pituitary stores these hormones and secretes
them in response to neural activity.

¢ The anterior pituitary produces and secretes a variety
of hormones, many of which control other endocrine
glands; the anterior pituitary, however, is itself
controlled by the hypothalamus via releasing and
inhibiting hormones secreted by the hypothalamus.

4, Where are hormones secreted
by the posterior pituitary gland
actually produced?

5. Why are the hormones of the
anterior pituitary gland called
tropic hormones?

6. How does the hypothalamus
regulate the secretion of the
anterior pituitary?

56.4 Endocrine glands secrete hormones that regulate many body functions.

* Portal System
i)

+ Hypothalamus
+ Pituitary Gland

 

¢ The thyroid secretes thyroxine and triiodothyronine,
which set the basal metabolic rate by stimulating the
rate of cell respiration in most cells of the body.

¢ The adrenal cortex secretes cortisol, which regulates
glucose balance, and aldosterone, which regulates
Na* and K* balance.

* The B cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas
secrete insulin, which lowers the blood glucose;
glucagon, secreted by the cells, raises the blood
glucose level.

7. What hormones are produced
by the adrenal cortex? What
functions do these hormones
serve? What stimulates the
secretion of these hormones?

8. What pancreatic hormone is
produced when the body’s blood
glucose level becomes elevated?

1146 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body 6 BioCourse.com

+ Parathyroid Hormone
* Glucose Regulation

E

* Thyroid Gland
+ Parathyroid Glands
* Adrenal Glands

* Pancreas
