58.4 The kidney is regulated by hormones.

 

Hormones Control
Homeostatic Functions |

 

 

 

Dehydration | =

 

In mammals and birds, the amount of
water excreted in the urine, and thus the

Increased osmolality
of plasma

 

concentration of the urine, varies ac- J

 

cording to the changing needs of the
body. Acting through the mechanisms
described next, the kidneys will excrete a

Osmoreceptors
in hypothalamus

 

 

hypertonic urine when the body needs to J
conserve water. If an animal drinks too

 

much water, the kidneys will excrete a Posterior
hypotonic urine. As a result, the volume pituitary gland

 

of blood, the blood pressure, and the os- |

molality of blood plasma are maintained

 

Increased
ADH secretion

relatively constant by the kidneys, no
matter how much water you drink. The

 

 

 

kidneys also regulate the plasma K* and
Na* concentrations and blood pH within
very narrow limits. These homeostatic
functions of the kidneys are coordinated
primarily by hormones (see chapter 56).

FIGURE 58.23

 
  
 
    

 

Increased
water intake

 

 

 

Increased reabsorption
of water

 

Antidiuretic hormone stimulates the reabsorption of water by the kidneys. This

action completes a negative feedback loop and helps to maintain homeostasis of blood

Antidiuretic Hormone

Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) is pro-

duced by the hypothalamus and secreted by the posterior
pituitary gland. The primary stimulus for ADH secretion
is an increase in the osmolality of the blood plasma. The
osmolality of plasma increases when a person is dehy-
drated or when a person eats salty food. Osmoreceptors in
the hypothalamus respond to the elevated blood osmolal-
ity by sending more nerve signals to the integration cen-
ter (also in the hypothalamus). This, in turn, triggers a
sensation of thirst and an increase in the secretion of
ADH (figure 58.23).

ADH causes the walls of the collecting ducts in the kid-
ney to become more permeable to water. This occurs be-
cause water channels are contained within the membranes
of intracellular vesicles in the epithelium of the collecting
ducts, and ADH stimulates the fusion of the vesicle mem-
brane with the plasma membrane, similar to the process of
exocytosis. When the secretion of ADH is reduced, the
plasma membrane pinches in to form new vesicles that con-
tain the water channels, so that the plasma membrane be-
comes less permeable to water.

Because the extracellular fluid in the renal medulla is hy-
pertonic to the filtrate in the collecting ducts, water leaves
the filtrate by osmosis and is reabsorbed into the blood.
Under conditions of maximal ADH secretion, a person ex-
cretes only 600 milliliters of highly concentrated urine per
day. A person who lacks ADH due to pituitary damage has
the disorder known as diabetes insipidus and constantly ex-

1192 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

volume and osmolality.

cretes a large volume of dilute urine. Such a person is in
danger of becoming severely dehydrated and succumbing
to dangerously low blood pressure.

Aldosterone and Atrial Natriuretic Hormone

Sodium ion is the major solute in the blood plasma. When
the blood concentration of Na* falls, therefore, the blood
osmolality also falls. This drop in osmolality inhibits ADH
secretion, causing more water to remain in the collecting
duct for excretion in the urine. As a result, the blood vol-
ume and blood pressure decrease. A decrease in extracellu-
lar Na* also causes more water to be drawn into cells by
osmosis, partially offsetting the drop in plasma osmolarity
but further decreasing blood volume and blood pressure. If
Na* deprivation is severe, the blood volume may fall so
low that there is insufficient blood pressure to sustain life.
For this reason, salt is necessary for life. Many animals
have a “salt hunger” and actively seck salt, such as the deer
at “salt licks.”

A drop in blood Na* concentration is normally compen-
sated by the kidneys under the influence of the hormone al-
dosterone, which is secreted by the adrenal cortex. Aldos-
terone stimulates the distal convoluted tubules to reabsorb
Na‘*, decreasing the excretion of Na* in the urine. Indeed,
under conditions of maximal aldosterone secretion, Na*
may be completely absent from the urine. The reabsorp-
