Antigen Shifting

A second way that a pathogen may defeat the immune sys-
tem is to mutate frequently so that it varies the nature of
its surface antigens. The virus which causes influenza uses
this mechanism, and so we have to be immunized against
a different strain of this virus periodically. This way of es-
caping immune attack is known as antigen shifting, and is
practiced very effectively by trypanosomes, the protists
responsible for sleeping sickness (see chapter 35). Try-
panosomes possess several thousand different versions of
the genes encoding their surface protein, but the cluster
containing these genes has no promoter and so is not
transcribed as a unit. The necessary promoter is located
within a transposable element that jumps at random from
one position to another within the cluster, transcribing a
different surface protein gene with every move. Because
such moves occur in at least one cell of an infective try-
panosome population every few weeks, the vertebrate im-
mune system is unable to mount an effective defense
against trypanosome infection. By the time a significant
number of antibodies have been generated against one
form of trypanosome surface protein, another form is al-
ready present in the trypanosome population that survives
immunological attack, and the infection cycle is renewed.
People with sleeping sickness rarely rid themselves of the
infection.

Although this mechanism of mutation to alter surface
proteins seems very “directed” or intentional on the part of
the pathogen, it is actually the process of evolution by nat-
ural selection at work. We usually think of evolution as_re-
quiring thousands of years to occur, and not in the time
frame of weeks. However, evolution can occur whenever
mutations are passed on to offspring that provide an organ-
ism with a competitive advantage. In the case of viruses,
bacteria, and other pathogenic agents, their generation
times are on the order of hours. Thus, in the time frame of
a week, the population has gone through millions of cell di-
visions. Looking at it from this perspective, it is easy to see
how random mutations in the genes for the surface anti-
gens could occur and change the surface of the pathogen in
as little as a week’s time.

How Malaria Hides from the Immune System

Every year, about a half-million people become infected
with the protozoan parasite Plasmodium falciparum, which
multiplies in their bodies to cause the disease malaria. The
plasmodium parasites enter the red blood cells and con-
sume the hemoglobin of their hosts. Normally this sort of
damage to a red blood cell would cause the damaged cell to
be transported to the spleen for disassembly, destroying the
plasmodium as well. The plasmodium avoids this fate, how-
ever, by secreting knoblike proteins that extend through
the surface of the red blood cell and anchor the cell to the
inner surface of the blood vessel.

1170 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Over the course of several days, the immune system of
the infected person slowly brings the infection under con-
trol. During this time, however, a small proportion of the
plasmodium parasites change their knob proteins to a form
different from those that sensitized the immune system.
Cells infected with these individuals survive the immune
response, only to start a new wave of infection.

Scientists have recently discovered how the malarial par-
asite carries out this antigen-shifting defense. About 6% of
the total DNA of the plasmodium is devoted to encoding a
block of some 150 var genes, which are shifted on and off
in multiple combinations. Each time a plasmodium divides,
it alters the pattern of var gene expression about 2%, an in-
credibly rapid rate of antigen shifting. The exact means by
which this is done is not yet completely understood.

DNA Vaccines May Get around Antigen Shifting

Vaccination against diseases such as smallpox, measles, and
polio involves introducing into your body a dead or dis-
abled pathogen, or a harmless microbe with pathogen pro-
teins displayed on its surface. The vaccination triggers an
immune response against the pathogen, and the blood-
stream of the vaccinated person contains B cells which will
remember and quickly destroy the pathogen in future in-
fections. However, for some diseases, vaccination is nearly
impossible because of antigen shifting; the pathogens
change over time, and the B cells no longer recognize
them. Influenza, as we have discussed, presents different
surface proteins yearly. The trypanosomes responsible for
sleeping sickness change their surface proteins every few
weeks.

A new type of vaccine, based on DNA, may prove to be
effective against almost any disease. The vaccine makes use
of the killer T cells instead of the B cells of the immune
system. DNA vaccines consist of a plasmid, a harmless cir-
cle of bacterial DNA, that contains a gene from the
pathogen that encodes an internal protein, one which is
critical to the function of the pathogen and does not
change. When this plasmid is injected into cells, the gene
they carry is transcribed into protein but is not incorpo-
rated into the DNA of the cell’s nucleus. Fragments of the
pathogen protein are then stuck on the cell’s membrane,
marking it for destruction by T cells. In actual infections
later, the immune system will be able to respond immedi-
ately. Studies are now underway to isolate the critical, un-
changing proteins of pathogens and to investigate fully the
use of the vaccines in humans.

 

Antigen shifting refers to the way a pathogen may
defeat the immune system by changing its surface
antigens and thereby escaping immune recognition.
Pathogens that employ this mechanism include flu
viruses, trypanosomes, and the protozoans that cause
malaria.

 
