Other Endocrine Glands

Sexual Development, Biological Clocks, and
Immune Regulation in Vertebrates

The ovaries and testes are important endocrine glands,
producing the steroid sex hormones called androgens (in-
cluding estrogens, progesterone, and testosterone), to be
described in detail in chapter 59. During embryonic devel-
opment, testosterone production in the embryo is critical
for the development of male sex organs. In mammals, an-
drogens are responsible for the development of secondary
sexual characteristics at puberty. These characteristics in-
clude breasts in females, body hair, and increased muscle
mass in males. Because of this, some bodybuilders illegally
take androgens to increase muscle mass. In addition to
being illegal, this practice can cause liver disorders as well
as a number of other serious side effects. In females, andro-
gens are especially important in maintaining the sexual
cycle. Estrogen and progesterone produced in the ovaries
are critical regulators of the menstrual and ovarian cycles.
During pregnancy, estrogen production in the placenta
maintains the uterine lining, which protects and nourishes
the developing embryo.

Another major endocrine gland is the pineal gland, lo-
cated in the roof of the third ventricle of the brain in most
vertebrates (see figure 54.27). It is about the size of a pea
and is shaped like a pine-cone (hence its name). The pineal
gland evolved from a median light-sensitive eye (sometimes
called a “third eye,” although it could not form images) at
the top of the skull in primitive vertebrates. This pineal eye
is still present in primitive fish (cyclostomes) and some rep-
tiles. In other vertebrates, however, the pineal gland is
buried deep in the brain and functions as an endocrine
gland by secreting the hormone melatonin. One of the ac-
tions of melatonin is to cause blanching of the skin of lower
vertebrates by reducing the dispersal of melanin granules.

The secretion of melatonin is stimulated by activity of
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus.
The SCN is known to function as the major biological
clock in vertebrates, entraining (synchronizing) various
body processes to a circadian rhythm (one that repeats
every 24 hours). Through regulation by the SCN, the se-
cretion of melatonin by the pineal gland is entrained to cy-
cles of light and dark, decreasing during the day and in-
creasing at night. This daily cycling of melatonin release
regulates body cycles such as sleep/wake cycles and tem-
perature cycles. In some vertebrates, melatonin helps to
regulate reproductive physiology in species with distinct
breeding seasons, but the role of melatonin in human re-
production is controversial.

There are a variety of hormones secreted by non-
endocrine organs. The thymus is the site of production of
particular lymphocytes called T cells, and it secretes a
number of hormones that function in the regulation of
the immune system. The right atrium of the heart se-
cretes atrial natriuretic hormone, which stimulates the

1144 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

FIGURE 56.21

A molting cicada. This adult insect is emerging from its old
cuticle.

kidneys to excrete salt and water in the urine. This hor-
mone, therefore, acts antagonistically to aldosterone,
which promotes salt and water retention. The kidneys se-
crete erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates the bone
marrow to produce red blood cells. Other organs such as
the liver, stomach, and small intestines secrete hormones;
even the skin has an endocrine function: it secretes vita-
min D. The gas nitric oxide, made by many different
cells, controls blood pressure by dilating arteries. The
drug sildenafil (Viagra) counters impotence by causing
nitric oxide to dilate the blood vessels of the penis.

Molting and Metamorphosis in Insects

As insects grow during postembryonic development, their
hardened exoskeletons do not expand. To overcome this
problem, insects undergo a series of molts wherein they
shed their old exoskeleton (figure 56.21) and secrete a new,
