Sensory Transduction

Sensory cells respond to stimuli because they possess stimulus-
gated ion channels in their membranes. The sensory stimu-
lus causes these ion channels to open or close, depending
on the sensory system involved. In doing so, a sensory
stimulus produces a change in the membrane potential of
the receptor cell. In most cases, the sensory stimulus pro-
duces a depolarization of the receptor cell, analogous to
the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP, described in
chapter 54) produced in a postsynaptic cell in response to
neurotransmitter. A depolarization that occurs in a sensory
receptor upon stimulation is referred to as a receptor po-
tential (figure 55.32).

Like an EPSP, a receptor potential is graded: the larger
the sensory stimulus, the greater the degree of depolariza-
tion. Receptor potentials also decrease in size (decrement)
with distance from their source. This prevents small, irrele-
vant stimuli from reaching the cell body of the sensory

Stimulus

  
  

 
  

Stimulus-gated
channels

neuron. Once a threshold level of depolarization is reached,
the receptor potential stimulates the production of action
potentials that are conducted by a sensory axon into the
CNS (figure 55.34). The greater the sensory stimulus, the
greater the depolarization of the receptor potential and the
higher the frequency of action potentials. There is gener-
ally a logarithmic relationship between stimulus intensity
and action potential frequency—a sensory stimulus that is
ten times greater than another stimulus will produce action
potentials at twice the frequency of the other stimulus.
This allows the brain to interpret the incoming signals as
indicating a sensory stimulus of a particular strength.

 

Sensory receptors transduce stimuli in the internal or
external environment into graded depolarizations,
which stimulates the production of action potentials.
Sensory receptors may be classified on the basis of the
type of stimulus energy to which they respond.

 

Voltage-gated
channels

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cma 7°
|
£& -10-+
| _
# 404
3 74
-704
Time — Time —
Stimulus Receptor potential Stimulus Train of action potentials
cco = pplied coo applied
(@) (b)

FIGURE 55.3

Events in sensory transduction. (a) Depolarization of a free nerve ending leads to a receptor potential that spreads by local current flow
to the axon. (}) Action potentials are produced in the axon in response to a sufficiently large receptor potential.

1106 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
