The Inflammatory Response

The inflammatory response is a localized, nonspecific re-
sponse to infection. Infected or injured cells release chemi-
cal alarm signals, most notably histamine and
prostaglandins. These chemicals promote the dilation of
local blood vessels, which increases the flow of blood to the
site of infection or injury and causes the area to become red
and warm. They also increase the permeability of capillar-
ies in the area, producing the edema (tissue swelling) so
often associated with infection. The more permeable capil-
laries allow phagocytes (monocytes and neutrophils) to mi-
grate from the blood to the extracellular fluid, where they
can attack bacteria. Neutrophils arrive first, spilling out
chemicals that kill the bacteria in the vicinity (as well as tis-
sue cells and themselves); the pus associated with some in-
fections is a mixture of dead or dying pathogens, tissue
cells, and neutrophils. Monocytes follow, become
macrophages and engulf pathogens and the remains of the
dead cells (figure 57.6).

The Temperature Response

Macrophages that encounter invading microbes release a
regulatory molecule called interleukin-1, which is carried

     
 

Chemical

alam signals —

Blood .
vessel

 

FIGURE 57.6

by the blood to the brain. Interleukin-1 and other pyrogens
(Greek pyr, “fire”) such as bacterial endotoxins cause neu-
rons in the hypothalamus to raise the body’s temperature
several degrees above the normal value of 37°C (98.6°F).
The elevated temperature that results is called a fever.

Experiments with lizards, which regulate their body
temperature by moving to warmer or colder locations,
demonstrate that infected lizards choose a warmer environ-
ment—they give themselves a fever! Further, if lizards are
prevented from elevating their body temperature, they have
a slower recovery from their infection. Fever contributes to
the body’s defense by stimulating phagocytosis and causing
the liver and spleen to store iron, reducing blood levels of
iron, which bacteria need in large amounts to grow. How-
ever, very high fevers are hazardous because excessive heat
may inactivate critical enzymes. In general, temperatures
greater than 39.4°C (103°F) are considered dangerous for
humans, and those greater than 40.6°C (105°F) are often
fatal.

 

Inflammation aids the fight against infection by
increasing blood flow to the site and raising
temperature to retard bacterial growth.

 

‘The events in a local inflammation. When an invading microbe has penetrated the skin, chemicals, such as histamine and
prostaglandins, cause nearby blood vessels to dilate. Increased blood flow brings a wave of phagocytic cells, which attack and engulf

invading bacteria.

Chapter 57 The Immune System 1151
