Sensing Taste, Smell,

and Body Position Taste papilla
Some sensory cells, called chemore- Bitter
ceptors, contain membrane proteins
that can bind to particular chemicals in Sour
the extracellular fluid. In response to

this chemical interaction, the mem- Salty
brane of the sensory neuron becomes
depolarized, leading to the production (a)
of action potentials. Chemoreceptors

are used in the senses of taste and smell

and are also important in monitoring

the chemical composition of the blood

and cerebrospinal fluid.

Sweet

Taste

Taste buds—collections of chemosensi-
tive epithelial cells associated with af-
ferent neurons—mediate the sense of
taste in vertebrates. In a fish, the taste
buds are scattered over the surface of
the body. These are the most sensitive (¢
vertebrate chemoreceptors known.
They are particularly sensitive to amino
acids; a catfish, for example, can distin-
guish between two different amino
acids at a concentration of less than 100
parts per billion (1 g in 10,000 L of
water)! The ability to taste the sur-
rounding water is very important to
bottom-feeding fish, enabling them to
sense the presence of food in an often murky environment.

The taste buds of all terrestrial vertebrates are located
in the epithelium of the tongue and oral cavity, within
raised areas called papillae (figure 55.6). Humans have four
kinds of taste buds—salty, sweet, sour, and bitter. The
salty taste is produced by the effects of sodium (Na*) and
the sour taste by the effects of hydrogen (H*). Organic
molecules that produce the sweet and bitter tastes, such as
sugars and quinine, respectively, are varied in structure.
Taste buds that respond best to specific tastes are concen-
trated in specific regions of the tongue: sweet at the tip,
sour at the sides, bitter at the back, and salty over most of
the tongue’s surface. Our complex perception of taste is
the result of different combinations of impulses in the
sensory neurons from these four kinds of taste buds, to-
gether with information related to smell. The effect of
smell on the sense of taste can easily be demonstrated by
eating an onion with the nose open and then eating it
with the nose plugged.

Like vertebrates, many arthropods also have taste
chemoreceptors. For example, flies, because of their mode
of searching for food, have taste receptors in sensory hairs
located on their feet. The sensory hairs contain different
chemoreceptors that are able to detect sugars, salts, and

FIGURE 55.6

   

Nerve fiber

 

Taste bud

 

bud
Receptor
cell with

microvilli

 

(d)

Taste. (2) Human beings have four kinds of taste buds (bitter, sour, salty, and sweet),
located on different regions of the tongue. (4) Groups of taste buds are typically organized
in sensory projections called papillae. (c) Individual taste buds are bulb-shaped collections
of chemosensitive receptors that open out into the mouth through a pore. (d)
Photomicrograph of taste buds in papillae.

   
  
  

Signals to brain <— 8
Different chemoreceptors —4

 

Sensory hair on foot |

Pore —

 

FIGURE 55.7

Many insects taste with their feet. In the blowfly shown here,
chemoreceptors extend into the sensory hairs on the foot. Each
different chemoreceptor detects a different type of food molecule.
When the fly steps in a food substance, it can taste the different
food molecules and extend its proboscis for feeding.

other molecules (figure 55.7). They can detect a wide vari-
ety of tastes by the integration of stimuli from these
chemoreceptors. If they step on potential food, the pro-
boscis (the tubular feeding apparatus) extends to feed.

Chapter 55 Sensory Systems 1109
