Sensory Systems

Concept Outline

55.1 Animals employ a wide variety of sensory
receptors.

Categories of Sensory Receptors and Their Actions.
Sensory receptors can be classified according to the type of
stimuli to which they can respond.

55.2 Mechanical and chemical receptors sense the
body’s condition.
Detecting Temperature and Pressure. Receptors
within the skin respond to touch, pressure, pain, heat and
cold.
Sensing Muscle Contraction and Blood Pressure. A
muscle spindle responds to stretching of the muscle;
receptors in arteries monitor changes in blood pressure.
Sensing Taste, Smell, and Body Position. Receptors
that respond to chemicals produce sensations of taste and
smell. Hair cells send nerve impulses when they are bent.

55.3 Auditory receptors detect pressure waves
in the air.
The Ears and Hearing. Sound causes vibrations in the
ear that bend hair cell processes, initiating a nerve impulse.
Sonar. Bats orient themselves in space by emitting sounds
and detecting the time required for the sounds to bounce
off objects and return to their ears.

55.4 Optic receptors detect light over a broad range of

wavelengths.
Evolution of the Eye. ‘True image-forming eyes evolved
independently in several phyla.

Vertebrate Photoreceptors. Light causes a pigment
molecule in a rod or cone cell to dissociate; this “bleaching”
reaction activates the photoreceptor.

Visual Processing in the Vertebrate Retina. Action
potentials travel from the retina of the eyes to the brain for
visual perception.

55.5 Some vertebrates use heat, electricity, or
magnetism for orientation.
Diversity of Sensory Experiences. Special receptors

can detect heat, electrical currents, and magnetic
fields.

 

FIGURE 55.1

Photoreceptors in the vertebrate eye. Rods, the broad, tubular
cells, allow black-and-white vision, while cones, the short, tapered
cells, are responsible for color vision. Not all vertebrates have
both types of receptors.

A Il input from sensory neurons to the central nervous
system arrives in the same form, as action potentials
propagated by afferent (inward-conducting) sensory neu-
rons. Different sensory neurons project to different brain
regions, and so are associated with different sensory modal-
ities (figure 55.1). The intensity of the sensation depends
on the frequency of action potentials conducted by the sen-
sory neuron. A sunset, a symphony, and a searing pain are
distinguished by the brain only in terms of the identity of
the sensory neuron carrying the action potentials and the
frequency of these impulses. Thus, if the auditory nerve is
artificially stimulated, the brain perceives the stimulation as
sound. But if the optic nerve is artificially stimulated in ex-
actly the same manner and degree, the brain perceives a

flash of light.

1103
