Regulating Body Temperature

Humans, together with other mammals and with birds, are
endothermic; they can maintain relatively constant body tem-
peratures independent of the environmental temperature.
When the temperature of your blood exceeds 37°C (98.6°F),
neurons ina part of the brain called the hypothalamus detect
the temperature change. Acting through the control of
motor neurons, the hypothalamus responds by promoting
the dissipation of heat through sweating, dilation of blood
vessels in the skin, and other mechanisms. These responses
tend to counteract the rise in body temperature. When body
temperature falls, the hypothalamus coordinates a different
set of responses, such as shivering and the constriction of
blood vessels in the skin, which help to raise body tempera-
ture and correct the initial challenge to homeostasis.

Vertebrates other than mammals and birds are ectother-
mic; their body temperatures are more or less dependent on
the environmental temperature. However, to the extent
that it is possible, many ectothermic vertebrates attempt to
maintain some degree of temperature homeostasis. Certain
large fish, including tuna, swordfish, and some sharks, for
example, can maintain parts of their body at a significantly
higher temperature than that of the water. Reptiles attempt
to maintain a constant body temperature through behav-
ioral means—by placing themselves in varying locations of
sun and shade (see chapter 29). That’s why you frequently
see lizards basking in the sun. Sick lizards even give them-
selves a “fever” by seeking warmer locations!

Most invertebrates do not employ feedback regulation
to physiologically control their body temperature. Instead,
they use behavior to adjust their temperature. Many butter-
flies, for example, must reach a certain body temperature
before they can fly. In the cool of the morning they orient
so as to maximize their absorption of sunlight. Moths and
many other insects use a shivering reflex to warm their tho-
racic flight muscles (figure 58.4).

Regulating Blood Glucose

When you digest a carbohydrate-containing meal, you ab-
sorb glucose into your blood. This causes a temporary rise
in the blood glucose concentration, which is brought back
down in a few hours. What counteracts the rise in blood
glucose following a meal?

Glucose levels within the blood are constantly moni-
tored by a sensor, the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas.
When levels increase, the islets secrete the hormone in-
sulin, which stimulates the uptake of blood glucose into
muscles, liver, and adipose tissue. The islets are, in this
case, the sensor and the integrating center. The muscles,
liver, and adipose cells are the effectors, taking up glucose
to control the levels. The muscles and liver can convert the
glucose into the polysaccharide glycogen; adipose cells can
convert glucose into fat. These actions lower the blood glu-
cose (figure 58.5) and help to store energy in forms that the
body can use later.

1176 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Preflight ! Warmup Flight
Nowing |  Shiverlike | Full range
movement t contraction H movement
40-4 | ofthorax =| of wings
o ' muscles '
3 ;
3 t
8
E 1
& 35 '
s n
£ '
2 f
5 f
2 f
2 304 ;
2 1
8 f
5
3 f
2 |
& y i
25 '
4 fl
' '
T t T i T T
a 0 1 2 3 4
Time (minutes)
FIGURE 58.4

Thermoregulation in insects. Some insects, such as the sphinx
moth, contract their thoracic muscles to warm up for flight.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eating
Yv
J Blood glucose
Stops insulin
secretion y
ro ror ce ne ne nenene >| Islets of Langerhans
1 y
Negative Insulin
feedback
loop t
9 Cellular uptake of glucose
i
I y
L-------------------| | Blood glucose
FIGURE 58.5

The negative feedback control of blood glucose. The rise in
blood glucose concentration following a meal stimulates the secre-
tion of insulin from the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. In-
sulin is a hormone that promotes the entry of glucose in skeletal
muscle and other tissue, thereby lowering the blood glucose and
compensating for the initial rise.

 

Negative feedback mechanisms correct deviations from
a set point for different internal variables. In this way,
body temperature and blood glucose, for example, are
kept within normal limits.

 
