Sex and Reproduction

 

Concept Outline

59.1 Animals employ both sexual and asexual
reproductive strategies.

Asexual and Sexual Reproduction. Some animals
reproduce asexually, but most reproduce sexually; male and
female are usually different individuals, but not always.

59.2 The evolution of reproduction among the
vertebrates has led to internalization of
fertilization and development.

Fertilization and Development. Among vertebrates that
have internal fertilization, the young are nourished by egg
yolk or from their mother’s blood.

Fish and Amphibians. Most bony fish and amphibians
have external fertilization, while most cartilaginous fish
have internal fertilization.

Reptiles and Birds. Most reptiles and all birds lay eggs
externally, and the young develop inside the egg.
Mammals. Monotremes lay eggs, marsupials have
pouches where their young develop, and placental
mammals have placentas that nourish the young within the
uterus.

59.3 Male and female reproductive systems are
specialized for different functions.

Structure and Function of the Male Reproductive
System. The testes produce sperm and secrete the male
sex hormone, testosterone.

Structure and Function of the Female Reproductive
System. An egg cell within an ovarian follicle develops
and is released from the ovary; the egg cell travels into the
female reproductive tract, which undergoes cyclic changes
due to hormone secretion.

59.4 The physiology of human sexual intercourse is
becoming better known.

Physiology of Human Sexual Intercourse. The human
sexual response can be divided into four phases: excitement,
plateau, orgasm, and resolution.

Birth Control. Various methods of birth control are
employed, including barriers to fertilization, prevention of
ovulation, and prevention of the implantation.

 

FIGURE 59.1

The bright color of male golden toads serves to attract
mates. The rare golden toads of the Monteverde Cloud Forest
Reserve of Costa Rica are nearly voiceless and so use bright colors
to attract mates. Always rare, they may now be extinct.

lhe cry of a cat in heat, insects chirping outside the win-

dow, frogs croaking in swamps, and wolves howling in
a frozen northern forest are all sounds of evolution’s essen-
tial act, reproduction. These distinct vocalizations, as well
as the bright coloration characteristic of some animals like
the tropical golden toads of figure 59.1, function to attract
mates. Few subjects pervade our everyday thinking more
than sex, and few urges are more insistent. This chapter
deals with sex and reproduction among the vertebrates, in-
cluding humans.

1195
