Ectoderm
Wall of forebrain

   
  

Optic cu
Optic stalk pees?

   

Lens
invagination

  

FIGURE 60.16

Lens vesicle Lens

 

Lens

   
 

Optic nerve:

 

Sensory
layer ;

” Retina
Pigment

layer

Development of the eye by induction. An extension of the optic stalk grows until it contacts ectoderm, which induces a section of the
ectoderm to pinch off and form the lens. Other structures of the eye develop from the optic stalk.

These cells had indeed induced the ectoderm cells of the
belly to form a notochord. This phenomenon as a whole
is known as induction.

The process of induction that Spemann discovered ap-
pears to be the basic mode of development in vertebrates.
Inductions between the three primary tissue types—ecto-
derm, mesoderm, and endoderm—are referred to as pri-
mary inductions. Inductions between tissues that have al-
ready been differentiated are called secondary inductions.
The differentiation of the central nervous system during
neurulation by the interaction of dorsal ectoderm and dor-
sal mesoderm to form the neural tube is an example of pri-
mary induction. In contrast, the differentiation of the lens
of the vertebrate eye from ectoderm by interaction with tis-
sue from the central nervous system is an example of sec-
ondary induction.

The eye develops as an extension of the forebrain, a stalk
that grows outward until it comes into contact with the epi-
dermis (figure 60.16). At a point directly above the growing
stalk, a layer of the epidermis pinches off, forming a trans-
parent lens. When the optic stalks of the two eyes have just
started to project from the brain and the lenses have not yet
formed, one of the budding stalks can be removed and
transplanted to a region underneath a different epidermis,
such as that of the belly. When Spemann performed this
critical experiment, a lens still formed, this time from belly
epidermis cells in the region above where the budding stalk
had been transplanted.

What is the nature of the inducing signal that passes
from one tissue to the other? If one imposes a nonporous
barrier, such as a layer of cellophane, between the inducer
and the target tissue, no induction takes place. In contrast,
a porous filter, through which proteins can pass, does per-
mit induction to occur. The induction process was dis-
cussed in detail in chapter 17. In brief, the inducer cells
produce a protein factor that binds to the cells of the target
tissue, initiating changes in gene expression.

The Nature of Developmental Decisions

All of the cells of the body, with the exception of a few spe-
cialized ones that have lost their nuclei, have an entire
complement of genetic information. Despite the fact that
all of its cells are genetically identical, an adult vertebrate
contains hundreds of cell types, each expressing various as-
pects of the total genetic information for that individual.
What factors determine which genes are to be expressed in
a particular cell and which are not to be? In a liver cell,
what mechanism keeps the genetic information that speci-
fies nerve cell characteristics turned off? Does the differen-
tiation of that particular cell into a liver cell entail the phys-
ical loss of the information specifying other cell types? No,
it does not—but cells progressively lose the capacity to ex-
press ever-larger portions of their genomes. Development is a
process of progressive restriction of gene expression.

Some cells become determined quite early in develop-
ment. For example, all of the egg cells of the human female
are set aside very early in the life of the embryo, yet some
of these cells will not achieve differentiation into functional
oocytes for more than 40 years. To a large degree, a cell’s
location in the developing embryo determines its fate. By
changing a cell’s location, an experimenter can alter its de-
velopmental destiny. However, this is only true up to a cer-
tain point in the cell’s development. At some stage, every
cell’s ultimate fate becomes fixed, a process referred to as
commitment. Commitment is not irreversible (entire indi-
viduals can be cloned from an individual specialized cell, as
recounted in chapter 17), but rarely if ever reverses under
ordinary circumstances.

 

When a cell is “determined,” it is possible to predict its
developmental fate; when a cell is “committed,” that
developmental fate cannot be altered. Determination
often occurs very early in development, commitment
somewhat later.

 

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1227
