Male Accessory Sex Organs

After the sperm are produced within the seminiferous
tubules, they are delivered into a long, coiled tube called
the epididymis (figure 59.13). The sperm are not motile
when they arrive in the epididymis, and they must remain
there for at least 18 hours before their motility develops.
From the epididymis, the sperm enter another long tube,
the vas deferens, which passes into the abdominal cavity via
the inguinal canal.

The vas deferens from each testis joins with one of the
ducts from a pair of glands called the seminal vesicles (see
figure 59.10), which produce a fructose-rich fluid. From
this point, the vas deferens continues as the ejaculatory
duct and enters the prostate gland at the base of the urinary
bladder. In humans, the prostate gland is about the size of a
golf ball and is spongy in texture. It contributes about 60%
of the bulk of the semen, the fluid that contains the prod-
ucts of the testes, fluid from the seminal vesicles, and the
products of the prostate gland. Within the prostate gland,
the ejaculatory duct merges with the urethra from the uri-
nary bladder. The urethra carries the semen out of the
body through the tip of the penis. A pair of pea-sized bul-
bourethral glands secrete a fluid that lines the urethra and
lubricates the tip of the penis prior to coitus (sexual inter-
course).

In addition to the urethra, there are two columns of
erectile tissue, the corpora cavernosa, along the dorsal
side of the penis and one column, the corpus spongiosum,
along the ventral side (figure 59.14). Penile erection is
produced by neurons in the parasympathetic division of
the autonomic nervous system. As a result of the release
of nitric oxide by these neurons, arterioles in the penis di-
late, causing the erectile tissue to become engorged with
blood and turgid. This increased pressure in the erectile
tissue compresses the veins, so blood flows into the penis
but cannot flow out. The drug sildenafil (Viagra) pro-
longs erection by stimulating release of nitric oxide in the
penis. Some mammals, such as the walrus, have a bone in
the penis that contributes to its stiffness during erection,
but humans do not.

The result of erection and continued sexual stimulation
is ejaculation, the ejection from the penis of about 5 milli-
liters of semen containing an average of 300 million sperm.
Successful fertilization requires such a high sperm count
because the odds against any one sperm cell successfully
completing the journey to the egg and fertilizing it are ex-
traordinarily high, and the acrosomes of several sperm need
to interact with the egg before a single sperm can penetrate
the egg. Males with fewer than 20 million sperm per milli-
liter are generally considered sterile. Despite their large
numbers, sperm constitute only about 1% of the volume of
the semen ejaculated.

1204 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

Testis

Vas
deferens

FIGURE 59.13

Photograph of the human testis. The dark, round object in the
center of the photograph is a testis, within which sperm are
formed. Cupped around it is the epididymis, a highly coiled
passageway in which sperm complete their maturation. Mature
sperm are stored in the vas deferens, a long tube that extends from
the epididymis.

     
      

Corpus
spongiosum

Dorsal veins

Artery Urethra

FIGURE 59.14
A penis in cross-section (left) and longitudinal section (right).
Note that the urethra runs through the corpus spongiosum.
