Types of Cell Signaling

Cells communicate through any of four
basic mechanisms, depending primarily
on the distance between the signaling
and responding cells (figure 7.3). In ad-
dition to using these four basic mecha-
nisms, some cells actually send signals
to themselves, secreting signals that
bind to specific receptors on their own
plasma membranes. This process,
called autocrine signaling, is thought

 

(a) Direct contact

   

Adjacent target cells

(b) Paracrine signaling

 

to play an important role in reinforcing
developmental changes.

   
    
 

Direct Contact

As we saw in chapter 6, the surface of a
eukaryotic cell is a thicket of proteins,
carbohydrates, and lipids attached to
and extending outward from the
plasma membrane. When cells are very
close to one another, some of the mol-
ecules on the cells’ plasma membranes
may bind together in specific ways.
Many of the important interactions
between cells in early development
occur by means of direct contact be-
tween cell surfaces (figure 7.32). We'll
examine contact-dependent interac-
tions more closely later in this chapter.

Blood vessel
Distant target cells

FIGURE 7.3

Paracrine Signaling

Signal molecules released by cells can diffuse through the
extracellular fluid to other cells. If those molecules are
taken up by neighboring cells, destroyed by extracellular
enzymes, or quickly removed from the extracellular fluid in
some other way, their influence is restricted to cells in the
immediate vicinity of the releasing cell. Signals with such
short-lived, local effects are called paracrine signals (figure
7.3b). Like direct contact, paracrine signaling plays an im-
portant role in early development, coordinating the activi-
ties of clusters of neighboring cells.

Endocrine Signaling

Ifa released signal molecule remains in the extracellular fluid,
it may enter the organism’s circulatory system and travel
widely throughout the body. These longer lived signal mole-
cules, which may affect cells very distant from the releasing
cell, are called hormones, and this type of intercellular com-
munication is known as endocrine signaling (figure 7.3c).
Chapter 58 discusses endocrine signaling in detail. Both ani-
mals and plants use this signaling mechanism extensively.

Hormone secretion into
blood by endocrine gland

Fs

(0) Endocrine signaling

Neurotransmitter

Target cell

   

Synaptic gap

 

(d) Synaptic signaling

Four kinds of cell signaling. Cells communicate in several ways. (a) Two cells in direct
contact with each other may send signals across gap junctions. (6) In paracrine signaling,
secretions from one cell have an effect only on cells in the immediate area. (¢) In endocrine
signaling, hormones are released into the circulatory system, which carries them to the target
cells. (d) Chemical synaptic signaling involves transmission of signal molecules, called
neurotransmitters, from a neuron over a small synaptic gap to the target cell.

Synaptic Signaling

In animals, the cells of the nervous system provide rapid
communication with distant cells. Their signal molecules,
neurotransmitters, do not travel to the distant cells
through the circulatory system like hormones do. Rather,
the long, fiberlike extensions of nerve cells release neuro-
transmitters from their tips very close to the target cells
(figure 7.3d). The narrow gap between the two cells is
called a chemical synapse. While paracrine signals move
through the fluid between cells, neurotransmitters cross the
synapse and persist only briefly. We will examine synaptic
signaling more fully in chapter 54.

 

Adjacent cells can signal others by direct contact, while
nearby cells that are not touching can communicate
through paracrine signals. Two other systems mediate
communication over longer distances: in endocrine
signaling the blood carries hormones to distant cells,

and in synaptic signaling nerve cells secrete
neurotransmitters from long cellular extensions close to
the responding cells.

 

Chapter 7 Cell-Cell Interactions 125
