Mammals

Some mammals are seasonal breeders, reproducing only
once a year, while others have shorter reproductive cycles.
Among the latter, the females generally undergo the repro-
ductive cycles, while the males are more constant in their
reproductive activity. Cycling in females involves the peri-
odic release of a mature ovum from the ovary in a process
known as ovulation. Most female mammals are “in heat,”
or sexually receptive to males, only around the time of ovu-
lation. This period of sexual receptivity is called estrus,
and the reproductive cycle is therefore called an estrous
cycle. The females continue to cycle until they become
pregnant.

In the estrous cycle of most mammals, changes in the se-
cretion of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteiniz-
ing hormone (LH) by the anterior pituitary gland cause
changes in egg cell development and hormone secretion in
the ovaries. Humans and apes have menstrual cycles that
are similar to the estrous cycles of other mammals in their
cyclic pattern of hormone secretion and ovulation. Unlike
mammals with estrous cycles, however, human and ape fe-
males bleed when they shed the inner lining of their uterus,
a process called menstruation, and may engage in copula-
tion at any time during the cycle.

Rabbits and cats differ from most other mammals in that
they are induced ovulators. Instead of ovulating in a cyclic
fashion regardless of sexual activity, the females ovulate
only after copulation as a result of a reflex stimulation of
LH secretion (described later). This makes these animals
extremely fertile.

The most primitive mammals, the monotremes (con-
sisting solely of the duck-billed platypus and the
echidna), are oviparous, like the reptiles from which they
evolved. They incubate their eggs in a nest (figure 59.94)
or specialized pouch, and the young hatchlings obtain
milk from their mother’s mammary glands by licking her
skin, as monotremes lack nipples. All other mammals are
viviparous, and are divided into two subcategories based
on how they nourish their young. The marsupials, a
group that includes opossums and kangaroos, give birth
to fetuses that are incompletely developed. The fetuses
complete their development in a pouch of their mother’s
skin, where they can obtain nourishment from nipples of
the mammary glands (figure 59.94). The placental mam-
mals (figure 59.9¢) retain their young for a much longer
period of development within the mother’s uterus. The
fetuses are nourished by a structure known as the pla-
centa, which is derived from both an extraembryonic
membrane (the chorion) and the mother’s uterine lining.
Because the fetal and maternal blood vessels are in very
close proximity in the placenta, the fetus can obtain nu-
trients by diffusion from the mother’s blood. The func-
tioning of the placenta is discussed in more detail in
chapter 60.

 

Among mammals that are not seasonal breeders, the
females undergo shorter cyclic variations in ovarian
function. These are estrous cycles in most mammals
and menstrual cycles in humans and apes. Some
mammals are induced ovulators, ovulating in response
to copulation.

 

 

(@) (b)
FIGURE 59.9

()

Reproduction in mammals. (2) Monotremes, like the duck-billed platypus shown here, lay eggs in a nest. (0) Marsupials, such as this
kangaroo, give birth to small fetuses which complete their development in a pouch. (c) In placental mammals, like this domestic cat, the
young remain inside the mother’s uterus for a longer period of time and are born relatively more developed.

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1201
