 

Gastrulation in Reptiles, Birds, and
Mammals

In the blastodise of a bird or reptile and the
inner cell mass of a mammal, the develop-
ing embryo is a small cap of cells rather
than a sphere. No yolk separates the two
sides of the embryo, and, as a result, the
lower cell layer is able to differentiate into
endoderm and the upper layer into ecto-
derm without cell movement. Just after
these two primary cell layers form, the
mesoderm arises by invagination and invo-
lution of cells from the upper layer. The
surface cells begin moving to the midline
where they involute and migrate laterally to
form a mesodermal layer between the ecto-
derm and endoderm. A furrow along the
longitudinal midline marks the site of this
involution (figures 60.12 and 60.13). This
furrow, analogous to an elongated blasto-
pore, is called the primitive streak.

Gastrulation in lancelets involves the
formation of ectoderm and endoderm
by the invagination of the blastula, and
the mesoderm layer forms from
pouches pinched from the endoderm.
In those vertebrates with extensive
amounts of yolk, gastrulation requires
the involution of surface cells into a
blastopore or primitive streak, and the
mesoderm is derived from some of
these involuted cells.

 

FIGURE 60.12

Gastrulation in birds. The upper layer of the blastodisc (a) differentiates into
ectoderm, the lower layer into endoderm (). Among the cells that migrate into the
interior through the dorsal primitive streak are future mesodermal cells (c).

 
  
  

Inner cell Formation of Primitive streak:

mass \ Amniotic cavity extraembryonic

  

membranes
Ectoderm

   

Trophoblast Endoderm

(a) (b) () (a

FIGURE 60.13

Mammalian gastrulation. (a) The amniotic cavity forms within the inner cell mass and its base. Layers of ectoderm and endoderm
differentiate (b and c) as in the avian blastodisc. (d) A primitive streak develops, through which cells destined to become mesoderm migrate
into the interior, again reminiscent of gastrulation in birds. The trophoblast has now moved further away from the embryo and begins to
playa role in forming the placenta.

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1223
