Evolution After Darwin:
More Evidence

More than a century has elapsed since Darwin’s death in
1882. During this period, the evidence supporting his the-
ory has grown progressively stronger. There have also
been many significant advances in our understanding of
how evolution works. Although these advances have not
altered the basic structure of Darwin’s theory, they have
taught us a great deal more about the mechanisms by
which evolution occurs. We will briefly explore some of
this evidence here; in chapter 21 we will return to the the-
ory of evolution and examine the evidence in more detail.

The Fossil Record

Darwin predicted that the fossil record would yield inter-
mediate links between the great groups of organisms, for
example, between fishes and the amphibians thought to
have arisen from them, and between reptiles and birds. We
now know the fossil record to a degree that was unthink-
able in the nineteenth century. Recent discoveries of mi-
croscopic fossils have extended the known history of life on
earth back to about 3.5 billion years ago. The discovery of
other fossils has supported Darwin’s predictions and has
shed light on how organisms have, over this enormous time
span, evolved from the simple to the complex. For verte-
brate animals especially, the fossil record is rich and exhib-
its a graded series of changes in form, with the evolutionary
parade visible for all to see (see Box: Why Study Fossils?).

The Age of the Earth

In Darwin’s day, some physicists argued that the earth was
only a few thousand years old. This bothered Darwin, be-
cause the evolution of all living things from some single

 

  

Human Cat Bat

Porpoise

 

original ancestor would have required a great deal more
time. Using evidence obtained by studying the rates of ra-
dioactive decay, we now know that the physicists of Dar-
win’s time were wrong, very wrong: the earth was formed
about 4.5 billion years ago.

The Mechanism of Heredity

Darwin received some of his sharpest criticism in the area of
heredity. At that time, no one had any concept of genes or
of how heredity works, so it was not possible for Darwin to
explain completely how evolution occurs. Theories of he-
redity in Darwin’s day seemed to rule out the possibility of
genetic variation in nature, a critical requirement of Dar-
win’s theory. Genetics was established as a science only at
the start of the twentieth century, 40 years after the publica-
tion of Darwin’s On the Origin of Species. When scientists
began to understand the laws of inheritance (discussed in
chapter 13), the heredity problem with Darwin’s theory
vanished. Genetics accounts in a neat and orderly way for
the production of new variations in organisms.

Comparative Anatomy

Comparative studies of animals have provided strong evi-
dence for Darwin’s theory. In many different types of verte-
brates, for example, the same bones are present, indicating
their evolutionary past. Thus, the forelimbs shown in figure
1.12 are all constructed from the same basic array of bones,
modified in one way in the wing of a bat, in another way in
the fin of a porpoise, and in yet another way in the leg of a
horse. The bones are said to be homologous in the differ-
ent vertebrates; that is, they have the same evolutionary ori-
gin, but they now differ in structure and function. This con-
trasts with analogous structures, such as the wings of birds
and butterflies, which have similar structure and function
but different evolutionary origins.

FIGURE 1.12
Homology among vertebrate
limbs. The forelimbs of these
4 five vertebrates show the ways
/ in which the relative
| proportions of the forelimb
bones have changed in relation
to the particular way of life of

> Horse each organism.

Chapter 1 The Science of Biology 15
