59.4 The physiology of human sexual intercourse is becoming better known.

Physiology of Human Sexual
Intercourse

Few physical activities are more pleasurable to humans
than sexual intercourse. The sex drive is one of the
strongest drives directing human behavior, and as such, it is
circumscribed by many rules and customs. Sexual inter-
course acts as a channel for the strongest of human emo-
tions such as love, tenderness, and personal commitment.
Few subjects are at the same time more private and of more
general interest. Here we will limit ourselves to a very nar-
row aspect of sexual behavior, its immediate physiological
effects. The emotional consequences are no less real, but
they are beyond the scope of this book.

Until relatively recently, the physiology of human sexual
activity was largely unknown. Perhaps because of the
prevalence of strong social taboos against the open discus-
sion of sexual matters, no research was carried out on the
subject, and detailed information was lacking. Over the past
40 years, however, investigations by William Masters and
Virginia Johnson, as well as an army of researchers who
followed them, have revealed much about the biological
nature of human sexual activity.

The sexual act is referred to by a variety of names, in-
cluding sexual intercourse, copulation, and coitus, as well as
a host of informal terms. It is common to partition the
physiological events that accompany intercourse into four
phases—excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution—
although there are no clear divisions between these phases.

Excitement

The sexual response is initiated by the nervous system. In
both males and females, commands from the brain increase
the respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood pressure. The
nipples commonly harden and become more sensitive.
Other changes increase the diameter of blood vessels, lead-
ing to increased circulation. In some people, these changes
may produce a reddening of the skin around the face,
breasts, and genitals (the sex flush). Increased circulation
also leads to vasocongestion, producing erection of the
male’s penis and similar swelling of the female’s clitoris.
The female experiences changes that prepare the vagina for
sexual intercourse: the labia majora and labia minora, lips
of tissue that cover the opening to the vagina, swell and
separate due to the increased circulation; the vaginal walls
become moist; and the muscles encasing the vagina relax.

Plateau

The penetration of the vagina by the thrusting penis con-
tinuously stimulates nerve endings both in the tip of the
penis and in the clitoris. The clitoris, which is now swollen,

1210 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

becomes very sensitive and withdraws up into a sheath or
“hood.” Once it has withdrawn, the clitoris is stimulated
indirectly when the thrusting movements of the penis rub
the clitoral hood against the clitoris. The nervous stimula-
tion produced by the repeated movements of the penis
within the vagina elicits a continuous response in the auto-
nomic nervous system, greatly intensifying the physiologi-
cal changes initiated during the excitement phase. In the fe-
male, pelvic thrusts may begin, while in the male the penis
reaches its greatest length and rigidity.

Orgasm

The climax of intercourse is reached when the stimulation
is sufficient to initiate a series of reflexive muscular con-
tractions. The nerve impulses producing these contractions
are associated with other activity within the central nervous
system, activity that we experience as intense pleasure. In
females, the contractions are initiated by impulses in the
hypothalamus, which causes the posterior pituitary gland to
release large amounts of oxytocin. This hormone, in turn,
causes the muscles in the uterus and around the vaginal
opening to contract and the cervix to be pulled upward.
Contractions occur at intervals of about one per second.
There may be one to several intense peaks of contractions
(orgasms), or the peaks may be more numerous but less in-
tense.

Analogous contractions take place in the male. The first
contractions, which occur in the vas deferens and prostate
gland, cause emission, the peristaltic movement of sperm
and seminal fluid into a collecting zone of the urethra lo-
cated at the base of the penis. Shortly thereafter, violent
contractions of the muscles at the base of the penis result in
ejaculation of the collected semen through the penis. As in
the female, the contractions are spaced about one second
apart, although in the male they continue for only a few
seconds and are almost invariably restricted to a single in-
tense wave.

Resolution

After ejaculation, males rapidly lose their erection and
enter a refractory period lasting 20 minutes or longer, in
which sexual arousal is difficult to achieve and ejaculation is
almost impossible. By contrast, many women can be
aroused again almost immediately. After intercourse, the
bodies of both men and women return over a period of sev-
eral minutes to their normal physiological state.

 

Sexual intercourse is a physiological series of events
leading to the ultimate deposition of sperm within the
female reproductive tract. The phases are similar in
males and females.

 
