60.2 Cell cleavage and the formation of a blastula set the stage for later

development.

Cell Cleavage Patterns

Following fertilization, the second major event in verte-
brate reproduction is the rapid division of the zygote into a
larger and larger number of smaller and smaller cells (table
60.1). This period of division, called cleavage, is not ac-
companied by an increase in the overall size of the embryo.
The resulting tightly packed mass of about 32 cells is called
a morula, and each individual cell in the morula is referred
to as a blastomere. As the blastomeres continue to divide,
they secrete a fluid into the center of the morula. Eventu-
ally, a hollow ball of 500 to 2000 cells, the blastula, is
formed. The fluid-filled cavity within the blastula is known
as the blastocoel.

The pattern of cleavage division is influenced by the
presence and location of yolk, which is abundant in the
eggs of many vertebrates (figure 60.5). As we discussed in
the previous chapter, vertebrates have embraced a variety
of reproductive strategies involving different patterns of
yolk utilization.

Primitive Chordates

When eggs contain little or no yolk, cleavage occurs
throughout the whole egg (figure 60.6). This pattern of
cleavage, called holoblastic cleavage, was characteristic of
the ancestors of the vertebrates and is
still seen in groups such as the
lancelets and agnathans. In these ani-
mals, holoblastic cleavage results in the
formation of a symmetrical blastula
composed of cells of approximately
equal size.

Amphibians and Advanced Fish

The eggs of bony fish and frogs con-
tain much more cytoplasmic yolk in
one hemisphere than the other. Be-
cause yolk-rich cells divide much more
slowly than those that have little yolk,
holoblastic cleavage in these eggs re-
sults in a very asymmetrical blastula
(figure 60.7), with large cells contain-
ing a lot of yolk at one pole and a con-
centrated mass of small cells contain-
ing very little yolk at the other. In
these blastulas, the pole that is rich in

 

@-*<
(a) Lancelet oll

Ja
Nucleus
Yolk
(b) Frog

a Nucleus
fo
a Yolk
bubble
IN — Shell

{ Albumen

LL

(©) Chicken

FIGURE 60.5

Yolk distribution in three kinds of eggs. (2) In the lancelet, a
primitive chordate, the egg consists of a central nucleus surrounded
bya small amount of yolk. (}) In a frog egg there is much more
yolk, and the nucleus is displaced toward one pole. () Bird eggs are
complexly organized, with the nucleus just under the surface of a
large, central yolk.

 

FIGURE 60.7

yolk is called the vegetal pole, while
the pole that is relatively poor in yolk
is called the animal pole.

FIGURE 60.6

Holoblastic cleavage (3000). In this
type of cleavage, cell division occurs
throughout the entire egg.

1218 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Dividing frog eggs. The closest cells in
this photo (those near the animal pole)
divide faster and are smaller than those
near the vegetal pole.
