59.3

Structure and Function of the Male
Reproductive System

The structures of the human male reproductive system,
typical of mammals, are illustrated in figure 59.10. If
testes form in the human embryo, they develop seminifer-
ous tubules beginning at around 43 to 50 days after con-
ception. The seminiferous tubules are the sites of sperm
production. At about 9 to 10 weeks, the Leydig cells, lo-
cated in the interstitial tissue between the seminiferous
tubules, begin to secrete testosterone (the major male sex
hormone, or androgen). Testosterone secretion during
embryonic development converts indifferent structures
into the male external genitalia, the penis and the scrotum,
a sac that contains the testes. In the absence of testos-
terone, these structures develop into the female external
genitalia.

In an adult, cach testis is composed primarily of the
highly convoluted seminiferous tubules (figure 59.11).
Although the testes are actually formed within the ab-
dominal cavity, shortly before birth they descend through
an opening called the inguinal canal into the scrotum,
which suspends them outside the abdominal cavity. The
scrotum maintains the testes at around 34°C, slightly
lower than the core body temperature (37°C). This lower
temperature is required for normal sperm development
in humans.

Bladder:

Ureter.
>!

i. A
Seminal
/ vesicle

   
   
    

Urethra j
Ejaculatory
duct

  

ae, Prostate
Vas deferens gland
Epididymis Cowper's
(bulbourethral)

 
 

Testis

Penis 4 — Scrotum

gland

FIGURE 59.10

Organization of the human male reproductive system. The
penis and scrotum are the external genitalia, the testes are the
gonads, and the other organs are sex accessory organs, aiding the
production and ejaculation of semen.

1202 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Male and female reproductive systems are specialized for different functions.

Production of Sperm

The wall of the seminiferous tubule consists of germinal
cells, which become sperm by meiosis, and supporting
Sertoli cells. The germinal cells near the outer surface of
the seminiferous tubule are diploid (with 46 chromo-
somes in humans), while those located closer to the
lumen of the tubule are haploid (with 23 chromosomes
each). Each parent cell duplicates by mitosis, and one of
the two daughter cells then undergoes meiosis to form
sperm; the other remains as a parent cell. In that way, the
male never runs out of parent cells to produce sperm.
Adult males produce an average of 100 to 200 million
sperm each day and can continue to do so throughout
most of the rest of their lives.

The diploid daughter cell that begins meiosis is called
a primary spermatocyte. It has 23 pairs of homologous
chromosomes (in humans) and each chromosome is du-
plicated, with two chromatids. The first meiotic division
separates the homologous chromosomes, producing two
haploid secondary spermatocytes. However, each chromo-
some still consists of two duplicate chromatids. Each of
these cells then undergoes the second meiotic division to
separate the chromatids and produce two haploid cells,
the spermatids. Therefore, a total of four haploid sper-
matids are produced by each primary spermatocyte (fig-
ure 59.11). All of these cells constitute the germinal ep-
ithelium of the seminiferous tubules because they
“germinate” the gametes.

In addition to the germinal epithelium, the walls of
the seminiferous tubules contain nongerminal cells
known as Sertoli cells. The Sertoli cells nurse the devel-
oping sperm and secrete products required for spermato-
genesis (sperm production). They also help convert the
spermatids into spermatozoa by engulfing their extra
cytoplasm.

Spermatozoa, or sperm, are relatively simple cells, con-
sisting of a head, body, and tail (figure 59.12). The head
encloses a compact nucleus and is capped by a vesicle
called an acrosome, which is derived from the Golgi com-
plex. The acrosome contains enzymes that aid in the pen-
etration of the protective layers surrounding the egg. The
body and tail provide a propulsive mechanism: within the
tail is a flagellum, while inside the body are a centriole,
which acts as a basal body for the flagellum, and mito-
chondria, which generate the energy needed for flagellar
movement.
