 

BUILD-UP OF THE ELEMENTS, HUND'S RULE

 

 

(24)

 

3. The probability of finding an electron at a direction 0, @ is the wave
function squared, A, or more precisely ~pay3,. The diagrams in Figure
1.9 are of the angular part of the wave function A, not A?. Squaring
does not change the shape of an s orbital, but it elongates the lobes of p
orbitals (Figure 1.10). Some books use elongated p orbitals, but strictly
these should not have signs, as squaring removes any sign from the
symmetry. Despite this, many authors draw shapes approximating to
the probabilities, ie. squared wave functions, and put the signs of the
wave function on the lobes, and refer to both the shapes and the wave
functions as orbitals.

4. A full representation of the probability of finding an electron requires
the total wave function squared and includes both the radial and angular
probabilities squared. It really needs a three-dimensional model to
display this probability, and show the shapes of the orbitals. It is
difficult to do this adequatel, on a two-dimensional piece of paper, but
a representation is shown in Figure 1.11. The orbitals are not drawn to
scale. Note that the p orbitals are not simply two spheres, but are
ellipsoids of revolution. Thus the 2p, orbital is spherically symmetrical
about the x axis, but is not spherical in the other direction. Similarly the
Py orbital is spherically symmetrical about the y axis, and both the Pz
and the 3d,: are spherically symmetrical about the z axis.

PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE

Three quantum numbers n, / and -. are needed to define an orbital. Each
orbital may hold up to two electrons, provided they have opposite spins.
An extra quantum number is required to define the spin of an electron in
an orbital. Thus four quantum numbers are needed to define the energy of
an electron in an atom. The Pauli exclusion principle states that no two
clectrons in one atom can have all four quantum numbers the same. By
Permutating the quantum numbers, the maximum number of electrons

which can be contained in each main energy level can be calculated (see
Figure 1.12).

BUILD-UP OF THE ELEMENTS, HUND’S RULE

When atoms are in their ground state, the electrons occupy the lowest

Possible energy levels.

\ re Simplest element, hydrogen, has one electron, which occupies the 1s

evel; this level has the principal quantum number n = 1, and the

Subsidiary quantum number / = 0.

wee has two electrons. The second electron also occupies the 1s
- “is 1s possible because the two electrons have 0} i i i

level is now ero PPosite spins. This

thee hext atom lithium has three electrons. The third electron occupies

ial lowest level. This is the 2s fevel, which has the principal quantum
ern = 2 and subsidiary quantum number / = 0,
