 

THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

 

certain orbits. The electron is thus considered as a particle. In the 1920s it
was shown that moving particles such as electrons behaved in some ways as
waves. This is an important concept in explaining the electronic structure
of atoms.

For some time light has been considered as either particles or waves.
Certain materials such as potassium emit electrons when irradiated with
visible light, or in some cases with ultraviolet light. This is called the
photoelectric effect. It is explained by light travelling as particles called
photons. If a photon collides with an electron, it can transfer its energy to
the electron. If the energy of the photon is sufficiently large it can remove
the electron from the surface of the metal. However, the phenomena of
diffraction and interference of light can only be explained by assuming that
light behaves as waves. In 1924, de Brogie postulated that the same dual
character existed with electrons - sometimes they are considered as
particles, and at other times it is more convenient to consider them as
waves. Experimental evidence for the wave nature of electrons was
obtained when diffraction tings were observed photographically when a
stream of electrons was passed through a thin metal foil. Electron dif-
fraction has now become a useful tool in determining molecular structure,
Particularly of gases. Wave mechanics is a means of studying the build-up

of electron shells in atoms, and the shape of orbitals occupied by the
electrons.

‘THE HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE

Calculations on the Bohr model of an atom require precise information
about the position of an electron and its velocity. It is difficult to measure
both quantities accurately at the same time. An electron is too small to see
and may only be observed if perturbed. For example, we could hit the
electron with another particle such as a photon or an electron, or we could
apply an electric or magnetic force to the electron. This will inevitably
change the position of the electron, or its velocity and direction. Heisen-
berg stated that the More precisely we can define the Position of an
electron, the less certainly we are able to define its velocity, and vice versa,
If Ax is the uncertainty in defining the position and Av the uncertainty in
the velocity, the uncertainty principle may be expressed mathematically as:

h
Ar. Ave

IT
Where A = Planck's constant = 6.6262 x 10
impossible to know both the position and the velocity exactly,
'e concept of an electron following a definite orbit . iti
and velocity are known exactly, must there! placed by restion

d 1 > fore be replaced b: th -
ability of finding an electron in @ particular position, or in 2 panculae

volume of space. The Schro dinger wave equation provides a Satisfactory
. .
. a
description of an atom in these terms, Solutions to the wave equation are

“Is. This implies that it is

| (23)
