Atomic structure and the

periodic table

 

THE ATOM AS A NUCLEUS WITH ORBITAL ELECTRONS

All atoms consist of a central nucleus surrounded by one or more orbital
electrons. The nucleus always contains protons and all nuclei heavier than
hydrogen contain neutrons too. The protons and neutrons together make
up most of the mass of the atom. Both protons and neutrons are particles
of unit mass, but a proton has one positive charge and a neutron is
electrically neutral (i.e. carries no charge). Thus the nucleus is always
positively charged. The number of positive charges on the nucleus is
exactly balanced by an equal number of orbital electrons, each of which
carries one negative charge. Electrons are relatively light — about 1/1836
the mass of a proton. The 103 or so elements at present known are all built
up from these three fundamental particles in a simple way.

Hydrogen is the first and most simple element. It consists of a nucleus
containing one proton and therefore has one positive charge, which is
balanced by one negatively charged orbital electron. The second element is
helium. The nucleus contains two protons, and so has a charge of +2, The
nuclear charge of +2 is balanced by two negatively charged orbital
electrons. The nucleus also contains two neutrons, which minimize the
Tepulsion between the Protons in the nucleus, and increase the mass of the
atom. All nuclei heavier than hydrogen contain neutrons, but the number
Present cannot be predicted reliably.

This pattern is repeated for the rest of the elements. Elément 3, lithium,
has three protons in the nucleus (plus some neutrons). The nuclear charge
1s +3 and is balanced by three orbital electrons. Element 103, lawrencium,
has 103 protons in the nucleus (plus some neutrons). The nuclear charge is
+103 and is balanced by 103 orbital electrons. The number of positive
charges on the nucleus of an atom always equals the number of orbital
electrons, and is called the atomic number of the element.
denne Sipe planetary theory of the atom, we imagine that these

round the nucleus in circular orbits, in much the same way
as the planets orbit round the sun. Thus hydrogen and helium (Figure La)
have one and two electrons respectively in their first orbit. The first orbit is

then full. The next eight atoms are lithium, beryllium, boron, carbon,

 

() S~x--7

Figure 1.1 Structures of (a)
hydrogen, symbol H, atomic
number 1; and (b) helium,
symbol He, atomic number 2,
