Extraembryonic Membranes

As an adaptation to terrestrial life, the embryos of reptiles,
birds, and mammals develop within a fluid-filled amniotic
membrane (sce chapter 48). The amniotic membrane and
several other membranes form from embryonic cells but
are located outside of the body of the embryo. For this
reason, they are known as extraembryonic membranes.
The extraembryonic membranes, later to become the
fetal membranes, include the amnion, chorion, yolk sac,
and allantois.

In birds, the amnion and chorion arise from two folds
that grow to completely surround the embryo (figure
60.19). The amnion is the inner membrane that surrounds
the embryo and suspends it in ammiotic fluid, thereby mim-
icking the aquatic environments of fish and amphibian em-
bryos. The chorion is located next to the eggshell and is
separated from the other membranes by a cavity, the ex-
traembryonic coelom. The yolk sac plays a critical role in the
nutrition of bird and reptile embryos; it is also present in
mammals, though it does not nourish the embryo. The al-
lantois is derived as an outpouching of the gut and serves
to store the uric acid excreted in the urine of birds. During

Union of

   

Amniotic folds Allantois Chorion

Embryo

 

(a) (b)

FIGURE 60.19

amniotic folds

development, the allantois of a bird embryo expands to
form a sac that eventually fuses with the overlying chorion,
just under the eggshell. The fusion of the allantois and
chorion form a functioning unit in which embryonic blood
vessels, carried in the allantois, are brought close to the
porous eggshell for gas exchange. The allantois is thus the
functioning “lung” of a bird embryo.

In mammals, the embryonic cells form an inner cell
mass that will become the body of the embryo and a layer
of surrounding cells called the trophoblast (see figure 60.9).
The trophoblast implants into the endometrial lining of its
mother’s uterus and becomes the chorionic membrane (fig-
ure 60.20). The part of the chorion in contact with en-
dometrial tissue contributes to the placenta, as is described
in more detail in the next section. The allantois in mam-
mals contributes blood vessels to the structure that will be-
come the umbilical cord, so that fetal blood can be deliv-
ered to the placenta for gas exchange.

 

‘The extraembryonic membranes include the yolk sac,
amnion, chorion, and allantois. These are derived from
embryonic cells and function in a variety of ways to
support embryonic development.

 

Amnion —_Allantois Chorion Amnion Allantois

(c)

‘The extraembryonic membranes of a chick embryo. The membranes begin as amniotic folds from the embryo (a) that unite () to form
a separate amnion and chorion (¢). The allantois continues to grow until it will eventually unite with the chorion just under the eggshell.

1230 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
