mammary glands, and it inhibits prolactin secretion by pro-
moting the release of prolactin-inhibiting hormone from
the hypothalamus. During pregnancy, therefore, the mam-
mary glands are prepared for lactation but prevented from
lactating.

When the placenta is discharged after birth, the concen-
trations of estradiol and progesterone in the mother’s
blood decline rapidly. This decline allows the anterior pitu-
itary gland to secrete prolactin, which stimulates the mam-
mary alveoli to produce milk. Sensory impulses associated
with the baby’s suckling trigger the posterior pituitary
gland to release oxytocin. Oxytocin stimulates contraction
of the smooth muscle surrounding the alveolar ducts, thus
causing milk to be ejected by the breast. This pathway is
known as the milk-ejection reflex. The secretion of oxy-
tocin during lactation also causes some uterine contrac-
tions, as it did during labor. These contractions help to re-
store the tone of uterine muscles in mothers who are
breastfeeding.

The first milk produced after birth is a yellowish fluid
called colostrum, which is both nutritious and rich in ma-
ternal antibodies. Milk synthesis begins about three days
following the birth and is referred to as when milk “comes
in.” Many mothers nurse for a year or longer. During this
period, important pair-bonding occurs between the mother
and child. When nursing stops, the accumulation of milk in
the breasts signals the brain to stop prolactin secretion, and
milk production ceases.

Postnatal Development

Growth of the infant continues rapidly after birth. Babies
typically double their birth weight within two months. Be-
cause different organs grow at different rates and cease
growing at different times, the body proportions of infants
are different from those of adults. The head, for example, is
disproportionately large in newborns, but after birth it
grows more slowly than the rest of the body. Such a pattern
of growth, in which different components grow at different
rates, is referred to as allometric growth.

In most mammals, brain growth is mainly a fetal phe-
nomenon. In chimpanzees, for instance, the brain and the
cerebral portion of the skull grow very little after birth,
while the bones of the jaw continue to grow. As a result,
the head of an adult chimpanzee looks very different from
that of a fetal chimpanzee (figure 60.27). In human infants,
on the other hand, the brain and cerebral skull grow at the
same rate as the jaw. Therefore, the jaw-skull proportions
do not change after birth, and the head of a human adult
looks very similar to that of a human fetus. It is primarily
for this reason that an early human fetus seems so remark-
ably adultlike. The fact that the human brain continues to
grow significantly for the first few years of postnatal life
means that adequate nutrition and a rich, safe environment
are particularly crucial during this period for the full devel-
opment of the person’s intellectual potential.

Fetus

  

 

 

Child

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 60.27

Allometric growth. In young chimpanzees, the jaw grows at a
faster rate than the rest of the head. Asa result, the adult chim-
panzee head shape differs greatly from its head shape as a
newborn. In humans, the difference in growth between the jaw
and the rest of the head is much smaller, and the adult head shape
is similar to that of the newborn.

 

Birth occurs in response to uterine contractions
stimulated by oxytocin and prostaglandins. Lactation is
stimulated by prostaglandin, but the milk-ejection
reflex requires the action of oxytocin.

 

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1237
