 

 

STOICHIOMETRIC DEFECTS 59

 

 

 

 

crystalline state is far from static, and the pattern is seldom perfect. Many
of the most useful properties of solids are related to the thermal vibrations
of atoms, the presence of impurities and the existence of defects.

STOICHIOMETRIC DEFECTS

Stoichiometric compounds are those where the numbers of the different
types of atoms or ions present are exactly in the ratios indicated by their
chemical formulae. They obey the law of constant composition that ‘the
same chemical compound always contains the same elements in the same
composition by weight’. At one time these were called Daltonide com-
pounds, in contrast to Berthollide or nonstoichiometric compounds where
the chemical composition of a compound was variable, not constant.

Two types of defects may be observed in stoichiometric compounds,
called Schottky and Frenkel defects respectively. At absolute zero, crystals
tend to have a perfectly ordered arrangement. As the temperature in-
creases, the amount of thermal vibration of ions in their lattice sites
increases, and if the vibration of a particular ion becomes large enough, it
may jump out of its lattice site. This constitutes a point defect. The higher
the temperature, the greater the chance that lattice sites may be un-
occupied. Since the number of defects depends on‘the temperature, they
are sometimes called thermodynamic defects.

Schottky defects @O-O-O-@-O
T H T t

A Schottky defect consists of a pair of ‘holes’ in the crystal lattice. One O-O-O-O-®
Positive ion and one negative ion are absent (see Figure 3.13). This sort of
defect Occurs mainly in highly ionic compounds where the positive and O-@E-@ OO”
high (og ions are of a similar size, and hence the coordination number is

gn (usually 8 or 6), for example NaCl, CsCl, KCI and KBr. -+ A) -(B}-{ A)

The number of Schottky defects formed per cm* (n,) is given by @

Ww
me Nexp(—37)

‘ i ,
where N is the number of sites per cm* that could be left vacant, W, is the

Work necessary to form a Schottky defect, k is the gas constant and T the

absolute temperature.

Frenkel defects O-@O-O-@-@
A Frenkel defect consi ice si ; ‘ ae,

vren onsists of a vacant lattice site (a ‘hole’), and the io @ C
wi : n ~ -@)--@)
posal phowa have occupied the site now occupies an interstitial @ ©) @) ®

igure 3.14),

ss O-O-O-

Pi Ay are generally smaller than the anions. Thus it is easier to ©) OO
into alternative interstitial positions, and consi it ii i A
si inter : equently it is ®-
Wype otden find the positive ions occupying interstitial positions. This © - ) “©-®)
Ct is favoured by a large difference in size between the Positive Figure 3.14 Frenkel defect

: . fect.
