59.2 The evolution of reproduction among the vertebrates has led to
internalization of fertilization and development.

Fertilization and Development

Vertebrate sexual reproduction evolved in the ocean before
vertebrates colonized the land. The females of most species
of marine bony fish produce eggs or ova in batches and re-
lease them into the water. The males generally release their
sperm into the water containing the eggs, where the union
of the free gametes occurs. This process is known as exter-
nal fertilization.

Although seawater is not a hostile environment for ga-
metes, it does cause the gametes to disperse rapidly, so
their release by females and males must be almost simul-
taneous. Thus, most marine fish restrict the release of
their eggs and sperm to a few brief and well-defined peri-
ods. Some reproduce just once a year, while others do so
more frequently. There are few seasonal cues in the
ocean that organisms can use as signals for synchronizing
reproduction, but one all-pervasive signal is the cycle of
the moon. Once each month, the moon approaches
closer to the earth than usual, and when it does, its in-
creased gravitational attraction causes somewhat higher
tides. Many marine organisms sense the tidal changes and
entrain the production and release of their gametes to the
lunar cycle.

The invasion of land posed the new danger of desicca-
tion, a problem that was especially severe for the small
and vulnerable gametes. On land, the gametes could not
simply be released near each other, as they would soon
dry up and perish. Consequently, there was intense selec-
tive pressure for terrestrial vertebrates (as well as some
groups of fish) to evolve internal fertilization, that is,
the introduction of male gametes into the female repro-

 

1198 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

ductive tract. By this means, fertilization still occurs in a
nondesiccating environment, even when the adult ani-
mals are fully terrestrial. The vertebrates that practice in-
ternal fertilization have three strategies for embryonic
and fetal development:

1. Oviparity. This is found in some bony fish, most
reptiles, some cartilaginous fish, some amphibians, a
few mammals, and all birds. The eggs, after being fer-
tilized internally, are deposited outside the mother’s
body to complete their development.

2. Ovoviviparity. This is found in some bony fish (in-
cluding mollies, guppies, and mosquito fish), some
cartilaginous fish, and many reptiles. The fertilized
eggs are retained within the mother to complete their
development, but the embryos still obtain all of their
nourishment from the egg yolk. The young are fully
developed when they are hatched and released from
the mother.

3. Viviparity. This is found in most cartilaginous
fish, some amphibians, a few reptiles, and almost all
mammals. The young develop within the mother
and obtain nourishment directly from their moth-
er’s blood, rather than from the egg yolk (fig-
ure 59.4).

 

Fertilization is external in most fish but internal in most
other vertebrates. Depending upon the relationship of
the developing embryo to the mother and egg, those
vertebrates with internal fertilization may be classified
as oviparous, ovoviviparous, or viviparous.

 

FIGURE 59.4
Viviparous fish
carry live, mobile
young within their
bodies. The young
complete their
development within
the body of the
mother and are then
released as small but
competent adults.
Here a lemon shark
has just given birth
toa young shark,
which is still
attached by the
umbilical cord.
