Embryonic Development and
Vertebrate Evolution

The primitive chordates that gave rise to vertebrates
were initially slow-moving, filter-feeding animals with
relatively low metabolic rates. Many of the unique verte-
brate adaptations that contribute to their varied ecologi-
cal roles involve structures that arise from neural crest
cells. The vertebrates became fast-swimming predators
with much higher metabolic rates. This accelerated me-
tabolism permitted a greater level of activity than was
possible among the more primitive chordates. Other evo-
lutionary changes associated with the derivatives of the
neural crest provided better detection of prey, a greatly
improved ability to orient spatially during prey capture,
and the means to respond quickly to sensory information.
The evolution of the neural crest and of the structures
derived from it were thus crucial steps in the evolution of
the vertebrates (figure 60.17).

Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny

The patterns of development in the vertebrate groups that
evolved most recently reflect in many ways the simpler pat-
terns occurring among earlier forms. Thus, mammalian de-
velopment and bird development are elaborations of reptile
development, which is an elaboration of amphibian devel-
opment, and so forth (figure 60.18). During the develop-
ment of a mammalian embryo, traces can be seen of ap-
pendages and organs that are apparently relicts of more
primitive chordates. For example, at certain stages a human
embryo possesses pharyngeal slits, which occur in all chor-
dates and are homologous to the gill slits of fish. At later
stages, a human embryo also has a tail.

In a sense, the patterns of development in chordate
groups has built up in incremental steps over the evolu-
tionary history of those groups. The developmental in-
structions for each new form seem to have been layered
on top of the previous instructions, contributing addi-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

= Chordates Vertebrates
Y 5
Brain,
_ Pharynx Blastula > spinal cord,
Lining of h spinal nerves
respiratory <——————
tract ¥
|. Gastrula >| Ectoderm >(eecceel jo—»| Neural
nerve cord crest
Lining of | |
digestive <1
tract Epidermis, skin, Gill arches,
hair, epithelium, sensory ganglia,
inner ear, lens Schwann cells,
of eye adrenal medulla
Pancreas Liver |
Mesoderm > Notochord
Outer covering ;
of intemal ~< Integuments Gory > Heart
GIES system
Blood Vessels
Lining of
thomcb nd Gonads ) >(Somites —> Skeleton
abdominal
cavities Y 1. Segmented
muscles
Demis
FIGURE 60.17

Derivation of the major tissue types. The three germ layers that form during gastrulation give rise to all organs and tissues in the body,
but the neural crest cells that form from ectodermal tissue give rise to structures that are prevalent in the vertebrate animal such as gill
arches and Schwann cells.

1228 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 
