Receptors That Act as Gene Regulators

Some intracellular receptors act as regulators of gene
transcription. Among them are the receptors for steroid
hormones, such as cortisol, estrogen, and progesterone, as
well as the receptors for a number of other small, lipid-
soluble signal molecules, such as vitamin D and thyroid
hormone. All of these receptors have similar structures;
the genes that code for them may well be the evolutionary
descendants of a single ancestral gene. Because of their
structural similarities, they are all part of the intracellular
receptor superfamily.

Each of these receptors has a binding site for DNA. In
its inactive state, the receptor typically cannot bind DNA
because an inhibitor protein occupies the binding site.
When the signal molecule binds to another site on the re-
ceptor, the inhibitor is released and the DNA binding site
is exposed (figure 7.5). The receptor then binds to a spe-
cific nucleotide sequence on the DNA, which activates (or,
in a few instances, suppresses) a particular gene, usually lo-
cated adjacent to the regulatory site.

The lipid-soluble signal molecules that intracellular re-
ceptors recognize tend to persist in the blood far longer
than water-soluble signals. Most water-soluble hormones
break down within minutes, and neurotransmitters within
seconds or even milliseconds. A steroid hormone like corti-
sol or estrogen, on the other hand, persists for hours.

The target cell’s response to a lipid-soluble cell signal
can vary enormously, depending on the nature of the cell.
This is true even when different target cells have the
same intracellular receptor, for two reasons: First, the
binding site for the receptor on the target DNA differs
from one cell type to another, so that different genes are
affected when the signal-receptor complex binds to the
DNA, and second, most eukaryotic genes have complex
controls. We will discuss them in detail in chapter 16,
but for now it is sufficient to note that several different
regulatory proteins are usually involved in reading a eu-
karyotic gene. Thus the intracellular receptor interacts
with different signals in different tissues. Depending on
the cell-specific controls operating in different tissues,
the effect the intracellular receptor produces when it
binds with DNA will vary.

Receptors That Act as Enzymes

Other intracellular receptors act as enzymes. A very inter-
esting example is the receptor for the signal molecule, ni-
tric oxide (NO). A small gas molecule, NO diffuses readily
out of the cells where it is produced and passes directly into
neighboring cells, where it binds to the enzyme guanylyl
cyclase. Binding of NO activates the enzyme, enabling it to
catalyze the synthesis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate
(GMP), an intracellular messenger molecule that produces
cell-specific responses such as the relaxation of smooth
muscle cells.

Transcription
activating
domain

   

Signal molecule-
binding domain

DNA binding
site blocked

     

DNA binding
site exposed

 

FIGURE 7.5

How intracellular receptors regulate gene transcription. In
this model, the binding of the steroid hormone cortisol toa DNA
regulatory protein causes it to alter its shape. The inhibitor is
released, exposing the DNA binding site of the regulatory
protein. The DNA binds to the site, positioning a specific
nucleotide sequence over the transcription activating domain of
the receptor and initiating transcription.

NO has only recently been recognized as a signal mole-
cule in vertebrates. Already, however, a wide variety of
roles have been documented. For example, when the brain
sends a nerve signal relaxing the smooth muscle cells lining
the walls of vertebrate blood vessels, the signal molecule
acetylcholine released by the nerve near the muscle does
not interact with the muscle cell directly. Instead, it causes
nearby epithelial cells to produce NO, which then causes
the smooth muscle to relax, allowing the vessel to expand
and thereby increase blood flow.

 

Many target cells possess intracellular receptors, which
are activated by substances that pass through the
plasma membrane.

 

Chapter 7 Cell-Cell Interactions 127
