 

A CAUTIONARY WORD ON RADIU. RATIOS

 

 

53]

 

Though radius ratios indicate the correct structure in many cases, there
are a significant number of exceptions where they predict the wrong
structure. It is therefore worth examining the assumptions behind the
radius ratio concept, to see if they are valid. The assumptions are:

1. That accurate ionic radii are known.

2. That ions behave as hard inelastic spheres.

3. That stable-arrangements are only possible if the positive and negative
ions touch.

4. That ions are spherical in shape.

5. That ions always adopt the highest possible coordination number.

6. That bonding is 100% ionic.

Values for ionic radii cannot be measured absolutely, but are estimated.
They are not completely accurate or reliable. Though it is possible to
measure the interatomic distance between two different ions very ac-
curately by X-ray crystallography, it is much less certain how to divide
the distance between the two ions to obtain ionic radii. Furthermore the
radius of an ion is not constant but changes depending on its environment.
In particular the radius changes when the coordination number changes.
The radii usually quoted are for a coordination number of 6, but the radius
effectively increases 3% when the coordination number is changed from 6
to 8, and decreases 6% when the coordination number changes from 6 to 4.

Ions are not hard inelastic spheres. They are sometimes fitted into ‘holes’
that are slightly too small, that is the ions are compressed, and the lattice
may be distorted.

The assumption that the ions touch is necessary to calculate the critical
lower limit for radius ratios. In principle positive and negative ions should
touch, So as to get the ions close together, and get the maximum electro-
Static attraction. (Electrostatic attraction depends on the product of the
charges on the ions divided by the distance between them.) Theoretically
structures where the smaller metal ion ‘rattles’ in its hole (that is, it does
Not touch the neighbouring negative ions) should be unstable. A more
favourable electrostatic attraction should be obtained by adopting a
different geometric arrangement with a smaller coordination number, so
that the ions can get closer. It has already been shown that in the alkali
halides and alkaline earth oxides the NaCl structure with coordination
numbers of 6:6 is sometimes adopted when other structures are predicted

"y radius ratios, It follows that, since the smaller ion no longer fits the
ite it occupies, it must either ‘rattle’, or be compressed.
st Saiiiaas spherical? It is reasonable to consider ions with a noble gas
elements in Spherical This includes the majority of the ions formed by
where the ‘on groups. There are a small number of exceptions
These ions 4 € an inert pair (Ga*, In* TI*, Sn**, Pb?*, I*, B+).
a we not have a centre of symmetry, and the structures they form
contre from it Some istortion, with the metal ion slightly displaced off-
dorbitals xpected position. Transition metal ions with Partially filled
‘sare not spherical, though in contrast to inert pair distortion they

si
