 

[ LAYER STRUCTURES

 

 

 

Cadmium chloride structure

Cadmium chloride forms a closely related layer structure, but in this the
chloride ions occur approximately in a cubic close-packed arrangement
(ABCABC. ..).
Layer structures are intermediate in type between the extreme cases of:
1. A totally ionic crystal with a regular arrangement of ions and strong
electrostatic forces in all directions.
2. A crystal in which small discrete molecules are held together by weak
residual forces such as van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonds.

Nickel arsenide structure

The structure of nickel arsenide NiAs is related to the structure of Cdl, In
NiAs (Figure 3.11), the arsenic atoms form a hexagonal close-packed type
of lattice with nickel atoms occupying all of the octahedral sites between all
of the layers of arsenic atoms. (In Cdl, all of the octahedral sites between
half of the layers are filled, whilst with NiAs all of the octahedral sites
between all of the layers are filled.)
In the nickel arsenide structure each atom has six nearest neighbours of
the other type of atom. Each arsenic atom is surrounded by six nickel
atoms at the corners of a trigonal prism. Each nickel atom is surrounded
octahedrally by six arsenic atoms, but with two more nickel atoms suf-
ficiently close to be bonded to the original nickel atom. This structure is
adopted by many transition elements combined with one of the heavier
elements from the p-block (Sn, As, Sb, Bi, S, Se, Te) in various alloys.
These are better regarded as intermetallic phases rather than true
compounds. They are opaque, have metallic lustre, and sometimes have a
variable composition.
For details of other ionic structures, such as perovskite and spinels, see
Chapter 20 and the Further Reading (Adams, Addison, Douglas McDaniel
and Alexander, Greenwood, Wells) at the end of this chapter.

Structures containing polyatomic ions

There are many ionic compounds of types AX and AX; where A, or X, or
both fons are replaced by complex ions. When the complex ion is roughly
spherical, the ions often adopt one of the more symmetrical structures
' pire above. Jons such as SO2-, ClOZ and NH? are almost spherical.
(fs dition, the transition metal complex (Co(NH3)¢]I2 adopts the CaF,
omar) structure. K,[PtCl,] adopts an anti-fluorite structure, which is the
ne a a fluorite Structure except that the sites occupied by positive and
[Sich] te are interchanged. Both ions may be complex: [Ni(H2O)<]
(CN-, . example, forms a slightly distorted CsC) structure. Other ions
rotation” SH7) sometimes attain effective spherical symmetry by free
CSSH. + Or by random orientation. Examples include CsCN, TICN and

 

Figure 3.11 Nickel arsenide
structure.

2ORIIG, Kamerr
OF serneomp

cron
SITY
wd

YG wearys:
Aza ge... 7

GAZ Op
