Second and Third Trimesters

The second and third trimesters are characterized by the
tremendous growth and development required for the via-

bility of the baby after its birth.

Second Trimester

Bones actively enlarge during the fourth month (figure
60.23d), and by the end of the month, the mother can feel
the baby kicking. During the fifth month, the head and
body grow a covering of fine hair. This hair, called lanugo,
is another evolutionary relict but is lost later in develop-
ment. By the end of the fifth month, the rapid heartbeat of
the fetus can be heard with a stethoscope, although it can
also be detected as early as 10 weeks with a fetal monitor.
The fetus has grown to about 175 millimeters in length and
attained a weight of about 225 grams. Growth begins in
earnest in the sixth month; by the end of that month, the
baby weighs 600 grams (1.3 Ibs) and is over 300 millimeters
(1 ft) long. However, most of its prebirth growth is still to
come. The baby cannot yet survive outside the uterus with-
out special medical intervention.

 

Third Trimester

The third trimester is predominantly a period of growth
rather than development. The weight of the fetus doubles
several times, but this increase in bulk is not the only kind
of growth that occurs. Most of the major nerve tracts in the
brain, as well as many new neurons (nerve cells), are
formed during this period. The developing brain produces
neurons at an average rate estimated at more than 250,000
per minute! Neurological growth is far from complete at
the end of the third trimester, when birth takes place. If the
fetus remained in the uterus until its neurological develop-
ment was complete, it would grow too large for safe deliv-
ery through the pelvis. Instead, the infant is born as soon as
the probability of its survival is high, and its brain contin-
ues to develop and produce new neurons for months after

birth.

 

The critical stages of human development take place
quite early, and the following six months are essentially
a period of growth. The growth of the brain is not yet
complete, however, by the end of the third trimester,
and must be completed postnatally.

 

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1235
