60.3 Gastrulation forms the three germ layers of the embryo.

The Process of Gastrulation

The first visible results of cytoplasmic distribution and cell
position within the blastula can be seen immediately after
the completion of cleavage. Certain groups of cells invagi-
nate (dent inward) and involute (roll inward) from the sur-
face of the blastula in a carefully orchestrated activity called
gastrulation. The events of gastrulation determine the
basic developmental pattern of the vertebrate embryo. By
the end of gastrulation, the cells of the embryo have re-
arranged into three primary germ layers: ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm. The cells in each layer have
very different developmental fates. In general, the ecto-
derm is destined to form the epidermis and neural tissue;
the mesoderm gives rise to connective tissue, skeleton,
muscle, and vascular elements; and the endoderm forms the
lining of the gut and its derivatives (table 60.2).

How is cell movement during gastrulation brought
about? Apparently, migrating cells creep over stationary
cells by means of actin filament contractions that change
the shapes of the migrating cells affecting an invagination
of blastula tissue. Each cell that moves possesses particular
cell surface polysaccharides, which adhere to similar poly-
saccharides on the surfaces of the other moving cells. This
interaction between cell surface molecules enables the mi-
grating cells to adhere to one another and move as a single
mass (see chapter 7).

Just as the pattern of cleavage divisions in different
groups of vertebrates depends heavily on the amount and
distribution of yolk in the egg, so the pattern of gastrula-
tion among vertebrate groups depends on the shape of the
blastulas produced during cleavage.

   

Ectoderm NY

 

Endoderm
(a) (b)
FIGURE 60.10

Table 60.2 Developmental Fates of the

Primary Cell Layers
Ectoderm __ Epidermis, central nervous system, sense
organs, neural crest
Mesoderm — Skeleton, muscles, blood vessels, heart, gonads
Endoderm __ Lining of digestive and respiratory tracts; liver,

pancreas

Gastrulation in Primitive Chordates

In primitive chordates such as lancelets, which develop
from symmetrical blastulas, gastrulation begins as the sur-
face of the blastula invaginates into the blastocoel. About
half of the blastula’s cells move into the interior of the blas-
tula, forming a structure that looks something like an in-
dented tennis ball. Eventually, the inward-moving wall of
cells pushes up against the opposite side of the blastula and
then stops moving. The resulting two-layered, cup-shaped
embryo is the gastrula (figure 60.10). The hollow structure
resulting from the invagination is called the archenteron,
and it is the progenitor of the gut. The opening of the
archenteron, the future anus, is known as the blastopore.

This process produces an embryo with two cell layers:
an outer ectoderm and an inner endoderm. Soon afterward,
a third cell layer, the mesoderm, forms between the ecto-
derm and endoderm. In lancelets, the mesoderm forms
from pouches that pinch off the endoderm. The appear-
ance of these three primary cell layers sets the stage for all
subsequent tissue and organ differentiation.

Archenteron

()

Gastrulation in a lancelet. In these chordates, the endoderm is formed by invagination of surface cells (a, b). This produces the primitive
gut, or archenteron (¢). Mesoderm will later be formed from pouches off the endoderm.

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1221
