Vertebrate
Development

Concept Outline

60.1 Fertilization is the initial event in development.

Stages of Development. Fertilization of an egg cell by a
sperm occurs in three stages: penetration, activation of the
egg cell, and fusion of the two haploid nuclei.

60.2 Cell cleavage and the formation of a blastula set
the stage for later development.

Cell Cleavage Patterns. The cytoplasm of the zygote is
divided into smaller cells by a mitotic cell division in a
process called cleavage.

60.3 Gastrulation forms the three germ layers of the
embryo.

The Process of Gastrulation. Cells of the blastula
invaginate and involute to produce an outer ectoderm, an
inner endoderm layer, and a third layer, the mesoderm.

60.4 Body architecture is determined during the next
stages of embryonic development.

Developmental Processes during Neurulation. The
mesoderm of chordates forms a notochord, and the
overlying ectoderm rolls to produce a neural tube.

How Cells Communicate during Development. Cell-
to-cell contact plays a major role in selecting the paths
along which cells develop.

Embryonic Development and Vertebrate Evolution.
The embryonic development of a mammal includes stages
that are characteristic of more primitive vertebrates.
Extraembryonic Membranes. Embryonic cells form
several membranes outside of the embryo that provide
protection, nourishment, and gas exchange for the embryo.

60.5 Human development is divided into trimesters.

First Trimester. A blastocyst implants into the mother’s
endometrium, and the formation of body organs begins
during the third and fourth week.

Second and Third Trimesters. All of the major organs
of the body form during the first trimester and so further
growth and development take place during this time.

Birth and Postnatal Development. Birth occurs as a
result of uterine contractions; the human brain continues to
grow significantly after birth.

 

FIGURE 60.1

Development is the process that determines an organism’s
form and function. A human fetus at 18 weeks is not yet
halfway through the 38 weeks—about 9 months—it will spend
within its mother, but it has already developed many distinct
behaviors, such as the sucking reflex that is so important to
survival after birth.

eproduction in all but a few vertebrates unites two
aploid gametes to form a single diploid cell called a
zygote. The zygote develops by a process of cell division
and differentiation into a complex multicellular organism,
composed of many different tissues and organs (figure
60.1). Although the process of development is a continuous
series of events with some of the details varying among dif-
ferent vertebrate groups, we will examine vertebrate devel-
opment in six stages. In this chapter, we will consider the
stages of development and conclude with a description of
the events that occur during human development.

1215
