Luteal Phase

After ovulation, LH stimulates the empty Graafian follicle
to develop into a structure called the corpus luteum (Latin,
“yellow body”). For this reason, the second half of the
menstrual cycle is referred to as the luteal phase of the
cycle. The corpus luteum secretes both estradiol and an-
other steroid hormone, progesterone. The high blood lev-
els of estradiol and progesterone during the luteal phase
now exert negative feedback inhibition of FSH and LH se-
cretion by the anterior pituitary gland. This inhibition dur-
ing the luteal phase is in contrast to the stimulation exerted
by estradiol on LH secretion at midcycle, which caused
ovulation. The inhibitory effect of estradiol and proges-
terone on FSH and LH secretion after ovulation acts as a
natural contraceptive mechanism, preventing both the de-
velopment of additional follicles and continued ovulation.

During the follicular phase the granulosa cells secrete in-
creasing amounts of estradiol, which stimulates the growth
of the endometrium. Hence, this portion of the cycle is also
referred to as the proliferative phase of the endometrium.
During the luteal phase of the cycle, the combination of
estradiol and progesterone cause the endometrium to be-
come more vascular, glandular, and enriched with glycogen
deposits. Because of the endometrium’s glandular appear-
ance, this portion of the cycle is known as the secretory
phase of the endometrium (figure 59.21).

In the absence of fertilization, the corpus luteum triggers
its own atrophy, or regression, toward the end of the luteal
phase. It does this by secreting hormones (estradiol and prog-
esterone) that inhibit the secretion of LH, the hormone
needed for its survival. In many mammals, atrophy of the cor-
pus luteum is assisted by luteolysin, a paracrine regulator be-
lieved to be a prostaglandin. The disappearance of the corpus
luteum results in an abrupt decline in the blood concentra-
tion of estradiol and progesterone at the end of the luteal
phase, causing the built-up endometrium to be sloughed off
with accompanying bleeding. This process is called menstru-
ation, and the portion of the cycle in which it occurs is known
as the menstrual phase of the endometrium.

If the ovulated oocyte is fertilized, however, regression of
the corpus luteum and subsequent menstruation is averted
by the tiny embryo! It does this by secreting human chori-
onic gonadotropin (hCG), an LH-like hormone produced
by the chorionic membrane of the embryo. By maintaining
the corpus luteum, hCG keeps the levels of estradiol and
progesterone high and thereby prevents menstruation,
which would terminate the pregnancy. Because hCG comes
from the embryonic chorion and not the mother, it is the
hormone that is tested for in all pregnancy tests.

Menstruation is absent in mammals with an estrous
cycle. Although such mammals do cyclically shed cells from
the endometrium, they don’t bleed in the process. The es-
trous cycle is divided into four phases: proestrus, estrus,
metestrus, and diestrus, which correspond to the prolifera-
tive, mid-cycle, secretory, and menstrual phases of the en-
dometrium in the menstrual cycle.

 

 

 
     
     
 
   

Levels of
gonadotropic
hormones in blood

0 7 21 28 days

Ovarian cycle

@O®® @E®
aa Ovulation pac regression

Hormone blood levels

   

  

 

0 cs

 
 

Endometrial changes
during menstrual cycle

 

Menstrual Proliferative
phase phase

T T
0 7 14

Ovulation Menstrual

phase

Secretory
phase

 

 
    

T T
21 28 days

 

 

 

FIGURE 59.21

The human menstrual cycle. The growth and thickening of the
endometrial (uterine) lining is stimulated by estradiol and
progesterone. The decline in the levels of these two hormones
triggers menstruation, the sloughing off of built-up endometrial
tissue.

 

The ovarian follicles develop under FSH stimulation,
and one follicle ovulates under LH stimulation. During
the follicular and luteal phases, the hormones secreted
by the ovaries stimulate the development of the
endometrium, so an embryo can implant there if
fertilization has occurred. A secondary oocyte is
released from an ovary at ovulation, and it only
completes meiosis if it is fertilized.

 

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1209
