 

{ TRANSITIONS BETWEEN THE MAIN TYPES OF BONDING

 

 

41

 

ions, and as these already exist, they have only to collide with the other
type of ion. For example, when testing a solution for chloride ions (by
adding silver nitrate solution), precipitation of AgCl is very rapid.

Agt + Cl — AgCl

Reactions of covalent compounds usually involve breaking a bond and
then substituting or adding another group. Energy is required to break the
bond. This is called the activation energy, and it often makes reactions
slow. Collisions between the reactant molecules will only causé reaction if
they have enough energy. For example, reduction of preparative amounts
of nitrobenzene to aniline takes several hours. Similarly the reaction of Hz
and Cl, is typically slow except in direct sunlight when the mixture may
explode!

CsHsNO, + 6[H] > CyHsNH, + 2H,O
H, > 2H
Ch, > 2Cl
H+Cl>HC

It is important to realize that bonds are not necessarily 100% covalent or
100% ionic, and that bonds of intermediate character exist. If a molecule
is made up of two identical atoms, both atoms have the same electro-
negativity, and so have an equal tendency to gain electrons. (See Chapter
6.) In such a molecule the electron pair forming the bond is equally shared
by both atoms. This constitutes a 100% covalent bond, and is sometimes
called a non-polar covalent bond.

More commonly molecules are formed between different types of atoms,
and the electronegativity of the two atoms differs. Consider for example
the molecules CIF and HF. Fluorine is the most electronegative atom, and
it attracts electrons more strongly than any other element when covalently
bonded. The bonding electrons spend more time round the F than round
the other atom, so the F atom has a very small negative charge 6— and the
atom (Cl or H) has a small positive charge 6+.

6+ 8 6+ 8
CI——_F H——F

iaouel these bonds are largely covalent. they possess a small amount of
mmoles and are sometimes called polar covalent bonds. In such
bya dist 78 Positive charge, and an equal negative charge, are separated
i ‘ance. This produces a permanent dipole moment in the molecule.

tine wp oe moment Measures the tendency of the molecule to turn and
high viele ee when placed in an electric field. Polar molecules have a
ant The Gone and non-polar molecules have a low dielectric
enser with sreseettic Constant is the ratio of the capacitance of a
© cond e material between the plates, to the capacitance of the
€nser with a vacuum between them. By measuring the capaci-

tance wi
ith the substance between the plates and then with a vacuum, we

const
cond
sam

 
