 

 

 

PROBLEMS | (27]
Ist period Is elements in this period 2
2nd period = 2s 2p elements in this period 8
3rd period . 3s 3p ‘elements in this period 8

4th period 4s 3d 4p elements in this period 18
5th period 5s 4d 5p elements in this period 18
6th period 6s 4f Sd 6p elements in this period 32

The alkali metals appear in a vertical column labelled Group 1, in
which all elements have one s electron in their outer shell, and hence
have similar properties. Thus when one element in a group reacts with a
reagent, the other elements in the group will probably react similarly,
forming compounds which have similar formulae. Thus reactions of new
compounds and their formulae may be predicted by analogy with known
compounds, Similarly the noble gases all appear in a vertical column
labelled Group 18, and all have a complete outer shell of electrons. This
is called the long form of the periodic table. It has many advantages, the
most important being that it eimphasizes the similarity of properties
within a group and the relation between the group and the electron
structure. The d-block elements are referred to as the transition elements
as they are situated between the s- and p-blocks.

Hydrogen and helium differ from the rest of the elements because there
are no p orbitals in the first shell. Helium obviously belongs to Group 18,
the noble gases, which are chemically inactive because their outer shell of
electrons is full. Hydrogen is more difficult to place in a group. It could be
included in Group 1 because it has one s electron in its outer shell,
is univalent and commonly forms univalent positive ions. However,
hydrogen is not a metal and is a gas whilst Li, Na, K, Rb and Cs are
Metals and are solids. Similarly, hydrogen could be included in Group 17
because it is one electron short of a complete shell, or in Group 14 because
Ms outer shell is half full. Hydrogen does not resemble the alkali metals,
the halogens or Group 14 very closely. Hydrogen atoms are extremely
small, and have many unique properties, Thus there is a case for placing
hydrogen in a group on its own.

FURTHER READING

Calas. M. and Porter, R.N. (1971) Atoms and Molecules, Benjamin, New York.
reenwood, N.N. (1980) Principles of Atomic Orbitals, Royal Institute of
Chemistry Monographs for Teachers No. 8, 3rd ed., London.

PROBLEMS

1 Name the first five Series of lines that occur in the atomic spectrum of
drogen. Indicate the region in the electromagnetic spectrum where

these series occur, and give a general equation for the wavenumber
applicable to all the series,
