G-Protein-Linked Receptors

A third class of cell surface receptors acts indirectly on
enzymes or ion channels in the plasma membrane with
the aid of an assisting protein, called a guanosine triphos-
phate (GTP)-binding protein, or G protein (figure 7.6c).
Receptors in this category use G proteins to mediate pas-
sage of the signal from the membrane surface into the
cell interior.

How G-Protein-Linked Receptors Work. G pro-
teins are mediators that initiate a diffusible signal in the
cytoplasm. They form a transient link between the recep-
tor on the cell surface and the signal pathway within the
cytoplasm. Importantly, this signal has a relatively short
life span whose active age is determined by GTP. When
a signal arrives, it finds the G protein nestled into the G-
protein-linked receptor on the cytoplasmic side of the
plasma membrane. Once the signal molecule binds to the
receptor, the G-protein-linked receptor changes shape.
This change in receptor shape twists the G protein, caus-
ing it to bind GTP. The G protein can now diffuse away
from the receptor. The “activated” complex of a G pro-
tein with attached GTP is then free to initiate a number
of events. However, this activation is short-lived, because
GTP has a relatively short life span (seconds to minutes).
This elegant arrangement allows the G proteins to acti-
vate numerous pathways, but only in a transient manner.
In order for a pathway to “stay on,” there must be a con-
tinuous source of incoming extracellular signals. When
the rate of external signal drops off, the pathway shuts
down.

The Largest Family of Cell Surface Receptors. — Sci-
entists have identified more than 100 different G-
protein-linked receptors, more than any other kind of
cell surface receptor. They mediate an incredible range
of cell signals, including peptide hormones, neurotrans-
mitters, fatty acids, and amino acids. Despite this great
variation in specificity, however, all G-protein-linked re-
ceptors whose amino acid sequences are known have a
similar structure. They are almost certainly closely re-
lated in an evolutionary sense, arising from a single an-
cestral sequence. Each of these G-protein-linked recep-
tors is a seven-pass transmembrane protein (figure
7.7)—a single polypeptide chain that threads back and
forth across the lipid bilayer seven times, creating a chan-
nel through the membrane.

Evolutionary Origin of G-Protein-Linked Receptors.
As research revealed the structure of G-protein-linked re-
ceptors, an interesting pattern emerged: the same seven-
pass structural motif is seen again and again, in sensory re-
ceptors such as the light-activated rhodopsin protein in the
vertebrate eye, in the light-activated bacteriorhodopsin
proton pump that plays a key role in bacterial photosynthe-
sis, in the receptor that recognizes the yeast mating factor

 

Protein signal-binding site

FIGURE 7.7
The G-protein-linked receptor is a seven-pass transmembrane
protein.

protein discussed earlier, and in many other sensory recep-
tors. Vertebrate rhodopsin is in fact a G-protein-linked re-
ceptor and utilizes a G protein. Bacteriorhodopsin is not.
The occurrence of the seven-pass structural motif in both,
and in so many other G-protein-linked receptors, suggests
that this motif is a very ancient one, and that G-protein-
linked receptors may have evolved from sensory receptors
of single-celled ancestors.

Discovery of G Proteins. Martin Rodbell of the Na-
tional Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and
Alfred Gilman of the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center received the 1994 Nobel Prize for Medi-
cine or Physiology for their work on G proteins. Rodbell
and Gilman’s work has proven to have significant ramifi-
cations. G proteins are involved in the mechanism em-
ployed by over half of all medicines in use today. Study-
ing G proteins will vastly expand our understanding of
how these medicines work. Furthermore, the investiga-
tion of G proteins should help elucidate how cells com-
municate in general and how they contribute to the over-
all physiology of organisms. As Gilman says, G proteins
are “involved in everything from sex in yeast to cognition
in humans.”

 

Most receptors are located on the surface of the plasma
membrane. Chemically gated ion channels open or
close when signal molecules bind to the channel,
allowing specific ions to diffuse through. Enzyme
receptors typically activate intracellular proteins by
phosphorylation. G-protein-linked receptors activate an
intermediary protein, which then effects the
intracellular change.

 

Chapter 7 Cell-Cell Interactions 129
