with the anterior portion of the brain, the forebrain.
Nearby clusters of ectodermal cells associated with the
neural crest cells thicken into placodes, which are distinct
from neural crest cells although they arise from similar cel-
lular interactions. Placodes subsequently develop into parts
of the sense organs in the head. The neural crest and asso-
ciated placodes exist in two lateral strips, which is why the
vertebrate sense organs that develop from them are paired.

Neural crest cells located in more posterior positions
have very different developmental fates. These cells mi-
grate away from the neural tube to other locations in the
head and trunk, where they form connections between the
neural tube and the surrounding tissues. At these new loca-
tions, they contribute to the development of a variety of
structures that are particularly characteristic of the verte-
brates, several of which are discussed below. The migration
of neural crest cells is unique in that it is not simply a
change in the relative positions of cells, such as that seen in
gastrulation. Instead, neural crest cells actually pass
through other tissues.

The Gill Chamber

Primitive chordates such as lancelets are filter-feeders,
using the rapid beating of cilia to draw water into their
bodies through slits in their pharynx. These pharyngeal
slits evolved into the vertebrate gill chamber, a structure
that provides a greatly improved means of respiration. The
evolution of the gill chamber was certainly a key event in
the transition from filter-feeding to active predation.

In the development of the gill chamber, some of the
neural crest cells form cartilaginous bars between the em-
bryonic pharyngeal slits. Other neural crest cells induce
portions of the mesoderm to form muscles along the carti-
lage, while still others form neurons that carry impulses be-
tween the nerve cord and these muscles. A major blood
vessel called the aortic arch passes through each of the em-
bryonic bars. Lined by still more neural crest cells, these

Neural crest

  

(e)

FIGURE 60.14 (continued)

Neural crest A 7

bars, with their internal blood supply, become highly
branched and form the gills of the adult.

Because the stiff bars of the gill chamber can be bent in-
ward by powerful muscles controlled by nerves, the whole
structure is a very efficient pump that drives water past the
gills. The gills themselves act as highly efficient oxygen ex-
changers, greatly increasing the respiratory capacity of the
animals that possess them.

Elaboration of the Nervous System

Some neural crest cells migrate ventrally toward the noto-
chord and form sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglia
(see chapter 54). Others become specialized as Schwann
cells, which insulate nerve fibers and permit the rapid con-
duction of nerve impulses. Still others form the autonomic
ganglia and the adrenal medulla. Cells in the adrenal
medulla secrete epinephrine when stimulated by the sym-
pathetic division of the autonomic nervous system during
the fight-or-flight reaction. The similarity in the chemical
nature of the hormone epinephrine and the neurotransmit-
ter norepinephrine, released by sympathetic neurons, is un-
derstandable—both adrenal medullary cells and sympa-
thetic neurons derive from the neural crest.

Sensory Organs and Skull

A variety of sense organs develop from the placodes. In-
cluded among them are the olfactory (smell) and lateral line
(primitive hearing) organs discussed in chapter 55. Neural
crest cells contribute to tooth development and to some of
the facial and cranial bones of the skull.

 

The appearance of the neural crest in the developing
embryo marked the beginning of the first truly
vertebrate phase of development, as many of the
structures characteristic of vertebrates derive directly
or indirectly from neural crest cells.

 

Neural tube

Neural crest
Somite

   

Coelom
Notochord

Archenteron
(digestive cavity)

(d) The neural groove eventually closes to form a hollow tube. (¢) As the tube closes, some of the cells from the dorsal margin of the neural
tube differentiate into the neural crest, which is characteristic of vertebrates.

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1225
