Fish and Amphibians

Most fish and amphibians, unlike other vertebrates, repro-
duce by means of external fertilization.

Fish

Fertilization in most species of bony fish (teleosts) is exter-
nal, and the eggs contain only enough yolk to sustain the
developing embryo for a short time. After the initial supply
of yolk has been exhausted, the young fish must seek its
food from the waters around it. Development is speedy,
and the young that survive mature rapidly. Although thou-
sands of eggs are fertilized in a single mating, many of the
resulting individuals succumb to microbial infection or pre-
dation, and few grow to maturity.

In marked contrast to the bony fish, fertilization in most
cartilaginous fish is internal. The male introduces sperm
into the female through a modified pelvic fin. Development
of the young in these vertebrates is generally viviparous.

Amphibians

The amphibians invaded the land without fully adapting
to the terrestrial environment, and their life cycle is still
tied to the water. Fertilization is external in most amphib-
ians, just as it is in most species of bony fish. Gametes
from both males and females are released through the
cloaca. Among the frogs and toads, the male grasps the fe-
male and discharges fluid containing the sperm onto the
eggs as they are released into the water (figure 59.5). Al-
though the eggs of most amphibians develop in the water,
there are some interesting exceptions. In two species of
frogs, for example, the eggs develop in the vocal sacs and
stomach, and the young frogs leave through their moth-
er’s mouth (figure 59.6)!

The time required for development of amphibians is
much longer than that for fish, but amphibian eggs do not
include a significantly greater amount of yolk. Instead, the
process of development in most amphibians is divided into
embryonic, larval, and adult stages, in a way reminiscent of
the life cycles found in some insects. The embryo develops
within the egg, obtaining nutrients from the yolk. After
hatching from the egg, the aquatic larva then functions as a
free-swimming, food-gathering machine, often for a con-
siderable period of time. The larvae may increase in size
rapidly; some tadpoles, which are the larvae of frogs and
toads, grow in a matter of weeks from creatures no bigger
than the tip of a pencil into individuals as big as a goldfish.
When the larva has grown to a sufficient size, it undergoes
a developmental transition, or metamorphosis, into the ter-
restrial adult form.

 

The eggs of most bony fish and amphibians are
fertilized externally. In amphibians the eggs develop
into a larval stage that undergoes metamorphosis.

 

 

FIGURE 59.5
‘The eggs of frogs are fertilized externally. When frogs mate,
as these two are doing, the clasp of the male induces the female to
release a large mass of mature eggs, over which the male
discharges his sperm.

l 2
(@)

()

  
 

Fe

      

(6) = @

FIGURE 59.6
Different ways young develop in frogs. (a) In the poison arrow
frog, the male carries the tadpoles on his back. (2) In the female
Surinam frog, froglets develop from eggs in special brooding
pouches on the back. (0 In the South American pygmy marsupial
frog, the female carries the developing larvae in a pouch on her
back. (@) Tadpoles of the Darwin’s frog develop into froglets in
the vocal pouch of the male and emerge from the mouth.

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1199
