  
 

Acrosome Cortical granule

secreting contents
into perivitelline
space

 

    
 

Vitelline “S
membrane r ,
‘Acrosomal
process j
Egg plasma
membrane
Altered vitelline ae
membrane prevents
further sperm
penetration
@
FIGURE 60.3

Sperm nucleus

 

Sperm penetration of a sea urchin egg. (2) The stages of penetration. (#) An electron micrograph (50,000) of penetration. Penetration

in both invertebrate and vertebrate eggs is similar.

for discussion of membrane potential) that prevents other
sperm from fusing with the oocyte membrane. In addition
to these changes, sperm penetration can have three other
effects on the egg. First, in mammals it stimulates the chro-
mosomes in the egg nucleus to complete the second mei-
otic division, producing two egg nuclei. One of these nuclei
is extruded from the egg as a second polar body (see chap-
ter 59), leaving a single haploid egg nucleus within the egg.

Second, sperm penetration in some animals triggers
movements of the egg cytoplasm around the point of sperm
entry. These movements ultimately establish the bilateral
symmetry of the developing animal. In frogs, for example,
sperm penetration causes an outer pigmented cap of egg
cytoplasm to rotate toward the point of entry, uncovering a
gray crescent of interior cytoplasm opposite the point of
penetration (figure 60.4). The position of the gray crescent
determines the orientation of the first cell division. A line
drawn between the point of sperm entry and the gray cres-
cent would bisect the right and left halves of the future
adult. Third, activation is characterized by a sharp increase
in protein synthesis and an increase in metabolic activity in
general. Experiments demonstrate that the protein synthe-
sis in the activated oocyte is coded by mRNA that was pre-
viously produced and already present in the cytoplasm of
the unfertilized egg cell.

In some vertebrates, it is possible to activate an egg
without the entry of a sperm, simply by pricking the egg
membrane. An egg that is activated in this way may go on
to develop parthenogenetically. A few kinds of amphibians,
fish, and reptiles rely entirely on parthenogenetic repro-
duction in nature, as we mentioned in chapter 59.

Sperm

Gray
crescent

Movement of pigment
opposite sperm entry

FIGURE 60.4
Gray crescent formation in frog eggs. The gray crescent
appears opposite the point of penetration by the sperm.

Nuclei Fusion

The third stage of fertilization is the fusion of the entering
sperm nucleus with the haploid egg nucleus to form the
diploid nucleus of the zygote. This fusion is triggered by
the activation of the egg. If a sperm nucleus is microin-
jected into an egg without activating the egg, the two nu-
clei will not fuse. The nature of the signals that are ex-
changed between the two nuclei, or sent from one to the
other, is not known.

 

The three stages of fertilization are penetration,
activation, and nuclei fusion. Penetration initiates a
complex series of developmental events, including
major movements of cytoplasm, which eventually lead
to the fusion of the egg and sperm nuclei.

 

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1217
