Birth Control

In most vertebrates, copulation is associated
solely with reproduction. Reflexive behavior
that is deeply ingrained in the female limits
sexual receptivity to those periods of the sex-
ual cycle when she is fertile. In humans and a
few species of apes, the female can be sexually
receptive throughout her reproductive cycle,
and this extended receptivity to sexual inter-
course serves a second important function—it
reinforces pair-bonding, the emotional rela-
tionship between two individuals living to-
gether.

Not all human couples want to initiate a
pregnancy every time they have sexual inter-
course, yet sexual intercourse may be a nec-
essary and important part of their emotional
lives together. The solution to this dilemma
is to find a way to avoid reproduction with-
out avoiding sexual intercourse; this ap-
proach is commonly called birth control or
contraception. A variety of approaches dif-
fering in effectiveness and in their accept-
ability to different couples are commonly
taken to achieve birth control (figure 59.22
and table 59.2).

Abstinence

The simplest and most reliable way to avoid pregnancy is
not to have sexual intercourse at all. Of all methods of birth
control, this is the most certain. It is also the most limiting,
because it denies a couple the emotional support of a sexual
relationship.

Sperm Blockage

If sperm cannot reach the uterus, fertilization cannot
occur. One way to prevent the delivery of sperm is to en-
case the penis within a thin sheath, or condom. Many
males do not favor the use of condoms, which tend to de-
crease their sensory pleasure during intercourse. In prin-
ciple, this method is easy to apply and foolproof, but in
practice it has a failure rate of 3 to 15% because of incor-
rect use or inconsistent use. Nevertheless, it is the most
commonly employed form of birth control in the United
States. Condoms are also widely used to prevent the
transmission of AIDS and other sexually transmitted dis-
eases (STDs). Over a billion condoms were sold in the
United States last year.

A second way to prevent the entry of sperm into the
uterus is to place a cover over the cervix. The cover may
be a relatively tight-fitting cervical cap, which is worn for
days at a time, or a rubber dome called a diaphragm,
which is inserted immediately before intercourse. Because

FIGURE 59.22

 

Four common methods of birth control. () Condom; (#) diaphragm and
spermicidal jelly; (c) oral contraceptives; (d) Depo-Provera.

the dimensions of individual cervices vary, a cervical cap
or diaphragm must be fitted by a physician. Failure rates
average 4 to 25% for diaphragms, perhaps because of the
propensity to insert them carelessly when in a hurry. Fail-
ure rates for cervical caps are somewhat lower.

Sperm Destruction

A third general approach to birth control is to eliminate the
sperm after ejaculation. This can be achieved in principle
by washing out the vagina immediately after intercourse,
before the sperm have a chance to enter the uterus. Such a
procedure is called a douche (French, “wash”). The douche
method is difficult to apply well, because it involves a rapid
dash to the bathroom immediately after ejaculation and a
very thorough washing. Its failure rate is as high as 40%.
Alternatively, sperm delivered to the vagina can be de-
stroyed there with spermicidal jellies or foams. These treat-
ments generally require application immediately before in-
tercourse. Their failure rates vary from 10 to 25%. The use
of a spermicide with a condom increases the effectiveness
over each method used independently.

Prevention of Ovulation

Since about 1960, a widespread form of birth control in the
United States has been the daily ingestion of birth control
pills, or oral contraceptives, by women. These pills contain
analogues of progesterone, sometimes in combination with

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1211
