Amplifying the Signal: Protein
Kinase Cascades

Both enzyme-linked and G-protein-linked receptors re-
ceive signals at the surface of the cell, but as we’ve seen, the
target cell’s response rarely takes place there. In most cases
the signals are relayed to the cytoplasm or the nucleus by
second messengers, which influence the activity of one or
more enzymes or genes and so alter the behavior of the
cell. But most signaling molecules are found in such low
concentrations that their diffusion across the cytoplasm
would take a great deal of time unless the signal is ampli-
fied. Therefore, most enzyme-linked and G-protein-linked

receptors use a chain of other protein messengers to am-
plify the signal as it is being relayed to the nucleus.

How is the signal amplified? Imagine a relay race where,
at the end of each stage, the finishing runner tags five new
runners to start the next stage. The number of runners
would increase dramatically as the race progresses: 1, then
5, 25, 125, and so on. The same sort of process takes place
as a signal is passed from the cell surface to the cytoplasm
or nucleus. First the receptor activates a stage-one protein,
almost always by phosphorylating it. The receptor either
adds a phosphate group directly, or, it activates a G protein
that goes on to activate a second protein that does the
phosphorylation. Once activated, each of these stage-one
proteins in turn activates a large number of stage-two pro-

 

Activated
adenylyl cyclase

 
   
  
 
 
 

 

GTP

G protein

IK

Not yet
activated

 

 

 

 

Amplification

®
TWN
QQQWVQWOQOQO- «awe

OLLI 4

QOOCOCOO- pretein|einasel

Onn

AUIS,

\

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Amplification

 

 

 

VAN

© 000000 0 O- Enzymatic product

 

 

 

FIGURE 7.11

Signal amplification. Amplification at many steps of the cell-signaling process can ultimately produce a large response by the cell. One
cell surface receptor (1), for example, may activate many G protein molecules (2), each of which activates a molecule of adenylyl cyclase
(3), yielding an enormous production of cAMP (4). Each cAMP molecule in turn will activate a protein kinase (5), which can
phosphorylate and thereby activate several copies of a specific enzyme (6). Each of those enzymes can then catalyze many chemical
reactions (7). Starting with 10~'° M of signaling molecule, one cell surface receptor can trigger the production of 10~¢ M of one of the

products, an amplification of four orders of magnitude.

132 Part II Biology of the Cell
