 
 
 
    
 
  

Vas deferens within
spermatic cord

—_

Vas deferens
cut and tied

(@)

Fallopian tube
cut and tied

FIGURE 59.23
Birth control through sterilization. (a)
Vasectomy; (b) tubal ligation.

A small number of women using birth control pills or
implants experience undesirable side effects, such as blood
clotting and nausea. These side effects have been reduced
in newer generations of birth control pills, which contain
less estrogen and different analogues of progesterone.
Moreover, these new oral contraceptives provide a number
of benefits, including reduced risks of endometrial and
ovarian cancer, cardiovascular disease, and osteoporosis (for
older women). However, they may increase the risk of con-
tracting breast cancer and cervical cancer. The risks in-
volved with birth control pills increase in women who
smoke and increase greatly in women over 35 who smoke.
The current consensus is that, for many women, the health
benefits of oral contraceptives outweigh their risks, al-
though a physician must help each woman determine the
relative risks and benefits.

Prevention of Embryo Implantation

The insertion of a coil or other irregularly shaped object
into the uterus is an effective means of birth control, be-
cause the irritation it produces in the uterus prevents the
implantation of an embryo within the uterine wall. Such in-
trauterine devices (IUDs) have a failure rate of only 1 to
5%. Their high degree of effectiveness probably reflects
their convenience; once they are inserted, they can be for-
gotten. The great disadvantage of this method is that al-
most a third of the women who attempt to use IUDs expe-
rience cramps, pain, and sometimes bleeding and therefore
must discontinue using them.

(b)

Uterus 1

Another method of preventing embryo implantation is
the “morning after pill,” which contains 50 times the dose
of estrogen present in birth control pills. The pill works by
temporarily stopping ovum development, by preventing
fertilization, or by stopping the implantation of a fertilized
ovum. Its failure rate is 1 to 10%, but many women are un-
easy about taking such high hormone doses, as side effects
can be severe. This is not recommended as a regular
method of birth control but rather as a method of emer-
gency contraception.

Sterilization

A completely effective means of birth control is steriliza-
tion, the surgical removal of portions of the tubes that
transport the gametes from the gonads (figure 59.23). Ster-
ilization may be performed on either males or females, pre-
venting sperm from entering the semen in males and pre-
venting an ovulated oocyte from reaching the uterus in
females. In males, sterilization involves a vasectomy, the re-
moval of a portion of the vas deferens from each testis. In
females, the comparable operation involves the removal of
a section of each fallopian tube.

 

Fertilization can be prevented by a variety of birth
control methods, including barrier contraceptives,
hormonal inhibition, surgery, and abstinence. Efficacy
rates vary from method to method.

 

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1213
