60.4 Body architecture is determined during the next stages of embryonic

development.

Developmental Processes during
Neurulation

During the next step in vertebrate development, the three
primary cell layers begin their transformation into the
body’s tissues and organs. The process of tissue differentia-
tion begins with the formation of two morphological fea-
tures found only in chordates, the notochord and the hol-
low dorsal nerve cord. This development of the dorsal
nerve cord is called neurulation.

The notochord is first visible soon after gastrulation is
complete, forming from mesoderm along the dorsal mid-
line of the embryo. It is a flexible rod located along the
dorsal midline in the embryos of all chordates, although its
function is replaced by the vertebral column when it devel-
ops from mesoderm in the vertebrates. After the notochord
has been laid down, a layer of ectodermal cells situated
above the notochord invaginates, forming a long crease, the
neural groove, down the long axis of the embryo. The
edges of the neural groove then move toward each other
and fuse, creating a long hollow cylinder, the neural tube
(figure 60.14), which runs beneath the surface of the em-
bryo’s back. The neural tube later differentiates into the
spinal cord and brain.

The dorsal lip of the blastopore induces the formation
of a notochord, and the presence of the notochord induces
the overlying ectoderm to differentiate into the neural
tube. The process of induction, when one embryonic re-
gion of cells influences the development of an adjacent re-
gion by changing its developmental pathway, was discussed
in chapter 17 and is further examined in the next section.

While the neural tube is forming from ectoderm, the
rest of the basic architecture of the body is being deter-
mined rapidly by changes in the mesoderm. On either side

Neural plate
Neural fold

 
   
    
 
 

 

Ectoderm

Notochord
Mesoderm
Endoderm

Archenteron

(a)

FIGURE 60.14

Neural plate
= >

of the developing notochord, segmented blocks of meso-
derm tissue called somites form; more somites are added
as development continues. Ultimately, the somites give rise
to the muscles, vertebrae, and connective tissues. The
mesoderm in the head region does not separate into dis-
crete somites but remains connected as somitomeres and
form the striated muscles of the face, jaws, and throat.
Some body organs, including the kidneys, adrenal glands,
and gonads, develop within another strip of mesoderm that
runs alongside the somites. The remainder of the meso-
derm moves out and around the endoderm and eventually
surrounds it completely. As a result of this movement, the
mesoderm becomes separated into two layers. The outer
layer is associated with the body wall and the inner layer is
associated with the gut. Between these two layers of meso-
derm is the coelom (see chapter 45), which becomes the
body cavity of the adult.

The Neural Crest

Neurulation occurs in all chordates, and the process in a
lancelet is much the same as it is in a human. However, in
vertebrates, just before the neural groove closes to form the
neural tube, its edges pinch off, forming a small strip of
cells, the neural crest, which becomes incorporated into
the roof of the neural tube (figure 60.14). The cells of the
neural crest later move to the sides of the developing em-
bryo. The appearance of the neural crest was a key event in
the evolution of the vertebrates because neural crest cells,
after migrating to different parts of the embryo, ultimately
develop into the structures characteristic of (though not
necessarily unique to) the vertebrate body.

The differentiation of neural crest cells depends on their
location. At the anterior end of the embryo, they merge

Neural fold Neural groove

uy eb

Mammalian neural tube formation. (a) The neural tube forms above the notochord when () cells of the neural plate fold together to

form the (6) neural groove.

1224 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
