 

 

IONIC COMPOUNDS OF THE TYPE AX

 

 

47]

 

the close-packed arrangement there is one octahedral hole and two
tetrahedral holes. The octahedral holes are larger than the tetrahedral
holes.

An ionic structure is composed of oppositely charged ions. If the larger
ions are close packed, then the smaller ions may occupy either the octa-
hedral holes or the tetrahedral holes depending on their size. Normally
the type of hole occupied can be determined from the radius ratio. An ion
occupying a tetrahedral hole has a coordination number of 4, whilst one
occupying an octahedral hole has a coordination number of 6. In some
compounds the relative sizes of the ions are such that the smaller ions are
too large to fit in the holes, and they force the larger ions out of contact
with each other so that they are no longer close packed. Despite this, the
telative positions of the ions remain unchanged, and it is convenient to
retain the description in terms of close packing.

_ CLASSIFICATION OF IONIC STRUCTURES

It is convenient to divide ionic compounds into groups AX, AX2, AX;
depending on the relative numbers of positive and negative ions.

IONIC COMPOUNDS OF THE TYPE AX (ZnS, NaCl, CsCl)

Three structural arrangements commonly found are the zinc sulphide,
sodium chloride and caesium chloride structures.

Structures of zinc sulphide

In zinc sulphide, ZnS, the radius ratio of 0.40 suggests a tetrahedral
arrangement. Each Zn** ion is tetrahedrally surrounded by four S?~ ions
and each S?~ ion is tetrahedrally surrounded by four Zn* ions. The co-
ordination number of both ions is 4, so this is called a 4:4 arrangement.
Two different forms of zinc sulphide exist, zinc blende and wurtzite (Figure
3.4), Both are 4:4 structures.

These two Structures may be considered as close-packed arrangements
of $ _ tons. Zinc blende is related to a cubic close-packed structure whilst
the 7 is related to a hexagonal close-packed structure. In both structures
en ions occupy tetrahedral holes in the lattice Since there are twice
oom pighedral holes as there are-S~ ions, it follows that to obtain a
(th ila ZnS only half of the tetrahedral holes are occupied by Zn?* ions

at Is every alternate tetrahedral site is unoccupied).

Sodium chloride structure

pies chloride, NaCl. the radius ratio is 0.52 and this suggests an
corner a arrangement. Each Na* ion is surrounded by six CI7 ions at the
by sin N fa regular octahedron and similarly each Cl” ion is surrounded

a” ions (Figure 3.5). The coordination is thus 6:6. This structure

 

Figure 3.4 Structures of ZnS: (a)
zinc blende and (b) wurtzite.
(Reproduced with permission
from Wells, A.F., Structural
Inorganic Chemistry, 5th ed.,

Oxford University P;
eh 'y Press, Oxford,
