Table 59.1 Mammalian Reproductive Hormones

MALE

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Testosterone

sex organs
FEMALE

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)

Stimulates spermatogenesis

Stimulates secretion of testosterone by Leydig cells
Stimulates development and maintenance of male secondary sexual characteristics and accessory

Stimulates growth of ovarian follicles and secretion of estradiol
Stimulates ovulation, conversion of ovarian follicles into corpus luteum, and secretion of

Stimulates development and maintenance of female secondary sexual characteristics;

prompts monthly preparation of uterus for pregnancy

Completes preparation of uterus for pregnancy; helps maintain female secondary sexual

Stimulates contraction of uterus and milk-ejection reflex

Luteinizing hormone (LH)
estradiol and progesterone by corpus luteum
Estradiol
Progesterone
characteristics
Oxytocin
Prolactin Stimulates milk production

Hormonal Control of Male Reproduction

As we saw in chapter 56, the anterior pituitary gland se-
cretes two gonadotropic hormones: FSH and LH. Al-
though these hormones are named for their actions in the
female, they are also involved in regulating male reproduc-
tive function (table 59.1). In males, FSH stimulates the Ser-
toli cells to facilitate sperm development, and LH stimu-
lates the Leydig cells to secrete testosterone.

The principle of negative feedback inhibition discussed in
chapter 56 applies to the control of FSH and LH secretion
(figure 59.15). The hypothalamic hormone, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH), stimulates the anterior pituitary
gland to secrete both FSH and LH. FSH causes the Sertoli
cells to release a peptide hormone called inhibin that specifi-
cally inhibits FSH secretion. Similarly, LH stimulates testos-
terone secretion, and testosterone feeds back to inhibit the
release of LH, both directly at the anterior pituitary gland
and indirectly by reducing GnRH release. The importance
of negative feedback inhibition can be demonstrated by re-
moving the testes; in the absence of testosterone and inhibin,
the secretion of FSH and LH from the anterior pituitary is
greatly increased.

 

An adult male produces sperm continuously by meiotic
division of the germinal cells lining the seminiferous
tubules. Semen consists of sperm from the testes and
fluid contributed by the seminal vesicles and prostate
gland. Production of sperm and secretion of
testosterone from the testes are controlled by FSH and
LH from the anterior pituitary.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hypothalamus
GnRH
Anterior
pituitary
gland
r= <=
Inhibition © |
1
I
FSH !
1
I
Testosterone Y Inhibin
Leydig Sertoli
cells cells
Maintains ;
secondary Testes Spermatogenesis

 

 

sex characteristics’

 

FIGURE 59.15

Hormonal interactions between the testes and anterior
pituitary. LH stimulates the Leydig cells to secrete testosterone,
and FSH stimulates the Sertoli cells of the seminiferous tubules to
secrete inhibin. Testosterone and inhibin, in turn, exert negative
feedback inhibition on the secretion of LH and FSH, respectively.

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1205
