How Cells Communicate during
Development

In the process of vertebrate development, the relative posi-
tion of particular cell layers determines, to a large extent,
the organs that develop from them. By now, you may have
wondered how these cell layers know where they are. For
example, when cells of the ectoderm situated above the de-
veloping notochord give rise to the neural groove, how do
these cells know they are above the notochord?

The solution to this puzzle is one of the outstanding
accomplishments of experimental embryology, the study
of how embryos form. The great German biologist Hans
Spemann and his student Hilde Mangold solved it early in
this century. In their investigation they removed cells
from the dorsal lip of an amphibian blastula and trans-
planted them to a different location on another blastula
(figure 60.15). (The dorsal lip region of amphibian blastu-

      
 

 
 

Discard mesoderm
opposite dorsal lip

Primary
neural fold

 

FIGURE 60.15
Speman and Mangold’s dorsal lip transplant experiment.

1226 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

las develops from the grey crescent zone and is the site of
origin of those mesoderm cells that later produce the no-
tochord.) The new location corresponded to that of the
animal’s belly. What happened? The embryo developed
two notochords, a normal dorsal one and a second one
along its belly!

By using genetically different donor and host blastulas,
Spemann and Mangold were able to show that the noto-
chord produced by transplanting dorsal lip cells contained
host cells as well as transplanted ones. The transplanted
dorsal lip cells had acted as organizers (see also chapter
17) of notochord development. As such, these cells stimu-
lated a developmental program in the belly cells of the
embryos in which they were transplanted: the develop-
ment of the notochord. The belly cells clearly contained
this developmental program but would not have expressed
it in the normal course of their development. The trans-
plantation of the dorsal lip cells caused them to do so.

Donor mesoderm
from dorsal lip

Primary notochord
and neural development

Secondary notochord
and neural development

 
