 

LAYER STRUCTURES

be 3. This is a 6:3 structure. Each Ti** is octahedrally surrounded by six
0% ions and each O?~ jon has three Ti** ions round it in a plane tri-
angular arrangement.

The rutile structure is not close packed. The unit cell, i.e. the repeating
unit of this structure, is not a cube, since one of the axes is 30% shorter
than the other two. It is convenient to describe it as a considerably
distorted cube (though the distortion is rather large). The structure may
then be described as a considerably distorted body-centred cubic lattice of
Ti** ions. Each Ti** ion is surrounded octahedrally by six O?~ ions, and
the O?~ are in positions of threefold coordination, that is each O*> is
surrounded by three Ti** ions at the corners of an equilateral triangle.
Three-coordination is not common in solids. There are no examples of
three-coordination in compounds of the type AX, but there is another
example in the compounds of type AX2, that is CdI,, though in this case
the shape is not an equilateral triangle. The structure of CaCl, is also a §:3
structure, and is similar to CdIz. These are described later.

There are only a few cases where the radius ratio is below 0.41.
Examples include silica SiO, and beryllium fluoride BeF2. These have
coordination numbers of 4 and 2, but radius ratio predictions are uncertain
since they are appreciably covalent.

B-cristobalite (silica) structure

Silica SiO, exists in six different crystalline forms as quartz, cristobalite and
tridymite, each with an a and B form. f-cristobalite is related to zinc
blende, with two interpenetrating close-packed lattices, one lattice arising
from Si occupying the S?~ positions, and the other lattice from Si oc-
cupying the Zn?* positions {i.e. the tetrahedral holes in the first lattice).
The oxygen atoms lie midway between the Si atoms, but are shifted slightly
off the line joining the Si atoms, so the bond angle Si~O—Si is not 180°.

The radius ratio predicts a coordination number of 4, and this is a 4:2
structure.

LAYER STRUCTURES (Cdl, CdCl, [NiAs])
Cadmium iodide structure

wean AX compounds are Hot sufficiently ionic to form the perfectly
culphid .° nic structures described. Many chlorides, bromides, iodides and
Gooihe oestallize into structures which are very different from those
structins ‘s ‘admium fluoride CdF, forms an ionic lattice with the CaF,
and Gone at ne marked contrast cadmium iodide Cdl, is much less ionic,
and this ie form the fluorite structure. The radius ratio for Cdl, is 0.45,
made ur nt rates a coordination number of 6 for cadmium. The structure is
eithes PP 7 ectrically neutral layers of Cd?* ions with layers of I” ions on
the men; rather like a sandwich where a layer of Cd?* corresponds to

in the middle, and layers of F~ correspond to the bread on either

 

    

Figure 3.8 Rutile (TiO.)
structure.

Figure 3.9 8-cristobalite
structure.

---~---

 
