7.3 Follow the journey of information into the cell.

Initiating the
Intracellular Signal

Oligosaccharide
unit

Some enzymic receptors and most G-
protein-linked receptors carry the sig-
nal molecule’s message into the target
cell by utilizing other substances to
relay the message within the cyto-
plasm. These other substances, small
molecules or ions commonly called
second messengers or intracellular
mediators, alter the behavior of partic-
ular proteins by binding to them and
changing their shape. The two most
widely used second messengers are
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) and calcium.

cAMP

All animal cells studied thus far use
cAMP as a second messenger (chap-
ter 56 discusses cAMP in detail). To
see how cAMP typically works as a
messenger, let’s examine what hap-
pens when the hormone epinephrine
binds to a particular type of G-
protein-linked receptor called the B-
adrenergic receptor (figure 7.8).
When epinephrine binds with this re-
ceptor, it activates a G protein, which
then stimulates the enzyme adenylyl
cyclase to produce large amounts of cAMP within the
cell (figure 7.92). The cAMP then binds to and activates
the enzyme a-kinase, which adds phosphates to specific
proteins in the cell. The effect this phosphorylation has
on cell function depends on the identity of the cell and
the proteins that are phosphorylated. In muscle cells, for
example, the o-kinase phosphorylates and thereby acti-
vates enzymes that stimulate the breakdown of glycogen

Intracellular

FIGURE 7.8

into glucose and inhibit the synthesis of glycogen from
glucose. Glucose is then more available to the muscle
cells for metabolism.

Calcium

Calcium (Ca**) ions serve even more widely than cAMP
as second messengers. Ca** levels inside the cytoplasm of a
cell are normally very low (less than 107 M), while outside
the cell and in the endoplasmic reticulum Ca** levels are
quite high (about 10-3 M). Chemically gated calcium chan-
nels in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane act as
switches; when they open, Ca** rushes into the cytoplasm
and triggers proteins sensitive to Ca** to initiate a variety of

130 Part II Biology of the Cell

 
 

NAA Ay
Vv Vv W Vi

A

C

%

oNH3*

 

Extracellular
Kk!
ss
Ss:
ss
o>
DST

 

Structure of the B-adrenergic receptor. The receptor is a G-protein-linked molecule
which, when it binds to an extracellular signal molecule, stimulates voluminous production
of cAMP inside the cell, which then effects the cellular change.

activities. For example, the efflux of Ca** from the endo-
plasmic reticulum causes skeletal muscle cells to contract
and some endocrine cells to secrete hormones.

The gated Ca** channels are opened by a G-protein-
linked receptor. In response to signals from other cells,
the receptor activates its G protein, which in turn acti-
vates the enzyme, phospholipase C. This enzyme catalyzes
the production of inositol trisphosphate (IP3) from phospho-
lipids in the plasma membrane. The IP; molecules diffuse
through the cytoplasm to the endoplasmic reticulum and
bind to the Ca** channels. This opens the channels and
allows Ca** to flow from the endoplasmic reticulum into
the cytoplasm (figure 7.90).

Ca** initiates some cellular responses by binding to
calmodulin, a 148-amino acid cytoplasmic protein that con-
tains four binding sites for Ca** (figure 7.10). When four
Ca* ions are bound to calmodulin, the calmodulin/Ca*
complex binds to other proteins, and activates them.

 

Cyclic AMP and Ca** often behave as second
messengers, intracellular substances that relay
messages from receptors to target proteins.

 
