Reptiles and Birds

Most reptiles and all birds are
oviparous—after the eggs are fertilized
internally, they are deposited outside of
the mother’s body to complete their de-
velopment. Like most vertebrates that
fertilize internally, male reptiles utilize a
tubular organ, the penis, to inject sperm
into the female (figure 59.7). The penis,
containing erectile tissue, can become
quite rigid and penetrate far into the fe-
male reproductive tract. Most reptiles
are oviparous, laying eggs and then
abandoning them. These eggs are sur-
rounded by a leathery shell that is de-
posited as the egg passes through the
oviduct, the part of the female reproduc-
tive tract leading from the ovary. A few
species of reptiles are ovoviviparous or
viviparous, forming eggs that develop
into embryos within the body of the
mother.

All birds practice internal fertilization,
though most male birds lack a penis. In
some of the larger birds (including
swans, geese, and ostriches), however,
the male cloaca extends to form a false
penis. As the egg passes along the oviduct, glands secrete
albumin proteins (the egg white) and the hard, calcareous
shell that distinguishes bird eggs from reptilian eggs. While

modern reptiles are poikilotherms (animals whose body

FIGURE 59.7

temperature varies with the temperature of their environ-
ment), birds are homeotherms (animals that maintain a rel-
atively constant body temperature independent of environ-
mental temperatures). Hence, most birds incubate their
eggs after laying them to keep them warm (figure 59.8).
The young that hatch from the eggs of most bird species
are unable to survive unaided, as their development is still
incomplete. These young birds are fed and nurtured by
their parents, and they grow to maturity gradually.

The shelled eggs of reptiles and birds constitute one of
the most important adaptations of these vertebrates to life
on land, because shelled eggs can be laid in dry places.
Such eggs are known as amniotic eggs because the embryo
develops within a fluid-filled cavity surrounded by a mem-
brane called the amnion. The amnion is an extraembry-
onic membrane—that is, a membrane formed from embry-
onic cells but located outside the body of the embryo.
Other extraembryonic membranes in amniotic eggs in-
clude the chorion, which lines the inside of the eggshell,
the yolk sac, and the allantois. In contrast, the eggs of fish
and amphibians contain only one extraembryonic mem-
brane, the yolk sac. The viviparous mammals, including
humans, also have extraembryonic membranes that will be
described in chapter 60.

1200 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

 

The introduction of sperm by the male into the female’s body is called copulation.
Reptiles such as these turtles were the first terrestrial vertebrates to develop this form of
reproduction, which is particularly suited to a terrestrial environment.

ae

 

FIGURE 59.8
Crested penguins incubating their egg. This nesting pair is
changing the parental guard in a stylized ritual.

 

Most reptiles and all birds are oviparous, laying
amniotic eggs that are protected by watertight
membranes from desiccation. Birds, being
homeotherms, must keep the eggs warm by incubation.

 
