Structure and Function of the
Female Reproductive System

The structures of the reproductive system in a human fe-
male are shown in figure 59.16. In contrast to the testes,
the ovaries develop much more slowly. In the absence of
testosterone, the female embryo develops a clitoris and
labia majora from the same embryonic structures that
produce a penis and scrotum in males. Thus clitoris and
penis, and the labia majora and scrotum, are said to be
homologous structures. The clitoris, like the penis, contains
corpora cavernosa and is therefore erectile. The ovaries
contain microscopic structures called ovarian follicles,
which each contain an egg cell and smaller granulosa
cells. The ovarian follicles are the functional units of the
ovary.

At puberty, the granulosa cells begin to secrete the
major female sex hormone estradiol (also called estrogen),
triggering menarche, the onset of menstrual cycling.
Estradiol also stimulates the formation of the female sec-
ondary sexual characteristics, including breast develop-
ment and the production of pubic hair. In addition, estra-
diol and another steroid hormone, progesterone, help to

Bladder

Clitoris
Urethra

Vagina

FIGURE 59.16

 

maintain the female accessory sex organs: the fallopian
tubes, uterus, and vagina.

Female Accessory Sex Organs

The fallopian tubes (also called uterine tubes or oviducts)
transport ova from the ovaries to the uterus. In humans,
the uterus is a muscular, pear-shaped organ that narrows to
form a neck, the cervix, which leads to the vagina (figure
59.174). The uterus is lined with a simple columnar epithe-
lial membrane called the endometrium. The surface of the
endometrium is shed during menstruation, while the un-
derlying portion remains to generate a new surface during
the next cycle.

Mammals other than primates have more complex fe-
male reproductive tracts, where part of the uterus divides to
form uterine “horns,” each of which leads to an oviduct
(figure 59.17%, 0). In cats, dogs, and cows, for example,
there is one cervix but two uterine horns separated by a
septum, or wall. Marsupials, such as opossums, carry the
split even further, with two unconnected uterine horns, two
cervices, and two vaginas. A male marsupial has a forked
penis that can enter both vaginas simultaneously.

Cervix

Rectum

Organization of the human female reproductive system. The ovaries are the gonads, the fallopian tubes receive the ovulated ova, and
the uterus is the womb, the site of development of an embryo if the egg cell becomes fertilized.

1206 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
