Cell-Cell Interactions

 

Concept Outline

7.1 Cells signal one another with chemicals.

Receptor Proteins and Signaling between Cells.
Receptor proteins embedded in the plasma membrane
change shape when they bind specific signal molecules,
triggering a chain of events within the cell.

‘Types of Cell Signaling. Cell signaling can occur between
adjacent cells, although chemical signals called hormones act
over long distances.

7.2 Proteins in the cell and on its surface receive
signals from other cells.

Intracellular Receptors. Some receptors are located
within the cell cytoplasm. These receptors respond to lipid-
soluble signals, such as steroid hormones.

Cell Surface Receptors. Many cell-to-cell signals are
water-soluble and cannot penetrate membranes. Instead, the
signals are received by transmembrane proteins protruding
out from the cell surface.

7.3 Follow the journey of information into the cell.

Initiating the Intracellular Signal. Cell surface receptors
often use “second messengers” to transmit a signal to the
cytoplasm.

Amplifying the Signal: Protein Kinase Cascades.
Surface receptors and second messengers amplify signals as
they travel into the cell, often toward the cell nucleus.

7.4 Cell surface proteins mediate cell-cell interactions.

‘The Expression of Cell Identity. Cells possess on their
surfaces a variety of tissue-specific identity markers that
identify both the tissue and the individual.

Intercellular Adhesion. Cells attach themselves to one
another with protein links. Some of the links are very strong,
others more transient.

Tight Junctions. Adjacent cells form a sheet when
connected by tight junctions, and molecules are encouraged
to flow through the cells, not between them.

Anchoring Junctions. The cytoskeleton of a cell is
connected by an anchoring junction to the cytoskeleton of
another cell or to the extracellular matrix.
Communicating Junctions. Many adjacent cells have
direct passages that link their cytoplasms, permitting the
passage of ions and small molecules.

 

FIGURE 7.1

Persimmon cells in close contact with one another. These
plant cells and all cells, no matter what their function, interact
with their environment, including the cells around them.

 

id you know that each of the 100 trillion cells of your

body shares one key feature with the cells of tigers,
bumblebees, and persimmons (figure 7.1)—a feature that
most bacteria and protists lack? Your cells touch and com-
municate with one another. Sending and receiving a variety
of chemical signals, they coordinate their behavior so that
your body functions as an integrated whole, rather than as a
massive collection of individual cells acting independently.
The ability of cells to communicate with one another is the
hallmark of multicellular organisms. In this chapter we will
look in detail at how the cells of multicellular organisms in-
teract with one another, first exploring how they signal one
another with chemicals and then examining the ways in
which their cell surfaces interact to organize tissues and
body structures.

123
