 

 

TRANSITIONS BETWEEN THE MAIN TYPES OF BONDING

 

 

 

39

 

than closest packing (compare Figures 2.3a and b). In a body-centred cubic
structure the spheres occupy 68% of the total space and have a co-
ordination number of 8, compared with close-packed structures where
74% of the space is occupied and the coordination number is 12. Metallic
structures always have high coordination numbers.

The theories of bonding in metals and alloys are described in Chapter 5.

Metallic bonding is found not only in metals and alloys, but also in
several other types of compound:

1. Interstitial borides, carbides, nitrides and hydrides formed by the
transition elements (and by some of the lanthanides too). Some low
oxidation states of transition metal halides also belong to this group,
where the compounds show electrical conductivity, and are thought to
contain free electrons in conduction bands.

2. Metal cluster compounds of the transition metals, and cluster com-
pounds of boron, where the covalent bonding is delocalized over several
atoms, and is equivalent to a restricted form of metallic bonding.

3. A group of compounds including the metal carbonyls which contain
a metal-metal bond. The cluster compounds, and the compounds

with metal-metal bonds, may help to explain the role of metals as
catalysts.

Melting points

lonic compounds are typically solids and usually have high melting and
boiling points. In contrast covalent compounds are typically gases, liquids
or low melting solids. These differences occur because of differences in
bonding and structure.

Tonic compounds are made up of positive and negative ions arranged in a
regular way in a lattice. The attraction between ions is electrostatic, and is
Ron-directional, extending equally in all directions. Melting the compound
involves breaking the lattice. This requires considerable energy, and so the
melting point and boiling point are usually high, and the compounds are
very hard. , ‘

Compounds with covalent bonds are usually made up of discrete
hour The bonds are directional, and strong covalent bonding forces
held oes together to make a molecule. In the solid, molecules are
we ‘ont ‘n 7 y weak van der Waals forces. To melt or boil the compound
der Waals f supply the small amount of energy needed to break the van
fiauia lorces. Herice covalently bonded compounds are often gases,

% lds or soft solids with low melting points. :
tiant Ine cases such as diamond, or silica SiO2, the structures are covalent
dimensional ‘aie of discrete molecules. In these cases there is a three-
alatge s ice, with strong covalent bonds in all directions. It requires
Be amount of energy to break this lattice, and so diamond, silica and

other materials wi i i jal lattices are v hard and
ith giant three-dimensional latti y
n s er
have h igh melting points.

 
