60.1

Stages of Development

In vertebrates, as in all sexual animals, the first step in de-
velopment is the union of male and female gametes, a
process called fertilization. Fertilization is typically ex-
ternal in fish and amphibians, which reproduce in water,
and internal in all other vertebrates. In internal fertiliza-
tion, small, motile sperm are introduced into the female
reproductive tract during mating. The sperm swim up the
reproductive tract until they encounter a mature egg or
oocyte in an oviduct, where fertilization occurs. Fertiliza-
tion consists of three stages: penetration, activation, and
fusion.

Penetration

As described in chapter 59, the secondary oocyte is released
from a fully developed Graafian follicle at ovulation. It is
surrounded by the same layer of small granulosa cells that
surrounded it within the follicle (figure 60.2). Between the
granulosa cells and the egg’s plasma membrane is a glyco-

  
  

First polar
body

Granulosa cell

spindle

Plasma membrane
of oocyte

(@)

FIGURE 60.2

Mammalian reproductive cells. (a) A sperm must penetrate a layer of
granulosa cells and then a layer of glycoprotein called the zona pellucida,
before it reaches the oocyte membrane. This penetration is aided by
digestive enzymes in the acrosome of the sperm. These scanning electron
micrographs show (J) a human oocyte (90x) surrounded by numerous

granulosa cells, and (0) a human sperm on an egg (3000x).

1216 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Second meiotic

Zona pellucida

Fertilization is the initial event in development.

protein layer called the zona pellucida. The head of each
sperm is capped by an organelle called the acrosome, which
contains glycoprotein-digesting enzymes. These enzymes
become exposed as the sperm begin to work their way into
the layer of granulosa cells, and the activity of the enzymes
enables the sperm to tunnel their way through the zona
pellucida to the egg’s plasma membrane. In sea urchins,
egg cytoplasm bulges out at this point, engulfing the head
of the sperm and permitting the sperm nucleus to enter the

cytoplasm of the egg (figure 60.3).

Activation.

The series of events initiated by sperm penetration are col-
lectively called egg activation. In some frogs, reptiles, and
birds, more than one sperm may penetrate the egg, but
only one is successful in fertilizing it. In mammals, by con-
trast, the penetration of the first sperm initiates changes in
the egg membrane that prevent the entry of other sperm.
As the sperm makes contact with the oocyte membrane,
there is a change in the membrane potential (see chapter 54

   

(b)

Granulosa cells

 

(©)
