Chapter 59

Summary

=
Ves

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

 

www.biocourse.com

Questions Media Resources

59.1 Animals employ both sexual and asexual reproductive strategies.

 

¢ Parthenogenesis is a form of asexual reproduction
that is practiced by many insects and some lizards.

¢ Among mammals, the sex is determined by the
presence of a Y chromosome in males and its absence
in females.

* Introduction to

1. How are oviparity,
reproduction

ovoviviparity, and viviparity
different?

@

59.2 The evolution of reproduction among the vertebrates has led to

internalization of fertilization and development.

 

* Most bony fish practice external fertilization,
releasing eggs and sperm into the water where
fertilization occurs. Amphibians have external
fertilization and the young go through a larval stage
before metamorphosis.

2. How does fetal development © On Science articles:

differ in the monotremes, — _ Interactions

, =e a
marsupials, and placental Student Research:
mammals? Reproductive biology

of house mice
Evolution of uterine

 

 

* Reptiles and birds are oviparous, the young ini
developing in eggs that are deposited externally. Most
mammals are viviparous, the young developing within
the mother.

59.3 Male and female reproductive systems are specialized for different functions.

¢ Sperm leave the testes and pass through the 3. Briefly describe the function fea Art Activities:
epididymis and vas deferens; the ejaculatory duct of seminal vesicles, prostate os a Sperm and egg
merges with the urethra, which empties at the tip of |_—_ gland, and bulbourethral glands. IY susie
the penis. 4. When do the ova in a female system

* An egg cell released from the ovary in ovulation is
drawn by fimbria into the fallopian tube, which
conducts the egg cell to the lining of the uterus, or
endometrium, where it implants if fertilized.

¢ If fertilization does not occur, the corpus luteum
regresses at the end of the cycle and the resulting fall
in estradiol and progesterone secretion cause
menstruation to occur in humans and apes.

mammal begin meiosis? When
do they complete the first
meiotic division?

Penis anatomy
Female reproductive
system

Breast anatomy
5. What hormone is secreted by °

the granulosa cells in a Graafian
follicle? What effect does this
hormone have on the

endometrium? cycle
* Oogenesis

* Spermatogenesis
* Menstruation
* Female reproductive

59.4 The physiology of human sexual intercourse is becoming better known.

 

¢ The physiological events that occur in the human
sexual response are grouped into four phases:
excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution.

* Males and females have similar phases, but males
enter a refractory period following orgasm that is
absent in many women.

© There are a variety of methods of birth control
available that range in ease of use, effectiveness, and
permanence.

1214 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

* Penile erection
* Vasectomy

6. What are the four phases in a
Z * Tubal ligation

the physiological events of sexual i’
intercourse in humans? During

the first phase, what events occur
specifically in males, and what

events occur specifically in

females?

7. How do birth control pills
prevent pregnancy?
