Birth and Postnatal
Development

In some mammals, changing hormone levels in the
developing fetus initiate the process of birth. The
fetuses of these mammals have an extra layer of cells
in their adrenal cortex, called a fetal zone. Before
birth, the fetal pituitary gland secretes corticotropin,
which stimulates the fetal zone to secrete steroid
hormones. These corticosteroids then induce the
uterus of the mother to manufacture prostaglandins,
which trigger powerful contractions of the uterine
smooth muscles.

The adrenal glands of human fetuses lack a fetal
zone, and human birth does not seem to be initiated
by this mechanism. In a human, the uterus releases
prostaglandins, possibly as a result of the high levels
of estradiol secreted by the placenta. Estradiol also
stimulates the uterus to produce more oxytocin re-
ceptors, and as a result, the uterus becomes increas-
ingly sensitive to oxytocin. Prostaglandins begin the
uterine contractions, but then sensory feedback
from the uterus stimulates the release of oxytocin
from the mother’s posterior pituitary gland. Work-
ing together, oxytocin and prostaglandins further
stimulate uterine contractions, forcing the fetus
downward (figure 60.25). Initially, only a few con-

Umbilical
cord

  

Wall of
uterus

  

Vagina

FIGURE 60.25

Position of the fetus just before birth. A developing fetus is a major
addition to a woman’s anatomy. The stomach and intestines are pushed far
up, and there is often considerable discomfort from pressure on the lower
back. In a natural delivery, the fetus exits through the vagina, which must

tractions occur each hour, but the rate eventually in-
creases to one contraction every two to three min-
utes. Finally, strong contractions, aided by the mother’s
pushing, expel the fetus, which is now a newborn baby.

After birth, continuing uterine contractions expel the
placenta and associated membranes, collectively called the
afterbirth. The umbilical cord is still attached to the baby,
and to free the newborn, a doctor or midwife clamps and
cuts the cord. Blood clotting and contraction of muscles in
the cord prevent excessive bleeding.

Nursing

Milk production, or lactation, occurs in the alveoli of mam-
mary glands when they are stimulated by the anterior pitu-
itary hormone, prolactin. Milk from the alveoli is secreted
into a series of alveolar ducts, which are surrounded by
smooth muscle and lead to the nipple (figure 60.26). Dur-
ing pregnancy, high levels of progesterone stimulate the
development of the mammary alveoli, and high levels of
estradiol stimulate the development of the alveolar ducts.
However, estradiol blocks the actions of prolactin on the

FIGURE 60.26

A sagittal section of a mammary gland. The mammary alveoli
produce milk in response to stimulation by prolactin, and milk is
ejected through the lactiferous duct in response to stimulation by
oxytocin.

1236 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

dilate (expand) considerably to permit passage.

  
    
   
   
 

Adipose

Rib tissue

Intercostal
muscles’

Mammary
(alveolar)

Pectoralis duct

minor

Pectoralis Lactiferous

major

Containing
[— mammary
alveoli

 
