Gastrulation in Most Aquatic Vertebrates

In the blastulas of amphibians and those aquatic vertebrates
with asymmetrical yolk distribution, the yolk-laden cells of
the vegetal pole are fewer and much larger than the yolk-
free cells of the animal pole. Consequently, gastrulation is
more complex than it is in the lancelets. First, a layer of
surface cells invaginates to form a small, crescent-shaped
slit where the blastopore will soon be located. Next, cells
from the animal pole involute over the dorsal lip of the
blastopore (figure 60.11), at the same location as the gray
crescent of the fertilized egg (see figure 60.4). As in the

Animal pole

Estedert~_ es PA

Ectoderm—
Blastocoel——— ry

Blastocoel

    
    

 

Mesoderm

Vegetal pole =

(a) (b)

Dorsal lip of
blastopore

Neural plate

(d)
FIGURE 60.11

Neural plate

lancelets, the involuting cell layer eventually presses against
the inner surface of the opposite side of the embryo, elimi-
nating the blastocoel and producing an archenteron with a
blastopore. In this case, however, the blastopore is filled
with yolk-rich cells, forming the yolk plug. The outer layer
of cells resulting from these movements is the ectoderm,
and the inner layer is the endoderm. Other cells that invo-
lute over the dorsal lip and ventral lip (the two lips of the
blastopore that are separated by the yolk plug) migrate be-
tween the ectoderm and endoderm to form the third germ
layer, the mesoderm (figure 60.11).

      
 

Neural fold

 

(e)

Frog gastrulation. (a) A layer of cells from the animal pole moves toward the yolk cells ultimately involuting through the dorsal lip of
the blastopore. (4) Cells in the dorsal lip zone then involute into the hollow interior, or blastocoel, eventually pressing against the far
wall. The three primary tissues (ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm) become distinguished. Ectoderm is shown in blue, mesoderm in
red, and endoderm in yellow. (¢) The movement of cells in the dorsal lip creates a new internal cavity, the archenteron, which opens to
the outside through the plug of yolk remaining at the point of invagination. (d) The neural plate later forms from ectoderm. (e) This will
next form a neural groove and then a neural tube as the embryo begins the process of neurulation. The cells of the neural ectoderm are
shown in green.

1222 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body
