Sperm Zygote

——_>
Ovum Develop in early
_—” enbye
Seminiferous
Y

@® :

 

tubules

 

Indifferent

 

Leydig
cells

 

 

 

 

 

®
= g—+| @

Sperm Zygote

FIGURE 59.3

gonads
a

(Follicles do not
develop until
third trimester)

Sex determination in mammals is made by a region of the Y chromosome designated SRY. Testes are formed when the Y
chromosome and SRY are present; ovaries are formed when they are absent.

There are some deep-sea fish that are hermaphro-
dites—both male and female at the same time. Numerous
fish genera include species in which individuals can
change their sex, a process called sequential hermaphro-
ditism. Among coral reef fish, for example, both protog-
yny (“first female,” a change from female to male) and
protandry (“first male,” a change from male to female)
occur. In fish that practice protogyny (figure 59.20), the
sex change appears to be under social control. These fish
commonly live in large groups, or schools, where success-
ful reproduction is typically limited to one or a few large,
dominant males. If those males are removed, the largest
female rapidly changes sex and becomes a dominant
male.

Sex Determination

Among the fish just described, and in some species of rep-
tiles, environmental changes can cause changes in the sex of
the animal. In mammals, the sex is determined early in em-
bryonic development. The reproductive systems of human
males and females appear similar for the first 40 days after
conception. During this time, the cells that will give rise to
ova or sperm migrate from the yolk sac to the embryonic
gonads, which have the potential to become either ovaries
in females or testes in males. For this reason, the embry-

onic gonads are said to be “indifferent.” If the embryo is a
male, it will have a Y chromosome with a gene whose prod-
uct converts the indifferent gonads into testes. In females,
which lack a Y chromosome, this gene and the protein it
encodes are absent, and the gonads become ovaries. Recent
evidence suggests that the sex-determining gene may be
one known as SRY (for “sex-determining region of the Y
chromosome”) (figure 59.3). The SRY gene appears to have
been highly conserved during the evolution of different
vertebrate groups.

Once testes form in the embryo, the testes secrete
testosterone and other hormones that promote the devel-
opment of the male external genitalia and accessory repro-
ductive organs. If the embryo lacks testes (the ovaries are
nonfunctional at this stage), the embryo develops female
external genitalia and sex accessory organs. In other words,
all mammalian embryos will develop female sex accessory
organs and external genitalia unless they are masculinized
by the secretions of the testes.

 

Sexual reproduction is most common among animals,
but many reproduce asexually by fission, budding, or
parthenogenesis. Sexual reproduction generally involves
the fusion of gametes derived from different individuals
of a species, but some species are hermaphroditic.

 

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1197
