The ionic bond

 

STRUCTURES OF IONIC SOLIDS

Tonic compounds include salts, oxides, hydroxides, sulphides, and the
majority of inorganic compounds. Ionic solids are held together by the
electrostatic attraction between the positive and negative ions. Plainly
there will be repulsion if ions of the same charge are adjacent, and at-
traction will occur when positive ions are surrounded by negative ions,
and vice versa. The attractive force will be a maximum when each ion is
surrounded by the greatest possible number of oppositely charged ions.
The number of ions surrounding any particular ion is called the coordina-
tion number. Positive and negative ions will both have the same co-
ordination number when there are equal numbers of both types of ions,
as in NaCl, but the coordination numbers for positive and negative ions are
different when there are different numbers of the ions, as in CaCl.

RADIUS RATIO RULES

The structures of many ionic solids can be accounted for by considering the
telative sizes of the positive and negative ions, and their relative numbers.
Simple geometric calculations allow us to work out how many ions of a
Biven size can be in contact with a smaller ion. Thus we can predict the
Coordination number from the relative sizes of the ions.

When the coordination number is three in an ionic compound AX, three
x tons are in contact with one A* ion (Figure 3,1a). A limiting case arises
(Figure 3.1b) when the X7 ions are also in contact with one another. By
Simple geometry this gives the ratio (radius A */radius X~) = 0.155. This is
the lower limit for a coordination number of 3. If the radius ratio is less
than 0.155 then the positive ion is not in contact with the negative ions, and
eas in the hole, and the structure is unstable (Figure 3.1c). If the
round cach, Is greater than 0.155 then it is possible to fit three X~ ions
the vadive A ion. As the difference in the size of the two ions increases,
0225), 4 ratio also increases, and at some point (when the ratio exceeds
‘ound, ecomes Possible to fit four ions round one, and so on for six ions

One, and eight ions round one. Coordination numbers of 3,4, 6 and

 

 

{c)

Figure 3.1 Sizes of ians for
coordination number 3.
