Reptiles and Birds

The eggs produced by reptiles, birds, and some fish are
composed almost entirely of yolk, with a small amount of
cytoplasm concentrated at one pole. Cleavage in these eggs
occurs only in the tiny disc of polar cytoplasm, called the
blastodisc, that lies astride the large ball of yolk material.
This type of cleavage pattern is called meroblastic cleavage
(figure 60.8). The resulting embryo is not spherical, but
rather has the form of a thin cap perched on the yolk.

Mammals

Mammalian eggs are in many ways similar to the reptilian
eggs from which they evolved, except that they contain
very little yolk. Because cleavage is not impeded by yolk in
mammalian eggs, it is holoblastic, forming a ball of cells
surrounding a blastocoel. However, an inner cell mass is
concentrated at one pole (figure 60.9). This inner cell mass
is analogous to the blastodise of reptiles and birds, and it
goes on to form the developing embryo. The outer sphere
of cells, called a trophoblast, is analogous to the cells that
form the membranes underlying the tough outer shell of
the reptilian egg. These cells have changed during the
course of mammalian evolution to carry out a very different
function: part of the trophoblast enters the endometrium
(the epithelial lining of the uterus) and contributes to the
placenta, the organ that permits exchanges between the
fetal and maternal bloods. While part of the placenta is
composed of fetal tissue (the trophoblast), part is composed
of the modified endometrial tissue (called the decidua
basalis) of the mother’s uterus. The placenta will be dis-
cussed in more detail in a later section.

The Blastula

Viewed from the outside, the blastula looks like a simple
ball of cells all resembling each other. In many animals, this
appearance is misleading, as unequal distribution of devel-
opmental signals from the egg produces some degree of
mosaic development, so that the cells are already commit-
ted to different developmental paths. In mammals, how-
ever, it appears that all of the blastomeres receive equiva-
lent sets of signals, and body form is determined by
cell-cell interactions. In a mammalian blastula, called a blas-
tocyst, each cell is in contact with a different set of neigh-
boring cells, and these interactions with neighboring cells
are a major factor influencing the developmental fate of
each cell. This positional information is of particular im-
portance in the orientation of mammalian embryos, setting
up different patterns of development along three embry-
onic axes: anterior-posterior, dorsal-ventral, and proximal-
distal.

For a short period of time, just before they implant in
the uterus, the cells of the mammalian blastocyst have the
power to develop into many of the 210 different types of

1220 Part XIV Regulating the Animal Body

Yolk

a Cleaving
embryonic
cells

FIGURE 60.8

Meroblastic cleavage (400%). In this type of cleavage, only a
portion of the egg actively divides to form a mass of cells.

    

Inner cell Blastocoel

mass —__o:

Blastodisc
QXxX, Yolk

Trophoblast

FIGURE 60.9

‘The embryos of mammals and birds are more similar than
they seem. (a) A mammalian blastula is composed of a sphere of
cells, the trophoblast, surrounding a cavity, the blastocoel, and an
inner cell mass. () An avian (bird) blastula consists of a cap of
cells, the blastodisc, resting atop a large yolk mass. The blastodise
will form an upper and a lower layer with a compressed blastocoel
in between.

cells in the body—and probably all of them. Biologists have
long sought to grow these cells, called embryonic stem cells,
in tissue culture, as such stem cells might in principle be
used to produce tissues for human transplant operations.
Injected into a patient, for example, they might be able to
respond to local signals and produce new tissue (see chap-
ter 19). The first success in growing stem cells in culture
was reported in 1998, when researchers isolated cells from
the inner cell mass of human blastocysts and successfully
grew them in tissue culture. These stem cells continue to
grow and divide in culture indefinitely, unlike ordinary
body cells, which divide only 50 or so times and then die.

 

Aseries of rapid cell divisions called cleavage
transforms the zygote into a hollow ball of cells, the
blastula. The cleavage pattern is influenced by the
amount of yolk and its distribution in the egg.

 
