blastocyst consists of an inner cell mass, which will become
the body of the embryo, and a surrounding layer of tro-
phoblast cells (see figure 60.9). The blastocyst begins to
grow rapidly and initiates the formation of the amnion and
the chorion. The blastocyst digests its way into the en-
dometrial lining of the uterus in the process known as im-
plantation.

During the second week after fertilization, the develop-
ing chorion forms branched extensions, the chorionic frondo-
sum (fetal placenta) that protrude into the endometrium
(figure 60.21). These extensions induce the surrounding
endometrial tissue to undergo changes and become the de-
cidua basalis (maternal placenta). Together, the chorionic
frondosum and decidua basalis form a single functioning
unit, the placenta (figure 60.22). Within the placenta, the
mother’s blood and the blood of the embryo come into
close proximity but do not mix (see figure 60.21). Oxygen
can thus diffuse from the mother to the embryo, and car-
bon dioxide can diffuse in the opposite direction. In addi-
tion to exchanging gases, the placenta provides nourish-
ment for the embryo, detoxifies certain molecules that may
pass into the embryonic circulation, and secretes hor-
mones. Certain substances such as alcohol, drugs, and an-
tibiotics are not stopped by the placenta and pass from the
mother’s bloodstream to the fetus.

One of the hormones released by the placenta is human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which was discussed in
chapter 59. This hormone is secreted by the trophoblast
cells even before they become the chorion, and is the hor-
mone assayed in pregnancy tests. Because its action is al-
most identical to that of luteinizing hormone (LH), hCG
maintains the mother’s corpus luteum. The corpus luteum,
in turn, continues to secrete estradiol and progesterone,
thereby preventing menstruation and further ovulations.

Gastrulation also takes place in the second week after
fertilization. The primitive streak can be seen on the sur-
face of the embryo, and the three germ layers (ectoderm,
mesoderm, and endoderm) are differentiated.

In the third week, neurulation occurs. This stage is
marked by the formation of the neural tube along the dor-
sal axis of the embryo, as well as by the appearance of the
first somites, which give rise to the muscles, vertebrae, and
connective tissues. By the end of the week, over a dozen
somites are evident, and the blood vessels and gut have
begun to develop. At this point, the embryo is about 2 mil-
limeters long.

Organogenesis (the formation of body organs) begins
during the fourth week (figure 60.232). The eyes form. The
tubular heart develops its four chambers and starts to pul-
sate rhythmically, as it will for the rest of the individual’s
life. At 70 beats per minute, the heart is destined to beat
more than 2.5 billion times during a lifetime of 70 years.
Over 30 pairs of somites are visible by the end of the fourth
week, and the arm and leg buds have begun to form. The
embryo has increased in length to about 5 millimeters. Al-
though the developmental scenario is now far advanced,

 

 

FIGURE 60.22
Placenta and fetus at seven weeks.

many women are unaware they are pregnant at this stage.

Early pregnancy is a very critical time in development
because the proper course of events can be interrupted eas-
ily. In the 1960s, for example, many pregnant women took
the tranquilizer thalidomide to minimize the discomforts
associated with early pregnancy. Unfortunately, this drug
had not been adequately tested. It interferes with limb bud
development, and its widespread use resulted in many de-
formed babies. Organogenesis may also be disrupted dur-
ing the first and second months of pregnancy if the mother
contracts rubella (German measles). Most spontaneous
abortions occur during this period.

The Second Month

Morphogenesis (the formation of shape) takes place dur-
ing the second month (figure 60.230). The miniature limbs
of the embryo assume their adult shapes. The arms, legs,
knees, elbows, fingers, and toes can all be seen—as well as a
short bony tail! The bones of the embryonic tail, an evolu-
tionary reminder of our past, later fuse to form the coccyx.
Within the abdominal cavity, the major organs, including
the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder, become evident. By the
end of the second month, the embryo has grown to about
25 millimeters in length, weighs about one gram, and be-
gins to look distinctly human.

Chapter 60 Vertebrate Development 1233
