 

ARRANGEMENT OF THE ELEMENTS IN GROUPS IN THE PERIODIC TABLE

 

]

 

25

 

ARRANGEMENT OF THE ELEMENTS IN GROUPS IN THE
PERIODIC TABLE

The chemical properties of an element are largely governed by the number
of electrons in the outer shell, and their arrangement. If the elements are
arranged in groups which have the same outer electronic arrangement,
then elements within a group should show similarities in chemical and
physical properties. One great advantage of this is that initially it is only
necessary to learn the properties of each group rather than the properties
of each individual element.

Elements with one s electron in their outer shell are called Group 1
(the alkali metals) and elements with two s electrons in their outer shell
are called Group 2 (the alkaline earth metals). These two groups are
known as the s-block elements, because their properties result from the
presence of s electrons.

Elements with three electrons in their outer shell (two s electrons and
one p electron) are called Group 13, and similarly Group 14 elements
have four outer electrons, Group 15 elements have five outer electrons,
Group 16 elements have six outer electrons and Group 17 elements have
Seven outer electrons. Group 18 elements have a full outer shell of
electrons. Groups 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 all have p orbitals filled and
because their properties are dependent on the presence of p electrons,
they are called jointly the p-bdlock elements.

In a similar way, elements where d orbitals are being filled are called
the d-block, or transition, elements. In these, d electrons are being added
to the penultimate shell, For example, the element scandium Sc is the
first transition element, and follows immediately after the element calcium
Ca, which is in Group 2. The outer shell of calcium contains two s
electrons. Scandium also has two s electrons, but also has one d electron
(albeit in the pentultimate shell); hence the scandium group is called
Group 3. Similarly, titanium Ti (the second transition element) has two s
électrons, and also two d electrons (in the penultimate shell); hence the
ham Bru. is called Group 4. Up to ten d electrons can be added;
Feat ¢ transition metals are arranged in Group 3 to Group 12 inclusive.
hete th ef cements where f orbitals are filling are called the f-block, and

electr i i
outside) chet Ons are entering the antepenultimate (or second from the
increas periodic table (Table 1.4), the elements are arranged in order of
increacea numb , er, that is in order of increased nuclear charge, or
more orbital slong of orbital electrons. Thus each element contains one
elements as one on a the preceding element. Instead of listing the 103
ig list, the periodic table arranges them into several

horizontal i
¢ rows or periods, in such a way that each row begi i
alkali metal and ends with a : nthe variows

 
