7.1 Cells signal one another with chemicals.

Receptor Proteins and
Signaling between Cells

Communication between cells is com-
mon in nature. Cell signaling occurs
in all multicellular organisms, provid-
ing an indispensable mechanism for
cells to influence one another. The
cells of multicellular organisms use a
variety of molecules as signals, includ-
ing not only peptides, but also large
proteins, individual amino acids, nu-
cleotides, steroids and other lipids.

Even dissolved gases are used as
signals. Nitric oxide (NO) plays a role
in mediating male erections (Viagra
functions by stimulating NO release).

Some of these molecules are at-
tached to the surface of the signaling
cell; others are secreted through the
plasma membrane or released by
exocytosis.

<3

   

FIGURE 7.2

Cell Surface Receptors

Any given cell of a multicellular organism is exposed to a
constant stream of signals. At any time, hundreds of differ-
ent chemical signals may be in the environment surround-
ing the cell. However, each cell responds only to certain
signals and ignores the rest (figure 7.2), like a person fol-
lowing the conversation of one or two individuals in a
noisy, crowded room. How does a cell “choose” which sig-
nals to respond to? Located on or within the cell are re-
ceptor proteins, each with a three-dimensional shape that
fits the shape of a specific signal molecule. When a signal
molecule approaches a receptor protein of the right shape,
the two can bind. This binding induces a change in the re-
ceptor protein’s shape, ultimately producing a response in
the cell. Hence, a given cell responds to the signal mole-
cules that fit the particular set of receptor proteins it pos-
sesses, and ignores those for which it lacks receptors.

The Hunt for Receptor Proteins

The characterization of receptor proteins has presented a
very difficult technical problem, because of their relative
scarcity in the cell. Because these proteins may constitute
less than 0.01% of the total mass of protein in a cell, puri-
fying them is analogous to searching for a particular grain
of sand in a sand dune! However, two recent techniques
have enabled cell biologists to make rapid progress in this
area.

124 Part II Biology of the Cell

Signal

\ molecules

” D>

go
Bw Bo

Extracellular
surface

t

     

    
      

Cell surface receptors recognize only specific molecules. Signal molecules will bind
only to those cells displaying receptor proteins with a shape into which they can fit snugly.

Monoclonal antibodies. The first method uses mono-
clonal antibodies. An antibody is an immune system pro-
tein that, like a receptor, binds specifically to another
molecule. Each individual immune system cell can make
only one particular type of antibody, which can bind to
only one specific target molecule. Thus, a cell-line de-
rived from a single immune system cell (a clone) makes
one specific antibody (a monoclonal antibody). Mono-
clonal antibodies that bind to particular receptor pro-
teins can be used to isolate those proteins from the
thousands of others in the cell.

Gene analysis. The study of mutants and isolation of
gene sequences has had a tremendous impact on the
field of receptor analysis. In chapter 19 we will present a
detailed account of how this is done. These advances
make it feasible to identify and isolate the many genes
that encode for various receptor proteins.

Remarkably, these techniques have revealed that the
enormous number of receptor proteins can be grouped into
just a handful of “families” containing many related recep-
tors. Later in this chapter we will meet some of the mem-
bers of these receptor families.

 

Cells in a multicellular organism communicate with
others by releasing signal molecules that bind to
receptor proteins on the surface of the other cells.
Recent advances in protein isolation have yielded a
wealth of information about the structure and function
of these proteins.

 
