 

FIGURE 59.17

 

A comparison of mammalian uteruses. (a) Humans and other primates; (b) cats, dogs, and cows; and (c) rats, mice, and rabbits.

Menstrual and Estrous Cycles

At birth, a female’s ovaries contain some 2 million follicles,
each with an ovum that has begun meiosis but which is ar-
rested in prophase of the first meiotic division. At this
stage, the ova are called primary oocytes. Some of these
primary-oocyte-containing follicles are stimulated to de-
velop during each cycle. The human menstrual (Latin mens,
“month”) cycle lasts approximately one month (28 days on
the average) and can be divided in terms of ovarian activity
into a follicular phase and luteal phase, with the two phases
separated by the event of ovulation.

Follicular Phase

During the follicular phase, a few follicles are stimulated to
grow under FSH stimulation, but only one achieves full
maturity as a tertiary, or Graafian, follicle (figure 59.18).
This follicle forms a thin-walled blister on the surface of
the ovary. The primary oocyte within the Graafian follicle
completes the first meiotic division during the follicular
phase. Instead of forming two equally large daughter cells,
however, it produces one large daughter cell, the secondary
oocyte, and one tiny daughter cell, called a polar body.
Thus, the secondary oocyte acquires almost all of the cyto-
plasm from the primary oocyte, increasing its chances of
sustaining the early embryo should the oocyte be fertilized.
The polar body, on the other hand, often disintegrates.
The secondary oocyte then begins the second meiotic divi-
sion, but its progress is arrested at metaphase IL. It is in this
form that the egg cell is discharged from the ovary at ovu-
lation, and it does not complete the second meiotic division
unless it becomes fertilized in the fallopian tube.

 

Secondary

 

Granulosa
cells

FIGURE 59.18

A mature Graafian follicle in a cat ovary (50x). Note the ring
of granulosa cells that surrounds the secondary oocyte. This ring
will remain around the egg cell when it is ovulated, and sperm
must tunnel through the ring in order to reach the plasma
membrane of the egg cell.

Chapter 59 Sex and Reproduction 1207
