 

SUMMARY OF MULTI-CENTRE x BONDED STRUCTURES

 

 

117]

 

 

and involves multi-centre x molecular orbitals. The molecule contains
16 outer shell electrons, made up from six electrons from each of the two
O atoms and four electrons from the C atom.

The C atom forms o bonds to both the O atoms, thus accounting for four
electrons. There are no lone pairs of electrons on the C atom. If the O
atoms also use sp hybrid orbitals then there is one lone pair of electrons on
each O atom, accounting for a further four electrons. This accounts for
eight electrons altogether, leaving eight electrons available for x bonding.

If the o bonding and lone pairs of electrons occupy the 2s and 2p, atomic
orbitals on each O atom, then the 2p, and 2p, atomic orbitals can be used
for x bonding. Thus there are six atomic orbitals available for x bonding.
The three 2p, atomic orbitals (one from C and one from each of the O
atoms) form three three-centre x molecular orbitals which cover all three
atoms. The MO with the lowest energy is called a bonding molecular
orbital. The MO with the highest energy is called an antibonding MO, and
the remaining MO is non-bonding. In a similar way, the three 2p, atomic
orbitals also form bonding, non-bonding and antibonding three-centre 1
molecular orbitals. Each of these MOs covers all three atoms in the mol-
ecule. The eight 7 electrons occupy the MOs of lowest energy, in this case
two electrons in the bonding 2p, MO, two electrons in the bonding 2p,
MO, then two electrons in the non-bonding 2p, MO and two electrons in
the non-bonding 2p, MO. This gives a net contribution of two x bonds to
re molecule, in addition to the two o bonds. Thus the bond order C—O is
thus two.

Azide ion Ny

The Nj ion has 16 outer electrons (five from each N and one from the
charge on the ion). It is isoelectronic with COz2, and is linear N—N—N
like CO2. We assume the central N uses sp hybrid orbitals for o bonding.

Four electrons are used for the two a bonds. Each of the end N atoms
has one non-bonding pair of electrons, accounting for four more electrons.
This leaves eight electrons for = bonding.

If the bonding and non-bonding electrons are assumed to use the 2s
and 2p, orbitals, this leaves six atomic orbitals for bondifig. These are
three 2p, AOs and three 2p, AOs. The three 2py orbitals form three three-
centre 7 molecular orbitals. The lowest in energy is bonding, the highest
is antibonding, and the remaining MO is non-bonding. In a similar way
the three 2p, atomic orbitals give bonding, non-bonding and antibonding
MOs. The cight x electrons fill both of the bonding MOs, and both of the
non-bonding MOs. Thus there are two o and two = bonds, giving a bond
order of 2. Thus both N—N bonds are the same length, 146A.

SUMMARY OF MULTICENTRE x BONDED STRUCTURES
Isoelectronic s
(Table 4.6).

pecies have the same shape and the same bond order -
