 

NONSTOICHIOMETRIC DEFECTS

 

61

 

 

 

ion requires less energy. However, migration of both types of ions in
opposite directions (using both types of holes) occurs at high temperatures.
For example, at temperatures below 500°C the alkali halides conduct by
migration of the cations, but at higher temperatures both anions and
cations migrate. Further, the amount of anionic conduction increases with
temperature, as shown in Table 3.7. 7

The density of a defect lattice should be different from that of a perfect
lattice. The presence of holes’ should lower the density, but if there are
too many ‘holes’ there may be a partial collapse or distortion of the lattice —
in which case the change in density is unpredictable. The presence of ions
in interstitial positions may distort (expand) the lattice and increase the
unit cell dimensions.

NONSTOICHIOMETRIC DEFECTS

Nonstoichiometric or Berthollide compounds exist over a range of
chemical composition. The ratio of the number of atoms of one kind to the
number of atoms of the other kind does not correspond exactly to the ideal
whole number ratio implied by the formula. Such compounds do not obey
the law of constant composition. There are many examples of these com-
pounds, particularly in the oxides and sulphides of the transition elements.
Thus in FeO, FeS or CuS the ratio of Fe: O, Fe:S or Cu:S differs from
that indicated by the ideal chemical formula. If the ratio of atoms is not
exactly 1:1 in the above cases, there must be either an excess of metal
ions, or a deficiency of metal ions (e.g. Feg gs0-Fey 940, Fea,yS).
Electrical neutrality is maintained either by having extra electrons in the
structure, or changing the charge on some of the metal ions. This makes
the Structure irregular in some way, i.e. it contains defects, which are in
addition to the normal thermodynamic defects already discussed.

Metal excess

This may occur in two different ways.

Fecentres

lcd ion may be absent from its lattice site, leaving a ‘hole’ which is
Figure 3 7 an electron, thereby maintaining the electrical balance (see
‘holes? aad ). This is Tather similar to a Schottky defect in that there are
pair The not interstitial ions, but only one ‘hole’ is formed rather than a
form Sche ag of defect is formed by crystals which would be expected to
i heated y defects. When compounds such as NaCl, KCI, Li or 8-TiO.
high ener Mae heise of their constituent metal vapours, or treated with
formulae ac ation, they become deficient in the negative ions, and their
nonstoichi 'y e Tepresented by AX\_,. where is a small fraction. The

tchtometric form of NaCl is yellow, and the nonstoichiometric

Figure 3.15 Metal excess defect
because of absent anion.
