 

SOME EXAMPLES USING THE VSEPR THEORY

 

77

 

 

 

 

Isoelectronic principle

Isoelectronic species usually have the same structure. This may be ex-
tended to species with the same number of valence electrons. Thus BF; ,
CH, and NH¢ are all tetrahedral, CO}-, NOF and SOs are all planar
triangles, and CO), Nx and NO? are all linear.

SOME EXAMPLES USING THE VSEPR THEORY

BF, and the (BF4]~ ion

Consider BF, first. The VSEPR theory only requires the number of
electron pairs in the outer shell of the central atom. Since B is in Group
13 it has three electrons in the outer shell. (Alternatively the electronic
structure of B (the central atom), is 15? 2s? 2p', so there are three electrons
in the outer valence shell.) If all three outer electrons are used to form
bonds to three F atoms, the outer shell then has a share in six electrons,
that is three electron pairs. Thus the structure is a planar triangle. Though
this gives the correct.shape, its bonds are actually shorter than would be
expected for single bonds, and the reason for this is discussed under
‘Trihalides’ in Chapter 12. :

The [BF,]~ ion may be regarded as being formed by adding a F~ ion to
a BF; molecule by means of a coordinate bond. Thus the B atom now
has three electron pairs from the BF; plus one electron pair from the F~
There are therefore four electron pairs in the outer shell: hence the BF;
ion has a tetrahedral structure. ‘ .

Ammonia NH3- Y '

bow : 1

Nis the central atom. It‘is in Group 15 and has five electrons in the outer
valence shell. (The electronic structure of N is 1s? 2s? 2p*.) Three of these
electrons are used to form bonds to three H atoms, and two electrons take
no Part in bonding and constitute a ‘lone pair’. The outer shell then has a
share in eight electrons, that is threé bond pairs of electrons and one lone
Pair. Four electron pairs give rise to a tetrahedral structure and in this
case three positions are occupied by H atoms and the fourth position is
Occupied by the lone pair (Figure 4.1). The shape of NH; may either be
described as tetrahedral with one corner occupied by a lone pair, or
alternatively as pyramidal. The presence of the lone pair causes slight
distortion from 109°28' to 107°48".

WaterH,0 |”

0 ee central atom. It is in Group 16 and hence has six outer electrons.
bonds win panic structure of O is 1s 2s* 2p*.) Two of these electrons form
electrons a H atoms, thus completing the octet. The other four outer
electrons (4 are non-bonding. Thus in HO the O atom has eight outer

(four electron Pairs) so the structure is based on a tetrahedron.

cre , S
are two bond pairs and two lone pairs. The structure is described as

 

Figure 4.2 Structure of H,0.
