 

MOLECULAR ORBITAL METHOD

 

in the sulphur trioxide molecule SO; valency requirements suggest the
structure
Oo
I
S.
ass
oO oO
The central S atom must be excited to provide six unpaired electrons to
form six bonds.

Electronic structure of
sulphur atom — excited
state

Sulphur atom having gained
six electrons from six bonds
to oxygen atoms in SOs
molecule

 

three o bonds three m bonds

The three x bonds are ignored in determining the shape of the molecule.
The three o orbitals are directed towards the corners of an equilateral
triangle, and the SO; molecule is a completely regular plane triangle
(Figure 4.13). The x bonds shorten the bond lengths, but do not affect the
shape. This approach’ explains the o bonding and shape of the molecule,
but the explanation of x bonding is unsatisfactory. It presumes: .

1. That one 3p and two 3d orbitals on S are in the correct orientation to
overlap sideways with the 2p, or 2p, orbitals on three different
O atoms, and

2, That the x bonds formed are all of equal strength.

This calls into question the treatment of x bonds. In moleculés with more
than one x bond, or molecules where the x bond could equally welll exist'in
more than one position, it is better to treat the x bonding as being de-'
localized over several atoms rather than localized between two atoms.
This approach is developed near the end of this chapter.

MOLECULAR ORBITAL METHOD , ‘

In the valence bond (clectron pair) theory, a molecule is considered to be
made up of atoms. Electrons in atoms occupy atomic orbitals. These may
wiibehia be hybridized. If they are hybridized, atomic orbitals from the
often combine to produce hybrid orbitals which can overlap more,
Thus the orbit from other atoms, thus producing stronger bonds.
even wh a ‘omic orbit (or the hybrid orbitals) are thought to remain
"when the atom is chemically bonded in a molecule.
In the molecular orbital theory, the valency electrons are considered to

   

} [89]

Lo™,

Figure 4.13 Sulphur trioxide
molecule.

0
