 

 

LCAO METHOD

 

 

[95]

 

occur, resulting in x bonding and x* antibonding MOs being produced
(Figure 4.19). ;

There are three points of difference between these molecular orbitals
and the o orbitals described previously:

For x overlap the lobes of the atomic orbitals are perpendicular to the
jine joining the nuclei, whilst for o overlap the lobes point along the line
joining the two nuclei.

For x molecular orbitals, y is zero along the internuclear line and
consequently the electron density 1p’ is also zero. This is in contrast to o
orbitals. :
The symmetry of molecular orbitals is different from that shown by o
orbitals. If the bonding x MO is rotated about the internuclear line
a change in the sign of the lobe occurs. The x bonding orbitals are
therefore ungerade, whereas all o bonding MOs are gerade. Conversely
the antibonding x MO is gerade whilst all o antibonding MOs are
ungerade.

n

ow

Pi bonding is important in many organic compounds such as ethene
(where there is one o bond and one x bond between the two carbon
atoms), ethyne (one o and two x), and benzene, and also in a number of
inorganic compounds such as CO2 and CN~

Ethene contains a localized double bond, which involves only the two
carbon atoms. Experimental measurements show that the two C atoms and
the four H atoms are coplanar, and the bond angles are close to 120°. Each
Catom uses its 2s and two 2p orbitals to form three sp” hybrid orbitals that
form o bonds to the other C atom and two H atoms. The remaining p
orbital on each C atom is at right angles to the o bonds so far formed. In
the valence bond theory these two p orbitals overlap sideways to give a
bond. This sideways overlap is not as great as the end to end overlap in a
bonds so a C=C, though stronger than a C—C bond, is not twice as strong
(C—C in ethane 346kJ mol™!, C==C in ethene 598kJ mol~'). The mol-
ecule can be twisted about the C—C bond in ethane, but it cannot be
twisted in ethene since this would reduce the amount of x overlap. In
the molecular orbital theory the explanation of the x bonding is slightly
different. The two p orbitals involved in x bonding combine to form two 1
molecular orbitals, one bonding and one antibonding. Since there are only
two electrons involved, these occupy the = bonding MO since this has the
lower energy. The molecular orbital explanation becomes more important
m cases where there is non-localized x bonding, that is where 2 bonding
Covers several atoms as in benzene, NOX and CO2-.

In ethyne each C atom uses sp hybrid orbitals to form o bonds to the
Other C atom and a H atom. These four atoms form a linear molecule.
Each C atom has two p orbitals at right angles to one another, and these
eee sideways with the equivalent p orbitals on the other C atom, thus
‘Orming two x bonds. Thus a C==C triple bond is formed, which is
Stronger than a C=C double bond (C==C in ethyne 813kJ mol7!).

The majority of strong x bonds occur between elements of the first short
