Tight Junctions

Cell junctions are divided into three
categories, based upon the functions

  

 

they serve (figure 7.16): tight junc-
tions, anchoring junctions, and com-
municating junctions.

Sometimes called occluding junc-
tions, tight junctions connect the Is z e|
plasma membranes of adjacent cells in night =
a sheet, preventing small molecules
from leaking between the cells and
through the sheet (figure 7.17). This
allows the sheet of cells to act as a

wall within the organ, keeping mole-
cules on one side or the other.

 

 

Intracellular Transmembrane Primary cell Plasma
attachment linking proteins wall membrane
proteins Plasma Middle
membranes lamella
L S
Lumen \
moott
ER
junctio
Central
tubule
Cell Cell
Extracellular matrix 1 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Creating Sheets of Cells (a) Tight junction

The cells that line an animal’s diges-
tive tract are organized in a sheet
only one cell thick. One surface of
the sheet faces the inside of the tract
and the other faces the extracellular
space where blood vessels are lo-
cated. Tight junctions encircle each
cell in the sheet, like a belt cinched
around a pair of pants. The junc-
tions between neighboring cells are so securely attached
that there is no space between them for leakage. Hence,
nutrients absorbed from the food in the digestive tract

must pass directly through the cells in the sheet to enter
the blood.

FIGURE 7.16

Partitioning the Sheet

The tight junctions between the cells lining the digestive
tract also partition the plasma membranes of these cells
into separate compartments. Transport proteins in the
membrane facing the inside of the tract carry nutrients
from that side to the cytoplasm of the cells. Other proteins,
located in the membrane on the opposite side of the cells,
transport those nutrients from the cytoplasm to the extra-
cellular fluid, where they can enter the blood. For the sheet
to absorb nutrients properly, these proteins must remain in
the correct locations within the fluid membrane. Tight
junctions effectively segregate the proteins on opposite
sides of the sheet, preventing them from drifting within the
membrane from one side of the sheet to the other. When
tight junctions are experimentally disrupted, just this sort
of migration occurs.

 

Tight junctions connect the plasma membranes of
adjacent cells into sheets.

 

136 = Part II Biology of the Cell

(b) Anchoring junction (c) Communicating junction

The three types of cell junctions. These three models represent current thinking on how
the structures of the three major types of cell junctions facilitate their function: (a) tight
junction; (b) anchoring junction; (2) communicating junction.

— Glucose

Apical surface

    
 
 
 
 
 
  

Tight junction

Plasma membranes
of adjacent cells

Intercellular space

Extracellular
fluid

FIGURE 7.17

Tight junctions. Encircling the cell like a tight belt, these
intercellular contacts ensure that materials move through the
cells rather than between them.
