 

SEMICONDUCTORS AND TRANSISTORS

 

63

 

 

 

 

variable valency of the metal, and might therefore be expected with the
transition metals.

Positive ions absent

Ifa positive ion is absent from its lattice site, the charges can be balanced
by an adjacent metal'ion having an extra positive charge (see Figure 3.17).
Examples of this are FeO, NiO, 5-TiO, FeS and Cul. (If an Fe?* is missing
from its lattice site in FeO, then there must be two Fe>* ions somewhere in
the lattice to balance the electrical charges. Similarly if a Ni** is missing
from its lattice site in NiO, there must be two Ni** present in the lattice.)

Crystals with metal deficiency defects are semiconductors. Suppose the
lattice contains A* and A?* metal ions. If an electron ‘hops’ from an A*
ion to the positive centre (an A?* ion), the original A* becomes a new
positive centre. There has been an apparent movement of A**. With a
series of similar ‘hops’, an electron may be transferred in one direction
across the structure, and at the same time the positive hole migrates in the
opposite direction across the structure. This is called positive hole, or
p-type semiconduction.

Ifa defect oxide of this type is heated in dioxygen, its room temperature
conductivity increases, because the dioxygen oxidizes some of the metal
ions, and this increases the number of positive centres.

Extra interstitial negative ions

In principle it might be possible to have an extra negative ion in an
interstitial position and to balance the charges by means of an extra charge
on an adjacent metal ion (see Figure 3.18). However, since negative ions
are usually large, it would be difficult to fit them into interstitial positions.
No examples of crystals containing such negative interstitial ions are
known at present.

SEMICONDUCTORS AND TRANSISTORS

Semiconductors are solids where there is only a small difference in energy,
called a band gap, between the filled valency band of electrons and a
Conduction band. If cooled to absolute zero, the electrons occupy their
lowest Possible energy levels. The conduction band is empty, and the
material is a perfect insulator. At normal temperatures, some electrons are
thermally excited from the valency band to the conduction band, and
hence they can conduct electricity by the passage of electrons at normal
jemperatures. The conductivity is in between that of a metal and an
insulator and depends on the number of electrons in the conduction band.
iia and, to an even greater extent, silicon are the most im-
of both nel a. examples of semiconductors. The crystal structures
theiy ¢ like diamond. Atoms of Si and Ge both have four electrons in

Outer shell, which form four covalent bonds to other atoms. In both

OO-O®

@-
@)-

~4)-
O-6
©-O
O-O-

@

OO

Figure 3.17 Metal deficiency
caused by missing positive ion.

O®

®)

@-

1 Bt

©®

Oo

@)

®

©

©

Figure 3.18 Metal deficiency
caused by interstitial negative

ions.
