 

 

SUPERCONDUCTIVITY

143

 

 

 

‘The upper and lower cubes have a Ba?* jon at the body-centred position
and the smaller Cu* ions at each corner. The middle cube is similar but
has a Y3* ion at the body centre. A perovskite structure has the formula
ABO;, and the stoichiometry of this compound would be YBa,Cu3Oo.
Since the formula actually found is YBa,Cu307_,, there is a massive
oxygen deficiency, and about one quarter of the oxygen sites in the crystal
are vacant. In a perovskite cube, O?> are located half-way along each of
the 12 edges of the cube, Neutron diffraction shows that the O vacancies
are ordered. All the O which should be present at the same height up
the z axis as the Y atom are absent: half of the O atoms around Cu and
between the Ba planes are also missing. .

Several lanthanides, including Sm, Eu, Nd, Dy and Yb, have been
substituted for Y in 1-2-3 structures. Values of T, up to 93K are well
established. These are called warm superconductors.

In 1988 new systems were reported using Bi or TI instead of the lan-
thanides. For example, in the system BizSr,Cac,—1)Cu,O(2n+4) Compounds
are known where n is 1, 2, 3 and 4, These all have a perovskite structure
and have T, values of 12K, 80K, 110K and 90K respectively. A similar
range of compounds Tl,BazCay,—1)Cu,Ocan+4) are known with T, values
of 90K, 110K, 122K and 119K respectively. There are claims that the
compound Bi; 7Pbo 2Sbo ;StzCazCuz gO, has a T. value of 164K.

BaBiO, has a perovskite structure, but is not a superconductor. How-
ever, replacing some of the Ba sites with K, or replacing some of the Bi
sites with Pb, gives other superconducting phases such as K,Ba;_,)BiO3
and BaPby_.)Bi,O3. These compounds have relatively low 7, values, but
are of theoretical interest because they do not contain Cu or a lanthanide
element.

The race to discover superconductors which work at higher tempera-
tures continues. ‘The prospect of making superconductors which work at
Toom temperature will continue to attract attention, since its technical

applications have great financial benefits. What are these potential
‘uses? .

- The possibility of power transmission using a superconductor is highly
attractive. There are obvious difficulties about making long cables from
a ceramic material. However, low loss transmission of DC through
Tesistanceless cables from electricity generating power stations rather
than Ac through normal wire is economically attractive.

. Use in computers. One of the: biggest difficulties in further minia-
‘turization of computer chips is how to get rid of‘ unwanted heat. If

superconductors were used, the heat problems would be dramatically

reduced. The greater speed of chips is hindered by the time it takes to
charge a capacitor, due to the resistance of the interconnecting metal
film. Superconductors could lead to faster chips.

Powerful electromagnets using superconducting windings are already

4 pie It would be much easier to do this at higher temperatures.

~ Levitation ~ much pioneering work was done by Eric Laithwaite at

3.

 
