 

ELECTRONEGATIVITY

 

 

157

 

 

The extent to which ion distortion occurs depends on the power of an ion
to distort the other ion (that is on its polarizing power) and also on how
susceptible the ion is to distortion (that is on its polarizability). Generally
the polarizing power increases as ions become smaller and more highly
charged. The polarizability of a negative ion is greater than -that of a
positive ion since the electrons are less firmly bound because of the dif-
ferences in effective nuclear charge. Large negative ions are more polariz-
able than small ones.

Fajans put forward four rules which summarize the factors favouring
polarization and hence covalency.

1. A small positive ion favours covalency.
In small ions the positive charge is concentrated over a small area. This
makes the ion highly polarizing, and very good at distorting the negative
ion.

2. A large negative ion favours covalency.
Large ions are highly polarizable, that is easily distorted by the positive
ion, because the outermost electrons are shielded from the charge on
the nucleus by filled shells of electrons.

3. Large charges on either ion, or on both ions, favour covalency.
This is because a high charge increases the amount of polarization.

4. Polarization, and hence covalency, is favoured if the positive ion does
not have a noble gas configuration.
Examples of ions which do not have a noble gas configuration include
a few main group elements such as T!*, Pb?* and Bi>*, many transi-
tion metal ions such as Ti+, V3*, Cr°*, Mn?* and Cu*, and some
lanthanide metal ions such as Ce>* and Eu2*. A noble gas configuration
is the most effective at shielding the nuclear charge, so ions without the
noble gas configuration will have high charges at their surfaces, and thus
be highly polarizing.

ELECTRONEGATIVITY

In 1931, Pauling defined the electronegativity of an atom as the tendency

of the atom to attract electrons to itself when combined in a compound.
The implication of this is that when a covalent bond is formed, the
electrons used for bonding need not be shared equally by both atoms. If
re bonding electrons spend more time round one atom, that atom will
Inthe charge, and consequently the other atom will have a 5* charge.
the tine Tne case where the bonding electrons are round one atom all of
thee 1e ond is ionic. Pauling and others have attempted to relate
lectronegativity difference between two atoms to the amount of ionic

character in the bond between them.

and renee Smal atoms attract electrons more strongly than large ones,
shells of clon atoms are more electronegative. Atoms with nearly filled
sparsely ‘ons tend to have higher electronegativities than those with
Y occupied ones. Electronegativity values are very difficult to

 
