Why Study Fossils?

 

I grew up on the streets of New York City,
in a family of modest means and little for-
mal education, but with a deep love of
learning. Like many urban kids who be-
come naturalists, my inspiration came
from a great museum—in particular, from
the magnificent dinosaurs on display at the
American Museum of Natural History. As
we all know from Jurassic Park and other
sources, dinomania in young children (I
was five when I saw my first dinosaur) is
not rare—but nearly all children lose the
passion, and the desire to become a pale-
ontologist becomes a transient moment
between policeman and fireman in a chro-
nology of intended professions. But I per-
sisted and became a professional paleontol-
ogist, a student of life’s history as revealed
by the evidence of fossils (though I ended
up working on snails rather than dino-
saurs!). Why?

I remained committed to paleontology
because I discovered, still as a child, the
wonder of one of the greatest transforming
ideas ever discovered by science: evolution.
I learned that those dinosaurs, and all crea-
tures that have ever lived, are bound to-
gether in a grand family tree of physical re-
lationships, and that the rich and fascinating
changes of life, through billions of years in

Flight has evolved
three separate
times among ver-
tebrates. Birds and
bats are still with
us, but pterosaurs,
such as the one
pictured, became
extinct with the di-
nosaurs about 65
million years ago.

geological time, occur by a natural process
of evolutionary transformation—‘“descent
with modification,” in Darwin’s words. I
was thrilled to learn that humans had arisen
from apelike ancestors, who had themselves
evolved from the tiny mouselike mammals
that had lived in the time of dinosaurs and
seemed then so inconspicuous, so unsuc-
cessful, and so unpromising.

Now, at mid-career (I was born in 1941)
I remain convinced that I made the right
choice, and committed to learn and convey,
as much as I can as long as I can, about evo-
lution and the history of life. We can learn
a great deal about the process of evolution

 

bia

Stephen Jay Gould
Harvard University

by studying modern organisms. But history
is complex and unpredictable—and princi-
ples of evolution (like natural selection)
cannot specify the pathway that life’s histo-
ty has actually followed. Paleontology holds
the archives of the pathway—the fossil
record of past life, with its fascinating histo-
ry of mass extinctions, periods of rapid
change, long episodes of stability, and con-
stantly changing patterns of dominance and
diversity. Humans represent just one tiny,
largely fortuitous, and late-arising twig on
the enormously arborescent bush of life.
Paleontology is the study of this grandest of
all bushes.

Molecular Biology

Biochemical tools are now of major importance in efforts to
reach a better understanding of how evolution occurs.
Within the last few years, for example, evolutionary biolo-
gists have begun to “read” genes, much as you are reading
this page. They have learned to recognize the order of the
“letters” of the long DNA molecules, which are present in
every living cell and which provide the genetic information
for that organism. By comparing the sequences of “letters”
in the DNA of different groups of animals or plants, we can
specify the degree of relationship among the groups more
precisely than by any other means. In many cases, detailed
family trees can then be constructed. The consistent pattern
emerging from a growing mountain of data is one of pro-
gressive change over time, with more distantly related
species showing more differences in their DNA than closely
related ones, just as Darwin’s theory predicts. By measuring
the degree of difference in the genetic coding, and by inter-
preting the information available from the fossil record, we

16 Part The Origin of Living Things

can even estimate the rates at which evolution is occurring
in different groups of organisms.

Development

Twentieth-century knowledge about growth and develop-
ment further supports Darwin’s theory of evolution. Strik-
ing similarities are seen in the developmental stages of
many organisms of different species. Human embryos, for
example, go through a stage in which they possess the
same structures that give rise to the gills in fish, a tail, and
even a stage when the embryo has fur! Thus, the develop-
ment of an organism (its ontogeny) often yields informa-
tion about the evolutionary history of the species as a
whole (its phylogeny).

 

Since Darwin’s time, new discoveries of the fossil
record, genetics, anatomy, and development all support
Darwin’s theory.

 
