—_ _SIGMA_AND PI_ BONDS:

average radial distance is 2.46A, but when two 3d orbitals are occupied
the distance drops to 1.60A. The effect of changing the charge can be seen
in Table 4.5. .
A-further small contraction of d orbitals may arise by coupling of the
spins of electrons occupying different orbitals. . —
It seems probable that d orbitals do participate in bonding in cases
where d orbital contraction occurs.

SIGMA AND PI BONDS

All the bonds formed in these examples result from end to end overlap of
orbitals and are called sigma o bonds. Ino bonds the electron density is
concentrated in between the two atoms, and on a line joining the two
atoms. Double or triple bonds occur by the sideways overlap of orbitals,
giving pi x bonds.’ In x bonds the electron density also concentrates be-
tween the atoms, but on either side of the line joining the atoms. The
shape of the molecule is determined by the o bonds (and lone pairs) but
not by the x bonds. Pi bonds merely shorten the bond lengths.

Consider the structure of the carbon dioxide molecule. Since C is
typically four-valent and O is typically two-valent, the bonding can be
simply represented

O=C=O

Triatomic molecules must be either linear or angular. In CO, the C
atom must be excited to provide four unpaired electrons to form the four
bonds required. ,

 

 

 

 

Electronic structure of ce

carbon atom — ground i)

Electronic structure of

garbon atom — orctea tL | tT | {r | tT {t
Carbon atom having gained four

 

 

 

 

electrons from oxygen atoms bi : il tel ts
forming four bonds Y (n] bs] lr tit

5

Lt
@bonds x bonds

iow ate two 9 bonds and two x bonds in the molecule. Pi orbitals are
oie in determining the shape of the molecule. The remaining s and Dp
ies 2s used to form the 9 bonds. (These could be hybridized and the
theore son itals will point in opposite directions. Alternatively VSEPR
poste ees that these two orbitals will be oriented as far apart as
formin . ee two orbitals overlap with p orbitals from two O atoms,
orbitae Inear molecule with a bond angle of 180°. The 2py and 2p,

Is on C used for x bonding are at right angles to the bond; and

} (871

C68o-

(a)

(b)

Figure 4.11 Sigma and pi
overlap: (a) sigma overlap (lobes
point along the nuclei); (b) pi
overlap (lubes are at right angles
to the line joining the nuclei).
