 

 

20)

 

THE COVALENT BOND 7

 

Speakman, J.C, (1977) Molecular Structure: Is Study by Crystal Diffracton, Royat

‘Society for Chemistry, Monographs for Teachers 30.

‘Ureh, D'S, (1970) Orbits and Symmetry, Penguin,

Wade, K, (1971) Electron Deficient Compounds, Nelson, London

Worral. 1 and Wortal IJ. (1969) Introduction fo Valence Theory, Amencan
‘Elsevier Publshing Co., New York.

[Bond lengths and bond angles of molecular structures sn the crystaline and
fascous states are given sm The Chemcal Society's Special Publication I
Gneratome Dstances) and Special Publication 18 (Iniereome Dusances
Supplement)

PROBLEMS

1, Show by drawings how an s orbital, a p orbital or a d orbital on one
‘atom may overlap with s, p or d orbitals of an adjacent atom.

tion of atomic orbitals.

3, Show how the LCAO approximation gives rise to bonding and anti-
bonding orbitals Mustrate your answer by reference to three different
diatomic motecules.

2. Last three rules for the linear combi

 

4, Use the molecular orbital theory to explain why the bond strength ina
Nz molecule is greater than that in a Fz molecule. ‘

5. Use the MO theory to predict the bond order and the number of
unpaired electrons in 03", OF, Oz, OF, NO and CO.

6. Draw MO energy level diagrams for C;, Oz and CO. Show which
‘orbitals are occupied, and work out the bond orders and magnetic
properties ofthese molecules. .

7. Name the three types of hybrid orbital that may be formed by an atom
with only s and p orbitals in its valence shell. Draw the shapes and
stereochemistry of the hybrid orbitals so produced.

8. Wht ate the geometric arrangements of p', spd and dip yb
orbitals?

9. Predict the structure of each of the following, and indicate whether
the bond angles are likely to be distorted from the theor

 

 

 

    

val
(@) BeCh,; (b) BCly; (c) SiC; (d) PC, ); (©) PFy: (f) Fi
Dats te Sr Ey see CAPM OO

 

10 How and why does the cohesive force in metals change on descending
4 group, of on moving from one group to another? What physica
properties follow these changes in cohesive force?

UL, Use energy level diagrams and the band theory to explain the di
ference between conductor, insulators and semiconductors

  
