 

THEORIES OF BONDING IN METALS

 

[129

 

 

 

The Li, molecule exists in the vapour state, and bonding occurs using the
2s atomic orbital. There are three empty 2p orbitals in the valence shell,
and the presence of empty AOs is a prerequisite for metallic properties.
(Carbon in its excited state, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, and neon all lack
empty AOs in the valence shell and are all non-metals.)

The valence shell has more AOs than electrons, so even if the elec-
“trons are all used to form normal two-electron bonds, the atom cannot
attain a noble gas structure. Compounds of this type are termed ‘electron
deficient’.

Empty AOs may be utilized to form additional bonds in two different
ways:

1. Empty AOs may accept lone pairs of electrons from other atoms or
ligands, forming coordinate bonds.

2. Cluster compounds may be formed, where each atom shares its few

* electrons with several of its neighbours, and obtains a share in their
electrons. Clustering occurs in the boron hydrides and carboranes, and
is a major feature of metals.

The molecular orbital description of an Li, molecule has been discussed
earlier in Chapter 4, in the examples of MO treatment. There are six
electrons arranged in molecular orbitals:

ols?, o*1s?, 02s?

Bonding occurs because the o2s bonding MO is full and the corresponding
antibonding orbital is empty. Ignoring any inner electrons, the 2s AOs on
each of the two Li atoms combine to give two MOs - one bonding and one
antibonding. The valency electrons occupy the bonding MO (Figure 5.2a).

Suppose three Li atoms joined to form Li;. Three 2s AOs would com-

bine to form three MOs — one bonding, one non-bonding and one anti- -

bonding. The energy of the non-bonding MO is between that for the
bonding and antibonding orbitals. The three valency electrons from the
three atoms would occupy the bonding MO (two electrons) and the non-,
bonding MO (one electron) (Figure 5.2b).
bie " four AOs would form four MOs ~ two bonding, and two anti-
ies ae le presence of two non-bonding MOs between the bonding and
vale mi ne orbitals reduces the energy gap betwee the orbitals. The four
both cy el ectrons would occupy the two lowest energy MOs, which are
* bonding orbitals, as shown in Figure 5.2c.
i the aber of electrons in the cluster increases, the spacing between
ties ae ive 7 of the various orbitals decreases further, and when there
togetherthen wh er of atoms, the energy levels of the orbitals are so close
‘The muy ey almost form a continuum (Figure 5.2d).
Pret en must by definition be equal to the number of
lithium, ands MOL there is only one valence ‘electron per atom in
MOs in thes can hold two electrons, it follows that only half the
'¢ 2s valence band are filled — i.e. the bonding MOs. It requires

 
