 

 

a4

 

"THE COVALENT BOND

 

‘The structure of the CO%~ will be examined in this way. There are 24
electrons in the valence shel! (four from C, six from each of the three O
atoms and two from the charges on the fon).

‘Of these, six are used to form the o bonds between C and the theee O
atoms Each O has four non-bonding electrons. This leaves six electrons
available for = bonding

“The atomic orbitals available for x bonding are the 2p, orbital on C and
the 2p, orbitals from the three O atoms. Combining these four atomic
‘orbitals gives four four-centre x molecular orbitals. Each of these covers
all four atoms in the ion. The lowest energy MO is bonding, the highest
is antibonding, and the remaining two are non-bonding (and are also
degenerate, i.e, the same in energy). The six x electrons occupy the MOs,
‘of lowest energy. Two electrons fill the bonding MO and four electrons fil
both of the non-bonding MOs and thus contribute one x bond to the
molecute. Each of the C—O bonds has a bond order of 14,1 from the @
‘bond and 4 from the x bond.

 

Nitrate ion NOS

‘The structure of the nitrate fon is a planar triangle, The N atom at the
centre uses sp? orbitals All three oxygen atoms are equivalent, and the
bond lengths N—O are all a ittle shorter than for a single bond. This
cannot be explained by a valence bond structure:

°
I

ot. ,
‘There 24 electrons in the valence shell (five from N, six from each of the
three © atoms and one from the charge on the ion). °

Of these, sit ae used to form the o bonds between N and the three O
toms. Each © has four non-bonding electrons. This leaves sx electrons
available for bonding.

‘The atomic orbitals used for = bonding are the 2p, orbitals on N and
the three O atoms. Combining these four atomic orbitals gwes fut fout-
centre x molecular orbitals ‘The lowest in energy is bonding, the highest is
sanutbonding, and the remaining two ate degenciate (the same in eness9)
and are non-bonding The six x electrons fill the bonding MO and both of
the non-bonding MOs and thus contribute one x bond to the molecule.

Each of the N—O bonds has a bond order of 14. 1 from the o bond and }
from the x bond

Sulphur trioxide SO

‘The structure of SO, isa planar triangle."The S atom at the centre uses 59°
tals, All three oxygen atoms are equivalent, and the S—O, bonds a
such shorter than single bonds. The valence bond structure is
