FIGURE 7.12 °
Cyclic GMP. Cyclic GMP is a

N
guanosine monophosphate nucleotide g N

molecule with the single phosphate | a
group attached to a sugar residue in nN” NH
Guanine

two places (this cyclic

part is shown in

yellow). Cyclic GMP 0
is an important

second messenger

CH,
GF fe)

linking G proteins
to signal o-——-P——O OH
transduction, I Sugar
pathways within °

Phosphate

the cytoplasm.

teins; then each of them activates a large number of stage-
three proteins, and so on (figure 7.11). A single cell surface
receptor can thus stimulate a cascade of protein kinases to
amplify the signal.

The Vision Amplification Cascade

Let’s trace a protein amplification cascade to see exactly
how one works. In vision, a single light-activated rhodopsin
(a G-protein-linked receptor) activates hundreds of mole-
cules of the G protein transducin in the first stage of the
relay. In the second stage, each transducin causes an en-
zyme to modify thousands of molecules of a special inside-
the-cell messenger called cyclic GMP (figure 7.12). (We
will discuss cyclic GMP in more detail later.) In about 1
second, a single rhodopsin signal passing through this two-
step cascade splits more than 105 (100,000) cyclic GMP
molecules (figure 7.13)! The rod cells of humans are suffi-
ciently sensitive to detect brief flashes of 5 photons.

The Cell Division Amplification Cascade

The amplification of signals traveling from the plasma
membrane to the nucleus can be even more complex than
the process we've just described. Cell division, for example,
is controlled by a receptor that acts as a protein kinase. The
receptor responds to growth-promoting signals by phos-
phorylating an intracellular protein called ras, which then
activates a series of interacting phosphorylation cascades,
some with five or more stages. If the ras protein becomes
hyperactive for any reason, the cell acts as if it is being con-
stantly stimulated to divide. Ras proteins were first discov-
ered in cancer cells. A mutation of the gene that encodes
ras had caused it to become hyperactive, resulting in unre-
strained cell proliferation. Almost one-third of human can-
cers have such a mutation in a ras gene.

 

Asmall number of surface receptors can generate a vast
intracellular response, as each stage of the pathway
amplifies the next.

 

One rhodopsin molecule
absorbs one photon, which

|

 

activates 500 transducin
molecules, which

|

activate 500 phosphodiesterase
molecules, which

|

 

hydrolyze 10° cyclic GMP
molecules, which

|

close 250 Na* channels, preventing .
10&107 Nat per second from entering Na
the cell fora period of 1 second, which

  
 

hyperpolarizes the rod cell membrane
by 1 mV, sending a visual signal to the brain.

FIGURE 7.13

The role of signal amplification in vision. In this vertebrate rod
cell (the cells of the eye responsible for interpreting light and
dark), one single rhodopsin pigment molecule, when excited by a
photon, ultimately yields 100,000 split CGMP molecules, which
will then effect a change in the membrane of the rod cell, which
will be interpreted by the organism as a visual event.

Chapter 7 Cell-Cell Interactions 133
