 

EXAMPLES OF MOLECULAR ORBITAL TREATMENT

 

 

113

 

 

are equivalent, and the C—O bonds are shorter than single bonds. A
single valence bond structure such as that shown would have different
bond lengths, and so fails to describe the structure adequately.

oO
ll

—~

-O O-

The problem is simply that an electron cannot be represented as a'dot, or a
pair of electrons as a line (bond). The fourth electron pair that makes
up the double bond is not localized in one of the three positions, but is
somehow spread out over all three bonds, so that each bond has a bond
order of 14.

Pauling adapted the valence bond notation to cover structures where
electrons are delocalized. Three contributing structures can be drawn for
the carbonate ion:

° o- o-
I

| |
Cc. ° Cc ° Cc
a — S ao

-O o- -O Oo oO o-
These contributing structures do not actually exist. The CO3~ does not
consist of a mixture of these structures, nor is there an equilibrium be-
tween them. The true structure is somewhere in between, and is called a
resonance hybrid. Resonance was widely accepted in the 1950s but is now
regarded at best as clumsy and inadequate, and at worst as misleading or
wrong!
_ Delocalized x bonding is best described by multi-centre bonds, which
involve x molecular orbitals. The steps in working this out are:

1, Find the basic shape of the molecule or ion, either experimentally, or
from the VSEPR theory using the number of o bonds and lone pairs on
the central atom. ,

. Add up the total number of electrons in the outer (valence) shell of all
the atoms involved, and add or subtract electrons as appropriate to
form ions.

- Calculate the number of electrons used in o bonds and lone pairs, and
by Subtracting this from the total determine the number of electrons
which can participate in x bonding.

. Count the number of atomic orbitals which can take part in x bonding.
Combine these to give the same number of molecular orbitals which are
delocalized over all of the atoms. Decide whether MOs are bonding
non-bonding or antibonding, and feed the appropriate number of =
flectrons into the MOs (two electrons per MO). The orbitals with
a energy are filled first. The number of x bonds formed can easily

determined from the MOs which have been filled.

 
