Communicating Junctions

Many cells communicate with adjacent cells through direct
connections, called communicating junctions. In these
junctions, a chemical signal passes directly from one cell to
an adjacent one. Communicating junctions establish direct
physical connections that link the cytoplasms of two cells
together, permitting small molecules or ions to pass from
one to the other. In animals, these direct communication
channels between cells are called gap junctions. In plants,
they are called plasmodesmata.

Gap Junctions in Animals

Communicating junctions called gap junctions are com-
posed of structures called connexons, complexes of six
identical transmembrane proteins (figure 7.21). The pro-
teins in a connexon are arranged in a circle to create a
channel through the plasma membrane that protrudes sev-
eral nanometers from the cell surface. A gap junction forms
when the connexons of two cells align perfectly, creating an
open channel spanning the plasma membranes of both
cells. Gap junctions provide passageways large enough to
permit small substances, such as simple sugars and amino
acids, to pass from the cytoplasm of one cell to that of the
next, yet small enough to prevent the passage of larger
molecules such as proteins. The connexons hold the plasma
membranes of the paired cells about 4 nanometers apart, in
marked contrast to the more-or-less direct contact between
the lipid bilayers in a tight junction.

Gap junction channels are dynamic structures that can
open or close in response to a variety of factors, including
Ca** and H* ions. This gating serves at least one important
function. When a cell is damaged, its plasma membrane
often becomes leaky. Ions in high concentrations outside
the cell, such as Ca**, flow into the damaged cell and shut
its gap junction channels. This isolates the cell and so pre-
vents the damage from spreading to other cells.

Plasmodesmata in Plants

In plants, cell walls separate every cell from all others. Cell-
cell junctions occur only at holes or gaps in the walls,
where the plasma membranes of adjacent cells can come
into contact with each other. Cytoplasmic connections that
form across the touching plasma membranes are called
plasmodesmata (figure 7.22). The majority of living cells
within a higher plant are connected with their neighbors by
these junctions. Plasmodesmata function much like gap
junctions in animal cells, although their structure is more
complex. Unlike gap junctions, plasmodesmata are lined
with plasma membrane and contain a central tubule that
connects the endoplasmic reticulum of the two cells.

 

Communicating junctions permit the controlled
passage of small molecules or ions between cells.

 

Adjacent plasma
membranes

    
    
    
   
  

Two adjacent connexons
forming an open channel
between cells

  
 

Channel
(diameter 1.5 nm)

Connexon

Intercellular
space

  

FIGURE 7.21

Gap junctions. Connexons in gap junctions create passageways
that connect the cytoplasms of adjoining cells. Gap junctions
readily allow the passage of small molecules and ions required for
rapid communication (such as in heart tissue), but do not allow
the passage of larger molecules like proteins.

Vacuoles Nuclei

Cytoplasm
Primary cell wall

Plasmodesmata

FIGURE 7.22
Plasmodesmata. Plant cells can communicate through specialized
openings in their cell walls, called plasmodesmata, where the
cytoplasms of adjoining cells are connected.

Chapter 7 Cell-Cell Interactions 139
