7.4 Cell surface proteins mediate cell-cell interactions.

The Expression of Cell Identity

With the exception of a few primitive types of organisms,
the hallmark of multicellular life is the development of
highly specialized groups of cells called tissues, such as
blood and muscle. Remarkably, each cell within a tissue
performs the functions of that tissue and no other, even
though all cells of the body are derived from a single fertil-
ized cell and contain the same genetic information. How
do cells sense where they are, and how do they “know”
which type of tissue they belong to?

Tissue-Specific Identity Markers

As it develops, each animal cell type acquires a unique set
of cell surface molecules. These molecules serve as markers
proclaiming the cells’ tissue-specific identity. Other cells
that make direct physical contact with them “read” the
markers.

Glycolipids. Most tissue-specific cell surface markers are
glycolipids, lipids with carbohydrate heads. The glycolipids
on the surface of red blood cells are also responsible for the
differences among A, B, and O blood types. As the cells in a
tissue divide and differentiate, the population of cell surface
glycolipids changes dramatically.

      
 

a chain

FIGURE 7.14

MHC Proteins. The immune system uses other cell sur-
face markers to distinguish between “self” and “nonself”
cells. All of the cells of a given individual, for example, have
the same “self” markers, called major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) proteins. Because practically every individual
makes a different set of MHC proteins, they serve as dis-
tinctive identity tags for each individual. The MHC pro-
teins and other self-identifying markers are single-pass pro-
teins anchored in the plasma membrane, and many of them
are members of a large superfamily of receptors, the im-
munoglobulins (figure 7.14). Cells of the immune system
continually inspect the other cells they encounter in the
body, triggering the destruction of cells that display foreign
or “nonself” identity markers.

The immune systems of vertebrates, described in detail in
chapter 57, shows an exceptional ability to distinguish self
from nonself. However, other vertebrates and even some
simple animals like sponges are able to make this distinc-
tion to some degree, even though they lack a complex im-
mune system.

 

Every cell contains a specific array of marker proteins
on its surface. These markers identify each type of cell
in a very precise way.

 

 

Constant region
x: Variable region

~{848> Disulfide bond

 

 

 

chain

B chain

p-2
icroglobulin

MHC-II

Structure of the immunoglobulin family of cell surface marker proteins. T and B cell receptors help mediate the immune response in
organisms by recognizing and binding to foreign cell markers. MHC antigens label cells as “self,” so that the immune system attacks only
invading entities, such as bacteria, viruses, and usually even the cells of transplanted organs!

134 Part II_ Biology of the Cell
