 

RECTIFIERS

three outer electrons to form three bonds in the lattice, but they are unable
to form four bonds to complete the covalent structure. One bond is in-
complete, and the site normally occupied by the missing electron is called
a ‘positive hole’. At absolute zero or low temperatures, the positive holes
are localized around the indium atoms. However, at normal temperatures
a valence electron on an adjacent Si atom may gain sufficient energy to
move into the hole. This forms a new positive hole on the Ge atom. The
positive hole seems to have moved in the opposite direction to the
electron. By a series of ‘hops’, the ‘positive hole’ can migrate across the
crystal. This is equivalent to moving an electron in the opposite direction,
and thus current is carried. Since current is carried by the migration of
positive centres, this is p-type semiconduction.

Silicon must be ultra-highly purified before it can be used in semiconduc-
tors. First impure silicon (98% pure) is obtained by reducing SiO with
carbon in an electric furnace at about 1900°C. This may bé purified by
reacting with HCI, forming trichlorosilane SiHCl,, which may be distilled
to purify it, then decomposed by heating to give pure silicon.

SiO, + C> Si + CO,

si+ 3HCI22S Hy + SIHCL ES

Si
The final purification is by zone refining, where a rod of silicon is melted
near one end by an electric furnace. As the furnace is slowly moved along
the rod, the narrow molten zone gradually moves to the other end of the
tod. The impurities are more soluble in the liquid melt than in the solid, so
they concentrate in the molten zone, and eventually move to the end of the
tod. The impure end is removed, leaving an ultra-purified rod, with a
purity of at least 1 part in 10!°. Purified silicon (or germanium) crystals can
be Converted to p-type or n-type semiconductors by high temperature
diffusion of the appropriate dopant element, up to a concentration of
' part in 10%. In principle any of the Group III elements boron, aluminium,
gallium or indium can be used to make p-type semiconductors, though
indium is the most used because of its low melting point. Similarly Group
Vv elements such as phosphorus or arsenic can be used to make n-type
semiconductors, but because of its low melting point arsenic is most used.
the single cstal is doped with indium at one end, and with arsenic at the
semitont, then one part is a p-type semiconductor and the other, an n-type
we ernie In the middle there will be a boundary region where the
Meet, which is a p-n junction. Such junctions are the important
Part of modern semiconductor devices.

RECTIFIERS

Atecti i i

in onater will only allow current from an outside source to flow through it

ine die This is invaluable in converting alternating current AC
Ct current DC, and it is common to use a square of four diodes ina

 

 

+ 28 electrons
Valence electron
Covalent bond

{a)

Germanium nucleus
e

, 4 4

OS oe
electron

— Os veer

impurity atom
(donor)

 

 

   
   
 

Hole
Ge Trvalent
I meet atom
oe Ge» __(acceptar)
°

(c)

Figure 3.19 (a) Pure germanium.
(b) n-type germanium. (c) p-type
germanium,
