 

 

 

 

p SUPERCONDUCTIVITY 141

 

their bulk. This is now called the Meissner effect, and gives rise to ‘levi-
tation’. Levitation occurs when objects float on air. This can be achieved
by the mutual repulsion between a permanent magnet and a supercon-
ductor. A superconductor also expels all internal magnetic fields (arising
from unpaired electrons), so superconductors are diamagnetic. In many
cases the change in magnetic properties is easier to detect than the in-
creased electrical conductivity, since the passage of high currents or strong
magnetic fields may destroy the superconductive state. Thus there is also a
critical current and critical magnetization which are linked to T..

A superconducting alloy of niobium and titanium, which has a T. of
about 4K and requires liquid helium to cool it, has been known since the
1950s. Considerable effort has been put into finding alloys which are
superconductors at higher temperatures. Alloys of Nb3Sn, Nb3Ge, Nb3Al
and V;Si all show superconductivity and have T, values of about 20K. It is
interesting that these alloys all have the same f-tungsten structure. The
Nb;Sn and and Nb3Ge alloys have 7, values of 22 K and 24 K respectively.
These alloys are used to make the wire for extremely powerful electro-
magnets. These magnets have a variety of uses:

1. In linear accelerators used as atom smashers for high energy particle
physics research

2. In nuclear fusion research to make powerful magnetic fields which act
as a magnetic bottle for a plasma

3. For military purposes

4. For nuclear magnetic resonance machines in chemical laboratories and
for imaging (which is used in diagnostic medicine).

An extremely high current can be passed through a very fine wire made
of a superconductor. Thus small coils with a large number of turns can be
used to make extremely powerful high field electromagnets. Because the
superconductor has effectively zero resistance, the wire does not get hot.
Since there is no current loss, once the current is flowing in the coil it
continues indefinitely. For example, in large superconducting magnets
used in plasma research, the current used by a Nb/Ta superconducting
alloy at 4K was only 0.3% of the current used in an electromagnet of
similar power using copper wire for the metal turns. A major obstacle to
the widespread use of these low temperature superconductors has been the
very low value of the transition temperature T.. The only way of attaining
these low temperatures was to use liquid helium, which is very expensive.

The first non-metallic superconductor was found in 1964. This was a
metal ved with a perovskite crystal structure and is a different type of
only 0001 al from the alloys. It was of no practical use since the T- is

The perovski i
where am sie arueture is formed by compounds of formula ABOs,
BaTiO, Cono, © and B add up to 6. Examples include @
AGH a ri 8 and NaNb"O3. The perovskite crystal structure is cubic.
cube), th is located at the body-centred position (at the centre of the

» the smaller Ti** ions are located at each corner, and the O are Figure 5.10 Perovskite.

* O

Ca T °
