 

 

 

 

RULES FOR LINEAR COMBINATION OF ATOMIC ORBITALS

97

 

 

 

XY
} a
p Ml

$ Py Px Ge
Figure 4.22 Some non-bonding combinations of atomic orbitals.

must be the same. Similarly for antibonding MOs the signs of the over-
lapping lobes must be different. In the combinations shown in Figure 4.22
any stabilization which occurs from overlapping + with + is destabilized
by an equal amount of overlap of + with —. There is no overall change in
energy, and this situation is termed non-bonding. It should be noted that
inall of these non-bonding cases the symmetry of the two atomic orbitals is
different, i.e. rotation about the axis changes the sign of one.

RULES FOR LINEAR COMBINATION OF ATOMIC ORBITALS

In deciding which atomic orbitals may be combined to form molecular
orbitals, three rules must be considered:

1. The atomic orbitals must be roughly of the same energy. This is im-
portant when considering overlap between two different types of atoms.
2. The orbitals must overlap one another as much as possible. This implies
that the atoms must be close enough for effective overlap and that the
radial distribution functions of the two atoms must be similar at this
distance,
In order to produce bonding and antibonding MOs, either the sym-
metry of the two atomic orbitals must remain unchanged when rotated
about the internuclear line, or both atomic orbitals must change sym-
metry in an identical manner.

In the same way that each atomic orbital has a particular energy, and
may be defined by four quantum numbers, each molecular orbital has a
definite energy, and is also defined by four quantum numbers.

1 ah Principal quantum number n has the same significance as in atomic
s.

The subsidiary quantum signi
S number / also has the same significance as in
atomic orbitals. °
The magnetic quantum number of atomic orbitals is replaced by a
mh quantum number i. In a diatomic molecule, the line joining the
nuclel is taken as a reference direction and A represents the quantization

of angular momentum in //2x units with respect to this axis. 4 takes the
same vaiues as m takes for atoms, i.e.

2.

3.

 
