 

EXAMPLES OF MOLECULAR ORBITAL TREATMENT

 

115

 

oO
4
cm)
The multi-centre x MO explanation is as follows. There are 24 electrons in
the valence shell (six from S and six from each of the three O atoms).

Of these, six are used to form the o bonds between S and the three oO
atoms. Each O has four non-bonding electrons. This leaves six electrons
available for 1. bonding.

SO; has 24 outer electrons like the NO3 ion. If SO followed the same
pattern as the NO} ion and used the 3p, AO on S and the 2p, AOs on
the three O atoms, four MOs would be formed, one bonding, two non-
bonding and one antibonding, and the six x electrons would occupy the
bonding and non-bonding MOs, thus contributing one x bond to the
molecule and giving a S—O bond order of 15. The bonds are much shorter
than this would imply. Though SO; has the same number of outer elec-
trons as NO3, the two are not isoelectronic. The S atom has three shells of
electrons, so there is the possibility of using d orbitals in the bonding
scheme.

The six atomic orbitals available for x bonding are the 2p, orbitals on
the three O atoms and the 3p,, 3d,, and 3d,, orbitals on S. Combining one
2p, AO with the 3p, AO gives two MOs, one bonding and the other
antibonding. Similarly, combining the second 2p, AO with the 3d,, AO
gives one bonding MO and one antibonding MO, and combining the third
2p, AO with the 3d,, AO gives one bonding MO and one antibonding
MO. Thus we obtain three bonding MOs and three antibonding MOs. The
Six electrons available for x bonding occupy the three bonding MOs, and
thus contribute three m bonds to the molecule. Each of the S—O bonds
has a bond order of approximately 2, 1 from the o bond and approximately
1 from the x bond. The reason why the bond order is approximate is that
the extent of d orbital participation depends on the number of electrons

and the size and energy of the orbitals involved. This involves detailed
calculation.

Ozone O;

Ozone 03 forms a V-shaped molecule. Both bond lengths are 1.278 A,
and the bond angle is 116°48’. We assume that the central O atom uses
moey sp orbitals for o bonding. The valence bond representation of
1 pucture is inadequate since it suggests that the bonds are of different
lengths, though it could be explained in terms of resonance hybrids.

oO
4s. single valence bond structure
Oo oO

oO °

Une i
& ‘o a“ \ resonance hybrids

 
