 

 

CONDUCTORS, INSULATORS AND SEMICONDUCTORS

 

 

131

 

 

Atomic. Molecular
orbitals orbitals

   

Atomic Molecular
orbitals orbitals

Empty

2p band levels
Empty

levels

Occupied
fevels

 

(a) (b)

Figure 5.3 Two methods by which conduction can occur: (a) metallic molecular
orbitals for lithium showing half-filled band; (b) metallic molecular orbitals for
beryllium showing overlapping bands.

promoting an electron to an unfilled level, where it can move readily. In
the absence of an electric field, equal numbers of electrons will move in all
directions. If a positive electrode is placed at one end, and a negative
electrode at the other, then electrons will move towards the anode much
morc readily than in the opposite direction; hence an electric current flows.

Conduction occurs because the MOs extend over the whole crystal, and
because there is effectively no energy gap between the filled and unfilled
MOs. The absence of an energy gap in lithium is because only half the
MOs in the valence band are filled with electrons (Figure 5.3a).

In beryllium there are two valence electrons, so the valence electrons
Would just fill the 2s valence band of MOs. In an isolated beryllium atom,
the 2s and 2p atomic orbitals differ in energy by 160kJ mol™!. In much the
same way as the 2s AOs form a band of MOs, the 2p AOs form a 2p band
st es The upper part of the 2s band overlaps with the lower part of the
bs . (Figure 5.3b). Because of this overlap of the bands some of the 2p
an s occupied and some of the 2s band is empty. It is both possible and
a perturb electrons to an unoccupied level in the conduction band,
ae meee Move throughout the crystal. Beryllium therefore behaves
o ceria is only because the bands overlap that there is no energy gap,
canoe ion from the filled valence band to the empty conduction band

CONDUCTORS, INSULATORS AND SEMICONDUCTORS
In electrical conductors

full, of the valenes vrs (metals), either the valence band is only partly

conduction bands overlap. There is therefore no
