 

 

SOME EXAMPLES USING THE VSEPR THEORY

Groups at 90° to each other repel each other strongly, whilst groups 120°
apart repel each other much less. , .

Structure 1 is the most symmetrical, but has six 90° repulsions between
lone pairs and and atoms. Structure 2 has one 90° repulsion between two
lone pairs, plus three 90° repulsions between lone pairs and atoms. Struc-
ture 3 has four 90° repulsions between lone pairs and atoms. These factors
indicate that structure 3 is the most probable. The observed bond angles
are 87°40’, which is close to the theoretical 90°. This confirms that the
correct structure is (3), and the slight distortion from 90° is caused by the
presence of the two lone pairs. ;

As a general rule, if lone pairs occur in a trigonal bipyramid they will
be located in the equatorial positions (round the middle) rather than
the apical positions (top and bottom), since this arrangement minimizes
repulsive forces.

Sulphur tetrafluoride SF,

S is in Group 16 and thus has six outer electrons. (The electronic con-
figuration of $ is 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p*.) Four outer electrons are used to form
bonds with the F atoms, and two electrons are non-bonding. Thus irr SF,
the S has five electron pairs in the outer shell: hence the structure is based
on a'trigoral bipyramid. There are four bond pairs and one lone pair. To
minimize the repulsive forces the lone pair occupies an equatorial position,
and F atoms are located at the other four corners, as shown in Figure 4.5.

The triiodide ion I

+ : yo
If iodine is dissolved in aqueous potassium iodide, the triiodide ion I; is
formed. This is an example ofa polyhalide ion, which is similar in structure
to BrCl” (see Chapter 15). The Ij ion (Figure 4.6) has three atoms, and
Must be either linear or angular in shape. It is convenient to consider the
structure in a series of stages > first an I atom, then an I, molecule, and

then the Ij ion made up of an I, molecule with an I~ bonded to it by means
of a coordinate bond.

Lh +I > [I-Ie] ~

lodine is in Group 17 and so has seven outer electrons. (The electronic
configuration of I is 1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p 3" 4s? 4p 4d" 5s? 5p.) One of the
Outer electrons is used to bond with another I atom, thus forming an I,
cena T atoms now have a share in eight electrons. One of the I
ane ‘oy i hela molecule accepts a lone pair from an I” ion, thus forming
that is Be ie outer shell of the central I atom now contains ten electrons,
There are 7 ectron pairs. Thus the shape is based on a trigonal bipyramid.
forces the re ond pairs and three lone pairs. To minimize the repulsive
located ree lone pairs occupy the equatorial positions, and I atoms are

at the centre and in the two api iti ion i
" ¥ pical positions. The ion is therefore
linear in shape, with a bond angle of exactly 180°. .

 

Figure 4.5 Sulphur tetrafluoride

molecule.

I
Figure 4.6 The triiodide ion.

;
