 

VALENCE SHELL ELECTRON PAIR REPULSION (VSEPR) THEORY

 

 

75

 

Table 4.1 Molecular shapes predicted by Sidgwick—- Powell theory

ee
Number of electron Shape of molecule Bond angles
pairs in outer shell

 

2 linear 180°
120°

A
4 tetrahedron vA 109°28'

5 trigonal bipyramid <7 120° and 90°
6 octahedron L7 90°

7 pentagonal bipyramid ce 72° and 90°

3 plane ‘iangle

 

2. A lone pair of electrons takes up more space round the central atom
than a bond pair, sine tie lone pair is attracted to one nucleus whilst
the bond pair is shared by two nuclei. It follows that repulsion between
two lone pairs is greater than repulsion between a lone pair and a bond
pair, which in turn is greater than the repulsion between two bond
pairs. Thus the presence of lone pairs on the central atom causes slight
distortion of the bond angles from the ideal shape. If the angle between
alone pair, the central atom and a bond pair is increased, it follows that
the actual bond angles between the atoms must be decreased.

. The magnitude of repulsions between bonding pairs of electrons de-
pends on the electronegativity difference between the central atom and
the other atoms.

. Double bonds cause more repulsion than single bonds, and triple bonds
Cause more repulsion than a double bond.

Effect of lone pairs
raeeules with four electron pairs in their outer shell are based on a
shell ie In CH, there are four bonding pairs of electrons in the outer
angles i ¢ C atom, and the structure is a regular tetrahedron with bond
theow nae of 109°28’. In NH; the N atom has four electron pairs in
the von shell, made up of three bond pairs and one lone pair. Because of
retaken the bond angle H—N—H is reduced from the theoretical
clectnan al angle of 109 28’ to 107°48’. In H,O the O atom has four
ona pai in the Guter shell. The shape of the HO molecule is based
two comen Suoaupiediby iy corners occupied by bond pairs and the other
ion 5 i
ie bond angle spied by on ries he presence of two lone pairs reduces
octahedne way SF, has six bond pairs in the outer shell and is a regular
outer pairs bond angles of exactly 90°. In BrFs the Br also has six
Of electrons, made up of five bond pairs and one lone pair. The

 
