Enzymes Take
Many Forms

While many enzymes are suspended
in the cytoplasm of cells, free to
move about and not attached to any
structure, other enzymes function as
integral parts of cell structures and
organelles.

Multienzyme Complexes

Often in cells the several enzymes
catalyzing the different steps of a
sequence of reactions are loosely
associated with one another in non-
covalently bonded assemblies called
multienzyme complexes. The bacter-
ial pyruvate dehydrogenase mul-
tienzyme complex seen in figure
8.10 contains enzymes that carry
out three sequential reactions in ox-
idative metabolism. Each complex has multiple copies of
each of the three enzymes—60 protein subunits in all.
The many subunits work in concert, like a tiny factory.

Multienzyme complexes offer significant advantages in
catalytic efficiency:

(a)
FIGURE 8.10

1. The rate of any enzyme reaction is limited by the fre-
quency with which the enzyme collides with its sub-
strate. If a series of sequential reactions occurs within
a multienzyme complex, the product of one reaction
can be delivered to the next enzyme without releasing
it to diffuse away.

2. Because the reacting substrate never leaves the com-
plex during its passage through the series of reactions,
the possibility of unwanted side reactions is eliminated.

3. All of the reactions that take place within the mul-
tienzyme complex can be controlled as a unit.

In addition to pyruvate dehydrogenase, which controls
entry to the Krebs cycle, several other key processes in
the cell are catalyzed by multienzyme complexes. One
well-studied system is the fatty acid synthetase complex
that catalyzes the synthesis of fatty acids from two-carbon
precursors. There are seven different enzymes in this
multienzyme complex, and the reaction intermediates re-
main associated with the complex for the entire series of
reactions.

Not All Biological Catalysts Are Proteins

Until a few years ago, most biology textbooks contained
statements such as “Enzymes are the catalysts of biological
systems.” We can no longer make that statement without
qualification. As discussed in chapter 4, Tom Cech and his
colleagues at the University of Colorado reported in 1981
that certain reactions involving RNA molecules appear to

 

tb

The enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase. The enzyme (model, a) that carries out the oxidation
of pyruvate is one of the most complex enzymes known—it has 60 subunits, many of which
can be seen in the electron micrograph () (200,000x).

be catalyzed in cells by RNA itself, rather than by enzymes.
This initial observation has been corroborated by addi-
tional examples of RNA catalysis in the last few years. Like
enzymes, these RNA catalysts, which are loosely called “ri-
bozymes,” greatly accelerate the rate of particular biochem-
ical reactions and show extraordinary specificity with re-
spect to the substrates on which they act.

There appear to be at least two sorts of ribozymes.
Those that carry out intramolecular catalysis have folded
structures and catalyze reactions on themselves. Those
that carry out intermolecular catalysis act on other mole-
cules without themselves being changed in the process.
Many important cellular reactions involve small RNA
molecules, including reactions that chip out unnecessary
sections from RNA copies of genes, that prepare ribo-
somes for protein synthesis, and that facilitate the replica-
tion of DNA within mitochondria. In all of these cases,
the possibility of RNA catalysis is being actively investi-
gated. It seems likely, particularly in the complex process
of photosynthesis, that both enzymes and RNA play im-
portant catalytic roles.

The ability of RNA, an informational molecule, to act as
a catalyst has stirred great excitement among biologists, as
it appears to provide a potential answer to the “chicken-
and-egg” riddle posed by the spontaneous origin of life hy-
pothesis discussed in chapter 3. Which came first, the pro-
tein or the nucleic acid? It now seems at least possible that
RNA may have evolved first and catalyzed the formation of
the first proteins.

 

Not all biological catalysts float free in the cytoplasm.
Some are part of other structures, and some are not
even proteins.

 

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 151
