1.4 This book is organized to help you learn biology.

Core Principles
of Biology

From centuries of biological observation and inquiry, one
organizing principle has emerged: biological diversity re-
flects history, a record of success, failure, and change ex-
tending back to a period soon after the formation of the
earth. The explanation for this diversity, the theory of evo-
lution by natural selection, will form the backbone of your
study of biological science, just as the theory of the covalent
bond is the backbone of chemistry, or the theory of quan-
tum mechanics is that of physics. Evolution by natural selec-
tion is a thread that runs through everything you will learn
in this book.

Basic Principles

The first half of this book is devoted to a description of the
basic principles of biology, introduced through a levels-of-
organization framework (sce figure 1.2). At the molecular,
organellar, and cellular levels of organization, you will be in-
troduced to cell biology. You will learn how cells are con-
structed and how they grow, divide, and communicate. At
the organismal level, you will learn the principles of genetics,
which deal with the way that individual traits are transmit-
ted from one generation to the next. At the population level,

you will examine evolution, the gradual change in popula-
tions from one generation to the next, which has led
through natural selection to the biological diversity we see
around us. Finally, at the community and ecosystem levels,
you will study ecology, which deals with how organisms in-
teract with their environments and with one another to pro-
duce the complex communities characteristic of life on

earth.

Organisms

The second half of the book is devoted to an examination of
organisms, the products of evolution. It is estimated that at
least 5 million different kinds of plants, animals, and micro-
organisms exist, and their diversity is incredible (figure 1.13).
Later in the book, we will take a particularly detailed look at
the vertebrates, the group of animals of which we are mem-
bers. We will consider the vertebrate body and how it func-
tions, as this information is of greatest interest and impor-
tance to most students.

 

As you proceed through this book, what you learn at one
stage will give you the tools to understand the next. The
core principle of biology is that biological diversity is the
result of a long evolutionary journey.

 

 

FIGURE 1.13

The diversity of life. Biologists categorize
all living things into six major groups
called kingdoms: archaebacteria,
eubacteria, protists, fungi, plants, and
animals.

 

Eubacteria

  
    

 

Animalia

Protista

 

—— Archaebacteria

 

Chapter 1 ‘The Science of Biology 17
