 

 

PREPARATION OF HYDROGEN

 

 

 

241

 

Group 18, but the properties of hydrogen cannot be correlated with any
of the main groups in the periodic table, and hydrogen is best considered
on its own.

The structure of hydrogen atoms is in some ways like that of the alkali
metals. The alkali metals (Group 1) also have just one electron in their
outer shell, but they tend to lose this electron in reactions and form posi-
tive ions M* Though H* are known, hydrogen has a much greater ten-
dency to pair the electron and form a covalent bond.

The structure of hydrogen atoms is in some ways like that of the halogens
(Group 17), since both are one electron short of a noble gas structure. In
many reactions the halogens gain an electron and so form negative ions
X~. Hydrogen does not typically form a negative ion, although it does
form ionic hydrides M*H™ (e.g. LiH and CaH,) with a few highly electro-
positive metals.

In some ways the structure of hydrogen resembles that of the Group 14
elements, since both have a half filled shell of electrons. There are a
number of similarities between hydrides and organometallic compounds
since the groups CH3;— and H— both have one remaining valency. Thus
the hydride is often considered as part of a series of organometallic com-
pounds, for example LiH, LiMe, LiEt; NH3, NMe3, NEts; or SiH,,
CH,SIH3, (CH3)2SiCh, (CH3)3SiCl, (CH3)4Si. However, hydrogen is
best treated as a group on its own.

ABUNDANCE OF HYDROGEN

Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe. Some estimates
are that 92% of the universe is made up of hydrogen, and 7% helium,
leaving only 1% for all of the other elements. However, the abundance of
H, in the earth’s atmosphere is very small. This is because the earth’s
gravitational field is too small to hold so light an element, though some Hy
is found in volcano gases. In contrast, hydrogen is the tenth most abundant
clement in the earth’s crust (1520 ppm or 0.152% by weight). It also occurs
in vast quantities as water in the oceans. Compounds containing hydrogen
are very abundant, particularly water, living matter (carbohydrates and
Proteins), organic compounds, fossil fuels (coal, petroleum, and natural

gas), ammonia and acids. In fact hydrogen is present in more compounds
than any other element.

PREPARATION OF HYDROGEN

Hydrogen is manufactured on a large scale by a variety of methods:

1. Hydrogen is made cheaply, and in large amounts, by passing steam
over red hot coke. The product is water gas, which is a mixture of CO

and Hp. This is an important industrial fuel since it is easy to make and it
burns, evolving a lot of heat.

 
