Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity

The rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is affected by the
concentration of substrate, and of the enzyme that works
on it. In addition, any chemical or physical factor that alters
the enzyme’s three-dimensional shape—such as tempera-
ture, pH, salt concentration, and the binding of specific
regulatory molecules—can affect the enzyme’s ability to
catalyze the reaction.

Temperature

Increasing the temperature of an uncatalyzed reaction will
increase its rate because the additional heat represents an
increase in random molecular movement. The rate of an
enzyme-catalyzed reaction also increases with temperature,
but only up to a point called the temperature optimum (fig-
ure 8.112). Below this temperature, the hydrogen bonds
and hydrophobic interactions that determine the enzyme’s
shape are not flexible enough to permit the induced fit that
is optimum for catalysis. Above the temperature optimum,
these forces are too weak to maintain the enzyme’s shape
against the increased random movement of the atoms in
the enzyme. At these higher temperatures, the enzyme de-
natures, as we described in chapter 3. Most human enzymes
have temperature optima between 35°C and 40°C, a range
that includes normal body temperature. Bacteria that live in
hot springs have more stable enzymes (that is, enzymes
held together more strongly), so the temperature optima
for those enzymes can be 70°C or higher.

pH

Tonic interactions between oppositely charged amino acid
residues, such as glutamic acid (-) and lysine (+), also hold
enzymes together. These interactions are sensitive to the
hydrogen ion concentration of the fluid the enzyme is dis-
solved in, because changing that concentration shifts the
balance between positively and negatively charged amino
acid residues. For this reason, most enzymes have a pH op-
timum that usually ranges from pH 6 to 8. Those enzymes
able to function in very acid environments are proteins that
maintain their three-dimensional shape even in the pres-
ence of high levels of hydrogen ion. The enzyme pepsin,
for example, digests proteins in the stomach at pH 2, a very
acidic level (figure 8.11).

Inhibitors and Activators

Enzyme activity is sensitive to the presence of specific sub-
stances that bind to the enzyme and cause changes in its
shape. Through these substances, a cell is able to regulate
which enzymes are active and which are inactive at a partic-
ular time. This allows the cell to increase its efficiency and
to control changes in its characteristics during develop-

152 Part II Energetics

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Optimum temperature Optimal temperature
| for human enzyme _for enzyme from
hotsprings bacterium
c
2
3
3
2
f
30 40 50 60 70 80
@ Temperature of reaction (°C). ——>
Optimum pH Optimum pH
for pepsin for trypsin

5
|
8
3
2
«

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

pH of reaction §=§ ——>

(b)
FIGURE 8.11

Enzymes are sensitive to their environment. The activity of
an enzyme is influenced by both (a) temperature and (b) pH.
Most human enzymes, such as the protein-degrading enzyme
trypsin, work best at temperatures of about 40°C and within a
pH range of 6 to 8.

ment. A substance that binds to an enzyme and decreases its
activity is called an inhibitor. Very often, the end product
of a biochemical pathway acts as an inhibitor of an early re-
action in the pathway, a process called feedback inbibition (to
be discussed later).

Enzyme inhibition occurs in two ways: competitive
inhibitors compete with the substrate for the same bind-
ing site, displacing a percentage of substrate molecules
from the enzymes; noncompetitive inhibitors bind to
the enzyme in a location other than the active site,
changing the shape of the enzyme and making it unable
to bind to the substrate (figure 8.12). Most noncompeti-
tive inhibitors bind to a specific portion of the enzyme
called an allosteric site (Greek allos, “other” + steros,
“form”). These sites serve as chemical on/off switches;
the binding of a substance to the site can switch the en-
zyme between its active and inactive configurations.
substance that binds to an allosteric site and reduces en-
zyme activity is called an allosteric inhibitor (figure
8.12). Alternatively, activators bind to allosteric sites
and keep the enzymes in their active configurations,
thereby increasing enzyme activity.

 
