 

 

THE OCCURRENCE AND ISOLATION OF THE ELEMENTS

 

 

183

 

 

In aqueous solution

Provided that the products do not react with water, electrolysis can be
carried out conveniently and cheaply in aqueous solution. Copper and zinc
are obtained by electrolysis of aqueous solutions of their sulphates.

In other solvents

Electrolysis can be carried out in solvents other than water. Fluorine reacts
violently with water, and it is produced by electrolysis of KHF2 dissolved in
anhydrous HF. (The reaction has many technical difficulties in that HF is
corrosive, the hydrogen produced at the cathode.must be kept separate
from the fluorine produced at the anode or an explosion will occur, water
must be rigorously excluded, and the fluorine produced attacks the anode
and the reaction vessel.)

In fused melts

Elements that react with water are often extracted from fused melts of
their ionic salts. These melts are frequently corrosive, and involve large
fuel bills to maintain the high temperatures required. Aluminium is
obtained by electrolysis of a fused mixture of Al,O, and cryolite
Na;{AIF,]. Both sodium and chlorine are obtained from the electrolysis of
fused NaCl: in this case up to two thirds by weight of CaCl, is added as an
impurity to lower the melting point from 803°C to 505°C.

Factors influencing the choice of extraction process

The type of process used commercially for any particular element depends
on a number of factors.

1, Is the element unreactive enough to exist in thé free state?

2. Are any of its compounds unstable to heat?

3. Does the element exist as an ionic compound, and is the element stable
in water? If both are true, is there a cheap element above it in the elec-
trochemical series which can be sacrificed to displace it from solution?

« Does the element occur as sulphide ores which can be roasted, or oxide
ores which can be reduced — using carbon is the cheapest whilst the use
of Mg, Al and Na as reducing agents is more expensive.

. If all other methods fail, electrolysis usually works for ionic materials,
but is expensive. If the element is stable in water, electrolysing aqueous
solutions is cheaper than using fused melts.

Thermodynamics of reduction processes
The extraction of metals from their oxides using carbon or other metals,

and by thermal deco ition, i i
oY mposition, involves a number of points whi
detailed discussion. p hieh meri

 
