 

 

THE OCCURRENCE AND ISOLATION OF THE ELEMENTS

 

 

179

 

much higher than that of the rocks or silt it is mixed with, and gold can
be separated by ‘panning’. (In recent times it has been more commonly
extracted by amalgamating with mercury.) Silver and copper are some
times found in the native form as ‘nuggets’. All three metals are noble
or unreactive, and this is associated with their position in the electro-
chemical series below hydrogen, and with the non-metals.

2. Palladium and platinum are also found as native metals. In addition
natural alloys of the Pt group are found.

The platinum metals are Ru Rh Pd
Os Ir Pt

The names of these natural alloys indicate their composition: os-
mididium, iridosmine.

3. Liquid droplets of mercury are found associated with cinnabar HgS.
Non-metals which occur as native elements in the earth’s crust are from
the carbon and sulphur groups, but the atmosphere comprises Nz, O2
and the noble gases.

4, Diamonds are found in the earth, and are obtained by mechanical
separation of large amounts of earth and rock. The largest deposits are
in Australia, Zaire, Botswana, the USSR and South Africa. Diamonds
are mostly used for making cutting tools, and some for jewellery.
-Graphite is mined mainly in China, South Korea, the USSR, Brazil and
Mexico. It is used for making electrodes, in steel making, as a lubricant,
and in pencils, brake linings and brushes for electric motors. It is also
used as the moderator in the cores of gas cooled nuclear reactors.

5. Deposits of sulphur are also found deep underground in Louisiana
(USA), Poland, Mexico and the USSR. These are extracted by the
Frasch process. Small amounts of selenium and tellurium are often
present in sulphur.

6. The atmosphere is made up of about 78% nitrogen, 22% oxygen and
traces of the noble gases argon, helium and neon. These may be
separated by fractional distillation of liquid air. Helium is also obtained
from some natural gas deposits.

Thermal decomposition methods

A few compounds will decompose into their constituent elements simply

by heating.

1. A number of hydrides will decompose in this way, but since hydrides
are usually made from the metal itself, the process is of no commercial
Significance. The hydrides arsine AsH; and stibine SbHs3 are produced
in Marsh's test, where an arsenic or antimony compound is converted to
the hydride with Zn/H2SO, and the gaseous hydrides are decomposed
a a silvery mirror of metal by passing the hydride through a heated

2. Sodium azide NaN3 decomposes to give sodium and pure dinitrogen on

 
