 

THE OCCURRENCE AND ISOLATION OF THE ELEMENTS

 

187

 

 

The second reaction produces two volumes of CO for every one volume
of dioxygen used. Thus AS is positive, and hence AG becomes increasingly
negative as T increases. Consequently the line on the Ellingham diagram
slopes downwards (Figure 6.6). The two lines for C-> CO2 and C> CO
cross at about 710°C. Below this temperature the reaction to form CO) is
energetically more favourable, but above 710°C the formation of CO is
preferred.

Carbon is extensively used to reduce iron oxide in the extraction of iron,
but it may also be used to reduce any other of the oxides above it on the
Ellingham diagram. Since the AG line slopes downwards it will eventually
cross and lie below all the other graphs for metal/metal oxide. Thus in
principle carbon could be used to reduce any metal oxide if a sufficiently
high temperature were used. At one time MgO was reduced by C at
2000°C, followed by shock (i.e. rapid) cooling, though this process is now
obsolete. Similarly the reduction of very stable oxides like TiO2, Al,O;
and MgO is theoretically possible, but is not attempted because of the high
cost and practical difficulties of using extremely high temperatures. A
further limitation on the use of carbon for extracting metals is that at high
temperatures many metals react with carbon, forming carbides.

Many metals occur as sulphide ores. Though carbon is a good reducing
agent for oxides, it is a poor reducing agent for sulphides. The reason why
carbon reduces so many oxides at elevated temperatures is that the AG°/T
line for CO has a negative slope. There is no compound CS analogous to
CO with a steep negative AG°/T line. Thus sulphides are normally roasted
in air to form oxides before reducing with carbon.

2MS + 302 2MO + 2SO,

In a similar way hydrogen is of limited use as a reducing agent for
extracting metals from their oxides since the AG°/T line has a positive
slope, and runs parallel to many metal oxide lines.

2H, + [02] > 2H,0

Thus only those metals with metal > metal oxide lines above the hydrogen
line will be reduced, and this does not change with temperature. A further
problem with H is that many metals react with hydrogen, forming
hydrides, and if hydrogen remains dissolved in the metal (interstitial
hydrides) it significantly affects the properties of the metal.

Thermodynamic arguments about what wil! reduce a given compound
have two limitations, They-assume that the reactants and products are in
equilibrium, which is often untrue, and they indicate whether a reaction is
Possible but do not predict the rate of reaction, or if some alternative
Teaction is even more favourable.

Further details of extraction processes and Ellingham diagrams for

halides and sulphides are given in Furth i
Elinghams rs gi urther Reading (see Ives D.J.G., and

 
