The Laws of

Thermodynamics

Running, thinking, singing, reading these
words—all activities of living organisms
involve changes in energy. A set of univer-
sal laws we call the Laws of Thermody-
namics govern all energy changes in the
universe, from nuclear reactions to the
buzzing of a bee.

The First Law of Thermodynamics

The first of these universal laws, the
First Law of Thermodynamics, con-
cerns the amount of energy in the uni-
verse. It states that energy cannot be cre-
ated or destroyed; it can only change
from one form to another (from potential
to kinetic, for example). The total
amount of energy in the universe remains
constant.

The lion eating a giraffe in figure 8.1
is in the process of acquiring energy.
Rather than creating new energy or cap-
turing the energy in sunlight, the lion is
merely transferring some of the potential
energy stored in the giraffe’s tissues to its
own body (just as the giraffe obtained the
potential energy stored in the plants it
ate while it was alive). Within any living
organism, this chemical potential energy can be shifted to
other molecules and stored in different chemical bonds,
or it can convert into other forms, such as kinetic energy,
light, or electricity. During each conversion, some of the
energy dissipates into the environment as heat, a measure

FIGURE 8.5

of the random motions of molecules (and, hence, a mea-
sure of one form of kinetic energy). Energy continuously
flows through the biological world in one direction, with
new energy from the sun constantly entering the system
to replace the energy dissipated as heat.

Heat can be harnessed to do work only when there is a
heat gradient, that is, a temperature difference between two
areas (this is how a steam engine functions). Cells are too
small to maintain significant internal temperature differ-
ences, so heat energy is incapable of doing the work of
cells. Thus, although the total amount of energy in the uni-
verse remains constant, the energy available to do work de-
creases, as progressively more of it dissipates as heat.

The Second Law of Thermodynamics

The Second Law of Thermodynamics concems this trans-
formation of potential energy into heat, or random molecular
motion. It states that the disorder (more formally called en-

146 Part IMI Energetics

   
   

Disorder happens “spontaneously”

Organization requires energy

Entropy in action. As time elapses, a child’s room becomes more disorganized. It takes
effort to clean it up.

1ropy) in the universe is continuously increasing. Put simply,
disorder is more likely than order. For example, it is much
more likely that a column of bricks will tumble over than that
a pile of bricks will arrange themselves spontaneously to form
acolumn. In general, energy transformations proceed sponta-
neously to convert matter from a more ordered, less stable
form, to a less ordered, more stable form (figure 8.5).

Entropy

Entropy is a measure of the disorder of a system, so the
Second Law of Thermodynamics can also be stated simply

s “entropy increases.” When the universe formed, it held
all the potential energy it will ever have. It has become pro-
gressively more disordered ever since, with every energy
exchange increasing the amount of entropy.

 

The First Law of Thermodynamics states that energy
cannot be created or destroyed; it can only undergo
conversion from one form to another. The Second Law
of Thermodynamics states that disorder (entropy) in
the universe is increasing. As energy is used, more and
more of it is converted to heat, the energy of random
molecular motion.

 
