Energy and Metabolism

 

Concept Outline

8.1 The laws of thermodynamics describe how energy
changes.

‘The Flow of Energy in Living Things. Potential energy
is present in the valance electrons of atoms, and so can be
transferred from one molecule to another.

‘The Laws of Thermodynamics. Energy is never lost but
as it is transferred, more and more of it dissipates as heat, a
disordered form of energy.

Free Energy. Ina chemical reaction, the energy released
or supplied is the difference in bond energies between
reactants and products, corrected for disorder.

Activation Energy. To start a chemical reaction, an input
of energy is required to destabilize existing chemical bonds.

8.2 Enzymes are biological catalysts.

Enzymes. Globular proteins called enzymes catalyze
chemical reactions within cells.

How Enzymes Work. Enzymes have sites on their surface
shaped to fit their substrates snugly, forcing chemically
reactive groups close enough to facilitate a reaction.
Enzymes Take Many Forms. Some enzymes are
associated in complex groups; others are not even proteins.
Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity. Each enzyme works
most efficiently at its optimal temperature and pH. Metal
ions or other substances often help enzymes carry out their
catalysis.

8.3 ATP is the energy currency of life.

What Is ATP? Cells store and release energy from the
phosphate bonds of ATP, the energy currency of the cell.

8.4 Metabolism is the chemical life of a cell.

Biochemical Pathways: The Organizational Units of
Metabolism. Biochemical pathways are the organizational
units of metabolism.

The Evolution of Metabolism. The major metabolic
processes evolved over a long period, building on what came
before.

 

FIGURE 8.1

Lion at lunch. Energy that this lion extracts from its meal of
giraffe will be used to power its roar, fuel its running, and build a
bigger lion.

ife can be viewed as a constant flow of energy, channeled

by organisms to do the work of living. Each of the signif-
icant properties by which we define life—order, growth, re-
production, responsiveness, and internal regulation—
requires a constant supply of energy (figure 8.1). Deprived of
a source of energy, life stops. Therefore, a comprehensive
study of life would be impossible without discussing bioener-
getics, the analysis of how energy powers the activities of liv-
ing systems. In this chapter, we will focus on energy—on
what it is and how organisms capture, store, and use it.

143
