 

 

ISOTOPES OF HYDROGEN

 

However, at high temperatures, in an electric arc, or under ultraviolet
light, Hz does dissociate. The atomic hydrogen produced exists for less
than half a second, after which it recombines to give molecular hydrogen
and a large amount of heat. This reaction has been used in welding metals.
Atomic hydrogen is a strong reducing agent, and is commonly prepared in
solution by means of a zinc—copper couple or a mercury~aluminium
couple.

‘there has been much talk of the hydrogen economy. (See Further
Reading.) The idea is that hydrogen could replace coal and oil as the major
source of energy. Burning hydrogen in air or dioxygen forms water and
liberates a great deal of energy. In contrast to burning coal or oil in power
stations, or petrol or diesel fuel in motor engines, burning hydrogen
produces no pollutants like SO2 and oxides of nitrogen that are responsible
for acid rain, nor CO, that is responsible for the greenhouse effect, nor
carcinogenic hydrocarbons, nor lead compounds. Hydrogen can be pro-
duced readily by electrolysis, and chemical methods. Hydrogen can be
stored and transported as gas in cylinders,.as liquid in very large cryogenic
vacuum flasks, or ‘dissolved’ in various metals. (For example, the alloy
LaNi, can absorb seven moles of hydrogen per mole of alloy at 2.5 atmos-
pheres pressure and room temperature.) Liquid hydrogen is used as a fuel
in space rockets for the Saturn series and the space shuttle in the US space
programme. Car engines have been modified to run on hydrogen. Note
that the use of hydrogen involves the risk of an explosion, but so does the
usé of petrol.

ISOTOPES OF HYDROGEN

If atoms of the same element have different mass numbers they are called
isotopes. The difference in mass number arises because the nucleus con-
tains a different number of neutrons. Naturally occurring hydrogen con-
tains three isotopes: protium {H or H, deuterium 7H or D, and tritium }H
orT. Each of the three isotopes contains one proton and 0, J or 2 neutrons
respectively in the nucleus. Protium is by far the most abundant.
Naturally occurring hydrogen contains 99.986% of the 1H_ isotope,
0.014% of {D and 7 x 10-!% 37, so the properties of hydrogen are
essentially those of the lightest isotope.
, These isotopes have the same electronic configuration and have essen-
tially the same chemical properties. The only differences in chemical

Properties are the rates of reactions, and equilibrium constants. For
example:

1 Hz is more rapidly adsorbed on to surfacés than D2.
2. Hp reacts over 13 times faster with Cl, than D2, because H, has a lower
energy of activation.
iompe of in Properties which arise from differences in mass are called
ase wel s. Because hydrogen is so light, the percentage difference in
tween protium }H, deuterium 3H and tritium iH is greater than
