8.1 The laws of thermodynamics describe how energy changes.

The Flow of Energy in Living Things

Energy is defined as the capacity to do work. It can be con-
sidered to exist in two states. Kinetic energy is the energy
of motion (figure 8.2). Moving objects perform work by
causing other matter to move. Potential energy is stored
energy. Objects that are not actively moving but have the
capacity to do so possess potential energy. A boulder
perched on a hilltop has potential energy; as it begins to
roll downhill, some of its potential energy is converted into
kinetic energy. Much of the work that living organisms
carry out involves transforming potential energy to kinetic
energy.

Energy can take many forms: mechanical energy, heat,
sound, electric current, light, or radioactive radiation. Be-
cause it can exist in so many forms, there are many ways to
measure energy. The most convenient is in terms of heat,
because all other forms of energy can be converted into
heat. In fact, the study of energy is called thermodynam-
ics, meaning heat changes. The unit of heat most com-
monly employed in biology is the kilocalorie (kcal). One
kilocalorie is equal to 1000 calories (cal), and one calorie is
the heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of.
water one degree Celsius (°C). (It is important not to con-
fuse calories with a term related to diets and nutrition, the
Calorie with a capital C, which is actually another term for
kilocalorie.) Another energy unit, often used in physics, is
the joule; one joule equals 0.239 cal.

Oxidation-Reduction

Energy flows into the biological world from the sun, which
shines a constant beam of light on the earth. It is estimated
that the sun provides the earth with more than 13 x 1073
calories per year, or 40 million billion calories per second!
Plants, algae, and certain kinds of bacteria capture a frac-
tion of this energy through photosynthesis. In photosyn-
thesis, energy garnered from sunlight is used to combine
small molecules (water and carbon dioxide) into more com-
plex molecules (sugars). The energy is stored as potential
energy in the covalent bonds between atoms in the sugar
molecules. Recall from chapter 2 that an atom consists of a
central nucleus surrounded by one or more orbiting elec-
trons, and a covalent bond forms when two atomic nuclei
share valence electrons. Breaking such a bond requires en-
ergy to pull the nuclei apart. Indeed, the strength of a cova-
lent bond is measured by the amount of energy required to
break it. For example, it takes 98.8 kcal to break one mole
(6.023 x 1023) of carbon-hydrogen (C—H) bonds.

During a chemical reaction, the energy stored in
chemical bonds may transfer to new bonds. In some of
these reactions, electrons actually pass from one atom or
molecule to another. When an atom or molecule loses an
electron, it is said to be oxidized, and the process by
which this occurs is called oxidation. The name reflects
the fact that in biological systems oxygen, which attracts
electrons strongly, is the most common electron accep-

 

 

FIGURE 8.2

Potential and kinetic energy. (@) Objects that have the capacity to move but are not moving have potential energy. The energy required
to move the ball up the hill is stored as potential energy. (b) Objects that are in motion have kinetic energy. The stored energy is released as

kinetic energy as the ball rolls down the hill.

144 Part IT Energetics
