 

PROPERTIES OF MOLECULAR HYDROGEN

iron cathodes. The gases produced in the anode and cathode compart-
ments must be kept separate.

Anode , 20H™ > H,O + 40, + 2e7
Cathode 2H,O + 2e7 > 20H™ + Hz
Overall H,O > H; + 402

5. A large amount of pure hydrogen is also formed as a by-product from
the chlor-alkali industry, in which aqueous NaCl is electrolysed to
produce NaOH, Cl, and H2.

6. The usual laboratory preparation is the reaction of dilute acids with
metals, or of an alkali with aluminium.

Zn + HySO,— ZnSO, + Hp
2Al + 2NaOH + 6H,O — 2Na{Al(OH),] + 3H2

7, Hydrogen can be prepared by the reaction of salt-like hydrides with
water.

LiH + H,0 > LiOH + H,

PROPERTIES OF MOLECULAR HYDROGEN

Hydrogen is the lightest gas known, and because of its low density, it is
used instead of helium to fill balloons for meteorology. It is colourless,
odourless and almost insoluble in water. Hydrogen forms diatomic mol-
ecules H2, and the two atoms are joined by a very strong covalent bond
(bond energy 435.9kJ mol™!).

Hydrogen is not very reactive under normal conditions. The lack of
Teactivity is due to kinetics rather than thermodynamics, and relates to the
Strength of the H—H bond. An essential step in H; reacting with another
element is the breaking of the H—H bond to produce atoms of hydrogen.
This requires 435.9kJ mol™!: hence there is a high activation energy to
such reactions. Consequently many reactions are slow, or require high
temperatures, or catalysts (often transition metals). Many important
Teactions of hydrogen involve heterogeneous catalysis, where the catalyst
first reacts with H, and either breaks or weakens the H—H bond, and thus
lowers the activation energy. Examples include:

1. The Haber process for the manufacture of NH3 from N; and Hp using a

catalyst of activated Fe at 380-450°C and 200 atmospheres pressure.
The hydrogenation of a variety of unsaturated organic compounds,
(including the hardening of oils), using finely divided Ni, Pd or Pt as
catalysts.

. The production of methanol by reducing CO with H2 over a Cu/Zn
catalyst at 300°C.

2.

Thus hydrogen will react direct!

with most elements under the appropri
conditions, y ppropriaie

 

243
