 

[ CRYSTAL FIELD THEORY

205

 

 

 

 

different energies. In an isolated gaseous metal ion, the five d orbitals
do all have the same energy, and are termed degenerate. If a spherically
symmetrical field of negative charges surrounds the metal ion, the d
orbitals remain degenerate. However, the energy of the orbitals is
raised because of repulsion between the field and the electrons on the
metal. In most transition metal complexes, either six or four ligands
surround the metal, giving octahedral or tetrahedral structures. In both
of these cases the field produced by the ligands is not spherically
symmetrical. Thus the d orbitals are not all affected equally by the
ligand field.

Octahedral complexes

In an octahedral complex, the metal is at the centre of the octahedron, and
the ligands are at the six corners. The directions x, y and z point to three
adjacent corners of the octahedron as shown in Figure 7.7.

The lobes of the e, orbitals (d,2_,2 and d,2) point along the axes x, y and
z. The lobes of the tz. orbitals (d,,, d,, and d,,) point in between the axes.
It follows that the approach of six ligands along the x, y, z, —x, —y and —z
directions will increase the energy of the d,:_,2 and d. orbitals (which
point along the axes) much more than it increases the energy of the d,y, d,z
and d,, orbitals (which point between the axes). Thus under the influence
of an octahedral ligand field the d orbitals split into two groups of different
energies (Figure 7.8).

Rather than referring to the energy level of an isolated metal atom, the
weighted mean of these two sets of perturbed orbitals is taken as the zero:
this is sometimes called the Bari centre. The difference in energy between
the two d levels is given either of the symbols A, or 10 Dq. It follows that

eg

Er
nergy d orbitals are

split into two.
groups

fag

Free metal ion Metal ion

(five degenerate in octahedral
d orbitals) field

Figure 7.8 Crystal field splitting of energy levels in an octahedral field.

x

Figure 7.7 The directions in an
octahedral complex.
