 

 

255]

 

HYDROGEN BONDING

forming the negative ion), and also the solvation energy of the negative
ion.

Compounds which form solvated hydrogen ions in a suitable solvent are
called acids. Even though the ions present are H3O* (or even H,04), it is
customary to write the ion as H*, indicating a hydrated proton.

HYDROGEN BONDING

In some compounds a hydrogen atom is attracted by rather strong forces
to two atoms, for example in [F—H—F]~. (Sometimes hydrogen is
attracted to more than two atoms.) It was at first thought that hydrogen
formed two covalent bonds, but it is now recognized that, since hydrogen
has the electronic structure 1s!, it can only form one covalent bond. The
hydrogen bond is most simply regarded as a weak electrostatic attraction
between a lone pair of electrons on one atom, and a covalently bonded
hydrogen atom that carries a fractional charge 5+.

Hydrogen bonds are formed only with the most electronegative atoms.
(Of these, F, O, N and Cl are the four most important elements.) These
bonds are very weak, and are typically about 10kJ mol~', though hydro-
gen bonds may have a bond energy from 4 to 45kJ mol~!. This must be
compared with a C—C covalent bond of 347kJ mol~'. Despite their low
bond energy, hydrogen bonds are of great significance both in biochemical
systems and in normal chemistry. They are extremely important because
they are responsible for linking polypeptide chains in proteins, and for
linking pairs of bases in large nucleic acid-containing molecules. The
hydrogen bonds maintain these large molecules in specific molecular
configurations, which is important in the operation of genes and enzymes.
Hydrogen bonds are responsible for water being liquid at room tempera-
ture, and but for this, life as we know it would not exist. Since hydrogen
bonds have a low bond energy, they also have a low activation energy, and
this results in their playing an important part in many reactions at normal
temperatures.

Hydrogen bonding was first used to explain the weakness of trimethy-
lammonium hydroxide as a base compared with tetramethylammonium
hydroxide. In the trimethyl compound the OH group is hydrogen bonded
to the Me;NH group (shown by a dotted line in Figure 8.4), and this makes
it more difficult for the OH group to ionize, and hence it is a weak base. In
the tetramethyl compound, hydrogen bonding cannot occur, so the OH
group ionizes and the tetramethyl compound is thus a much stronger base.

ri CHs *
|
Che NH ++/O-H CHs—N-+CHs | O—H-
|
CHy ’ CHy

Figure 8.4 Structures of trimethyl and tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide.
