 

 

PROBLEMS

 

{237]

 

10.

. Draw all of the isomers of an octahedral complex which has six

unidentate ligands; two of type A and four of type B.

. Draw all of the isomers of an octahedral complex which has three

unidentate ligands of type A and three unidentate ligands of type B.

. Draw all of the isomers of an octahedral complex which has three

identical bidentate ligands. :

. Draw all of the isomers of both tetrahedral and square planar vom-

plexes which have two unidentate ligands of type A and two unidentale
ligands of type B.

. Draw each of the possible stereoisomers of the octahedral complexes

listed: (a) Magbcd, (b) Magbcde and (c) M(AA)(AA)cd. The lower
case letters a, b, c, d. and e represent monodentate ligands, and upper
case letters (AA) represent the donor atoms of a bidentate ligand.
Indicate which isomers are optically active (chiral).

. Draw the shapes of the various d orbitals, and explain why they are

split into two groups 2» and e, in an octahedral ligand field.

. Draw a diagram to show how the d orbitals are split into groups with

different energy in an octahedral ligand field. Some electronic con-
figurations may exist in both high-spin and Jow-spin arrangements in
an octahedral field. Draw all of these cases, and, suggest which metal
fons and which figands might give rise to each.

Draw an energy level diagram to show the lifting of the degeneracy of
the 3d orbitals in a tetrahedral ligand field.

. Draw energy level diagrams and indicate the occupancy of the orbitals

in the following complexes:

(a) d°. octahedral, low-spin,

(b) d”. octahedral with tetragonal elongation

(c) d®. square planar

(d) d°, tetrahedral.

Calculate in units of A, the difference in crystal field stabilization
energy between complexes (a) and (d) assuming that the ligands are
strong field ligands. ,

ever octahedral ~2.4A,. tetrahedral —0.27A,, difference
~2.13d,.)

~ Calculate the crystal field stabilization energy for a d* ion such as Ni*

in octahedral and tetrahedral complexes. Use units of A, in both

cases. Which is the most stable? State any assumptions made.

» Calculate the spin only magnetic moment for a d® jon in octahedral,

square planar and tetrahedral ligand fields.

ri by means of a diagram how the pattern of d orbital splitting
wanges aS an octahedral complex undergoes tetragonal distortion and
cventually becomes a square planar complex.
