Energy-tich molecule

 

 

1. Enzymes that harvest hydrogen
atoms have a binding site for NAD*
located near the substrate binding
site. NAD* and an energy-rich
molecule bind to the enzyme.

 

Product

7

 

2. In an oxidation-reduction reaction,
a hydrogen atom is transferred to
NAD*, forming NADH.

 

 

 

~

 

FIGURE 8.3

 

3. NADH then diffuses away and
is available to other molecules.

 

 

 

An oxidation-reduction reaction. Cells use a chemical called NAD* to carry out oxidation-reduction reactions. Energetic electrons are
often paired with a proton as a hydrogen atom. Molecules that gain energetic electrons are said to be reduced, while ones that lose
energetic electrons are said to be oxidized. NAD* oxidizes energy-rich molecules by acquiring their hydrogens (in the figure, this proceeds
1-42-33) and then reduces other molecules by giving the hydrogens to them (in the figure, this proceeds 332-1).

tor. Conversely, when an atom or molecule gains an elec-
tron, it is said to be reduced, and the process is called re-
duction. Oxidation and reduction always take place to-
gether, because every electron that is lost by an atom
through oxidation is gained by some other atom through
reduction. Therefore, chemical reactions of this sort are
called oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions (figure
8.3). Energy is transferred from one molecule to another
via redox reactions. The reduced form of a molecule thus
has a higher level of energy than the oxidized form
(figure 8.4).

Oxidation-reduction reactions play a key role in the flow
of energy through biological systems because the electrons
that pass from one atom to another carry energy with
them. The amount of energy an electron possesses depends
on how far it is from the nucleus and how strongly the nu-
cleus attracts it. Light (and other forms of energy) can add
energy to an electron and boost it to a higher energy level.
When this electron departs from one atom (oxidation) and
moves to another (reduction), the electron’s added energy
is transferred with it, and the electron orbits the second
atom’s nucleus at the higher energy level. The added en-
ergy is stored as potential chemical energy that the atom
can later release when the electron returns to its original
energy level.

Loss of electron (oxidation)

© ~© « le e
OOO
[|

Gain of electron (reduction)

[Low energy
GBHigh energy

FIGURE 8.4

Redox reactions. Oxidation is the loss of an electron; reduction is
the gain of an electron. In this example, the charges of molecules
Aand Bare shown in small circles to the upper right of each
molecule. Molecule A loses energy as it loses an electron, while
molecule B gains energy as it gains an electron.

 

Energy is the capacity to do work, either actively
(kinetic energy) or stored for later use (potential
energy). Energy is transferred with electrons. Oxidation
is the loss of an electron; reduction is the gain of one.

 

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 145
