252 HYDROGEN AND THE HYDRIDES J

‘The Group 13 hydnides are unusual im that they are electron defcent
and polymenc, although they do not contain direct bonds between the
Group 13 elements The simplest boron hydride 1s called diborane Byty,
‘though more complicated structures such as BsHro, ByHl, BsHys, BAH
and Bygth, are known Aluminum hydride ts polymere (Alt). Ia
these structures, hydrogen appears to be bonded to two or more atoms,
and this is explanted im terms of multr-centre bonding, This 1s discussed n
Chapter 12

In addition to the simple hydrides, the rest of the lighter elements
except the halogens form polynuclear hydrides The tendency to do ths
ss strongest with the elements C, N and O. and two or more of the non
metal atoms are directly bonded to each other The tendency 1 greatest
vith C which catenates (forms chains) of several hundreds of atoms These
are grouped into three homotogous series of aliphatic hydrocarbons, and
aromatic hydrocarbons based on benzene

CHa, Calg, Cig, Callin CyHaysz (alkanes)

 

 

CHa, Cult Gy. Cyt, atenes)
CoH. CsHa CH, . GyHay-2 alkynes)
CoH (aromatic)

‘The alkanes are saturated, but alkenes have double bonds, and alkynes
have triple bonds $1 and Ge only form saturated compounds, and the
‘maximum chain length 18 SiyoHze ‘The longest hydride chains formed by
other elements are Sng, NzH. and HNs, PiHs, AsiM, HO; and H,0y
and HS3, Ss, WSs, H,Ss and HS

‘The meluung point and bowling point of water stand out in Table 8325
being much higher than the others, but on closer examination the values
for NH and HF also seem higher than would be expected sn their respec
tive groups This 1s due to hydrogen bonding, which 1s discussed later
ths chapter

 

    

‘Metallic (or interstuval) hydrides

Many of the elements in the d-block, and the Janthanide and actinde
elements in the block. react with Hs and form metalic hydrides How
‘ver, the elements inthe middle of the d-block do not form hydrides The
absence of hydrides inthis part of the periodic table 1s sometimes called
the hydrogen gap (See Figure 8 2 )

Metallic hydrides are usually prepared by heating the metal with hydro
sen under high pressure (If heated to higher temperatures the hydrides
ecompose. and this may be used as a convemieat method of making <r}
pure hydrogen )

‘These hydrides generally have properties similar to those of the paren!
metals they are hard, have a metal lustre, conduct electriety. and have
rmagnetie properties ‘The hydrides are less dense than the parent met
because the erystal lattice has expanded through the inclusion of hydrogen
