 

[ HYDRIDES .

This distortion of the crystal lattice may make the hydride brittle. Thus
when the hydride is formed a solid piece of metal turns into finely powdered
hydride. If the finely powdered hydrides are heated they decompose,
giving hydrogen and very finely divided metal. These finely divided metals
may be used as catalysts. They are also used in metallurgy in powder
fabrication, and zirconium hydride has been used as a moderator in
nuclear reactors.

In many cases the compounds are nonstoichiometric, for example
LaH,, TiH,, and PdH,, where the chemical composition is variable.
Typical formulae are LaH2,g7, YDH2 5s, TiHi.8, ZtHi 9, VHi 6, NbHo7
and PdHp,7. Such compounds were originally called interstitial hydrides,
and it was thought that a varying number of interstitial positions in the
metal lattice could be filled by hydrogen. |

The nonstoichiometric compounds may be regarded as solid solutions.
Metals which can ‘dissolve’ varying amounts of hydrogen in this way can
act as catalysts for hydrogenation reactions. The catalysts are thought to
be effective through providing H atoms rather than H2 molecules. It is not
certain whether the hydrogen is present in the interstitial sites as atoms of
hydrogen, or alternatively as H* ions with delocalized electrons, but they
have strongly reducing properties.

Even small amounts of hydrogen dissolved in a metal adversely affect its
strength and make it brittle. Titanium is extracted by reducing TiCl, with
Mg or Na in an inert atmosphere. If an atmosphere of Ho is used, the Ti
dissolves H2, and is brittle. Titanium is used to make supersonic aircraft,
and since strength is important, it is produced in an atmosphere of argon.

The bonding is more complicated than was originally thought, and is still
the subject of controversy. . '

1. Many of the hydrides have structures where hydrogen atoms occupy
tetrahedral holes in a cubic close-packed array of metal atoms. If all of
the tetrahedral sites are occupied then the formula is MH2, and a
fluorite structure is formed. Generally some sites are unoccupied, and
hence the compounds contain less hydrogen. This accounts for the
compounds of formula MH; s-» formed by the scandium and titanium
groups, and most of the lanthanides and actinides. :

. Two of the lanthanide elements, europium and ytterbium, are unusual
in that they form ionic hydrides EuH and YbH2, which are stoichio-
metric and resemble CaH>. The lanthanides are typically trivalent, but
Eu and Yb form divalent ions (associated with stable electronic struc-
tures Eu(+I1) 4f7 (half filled f shell), and Yb(+H) 4f"4 (filled f shell)).
The compounds YH and LaHg, as well as many of the lanthanide and
actinide hydrides MHg, can absorb more hydrogen, forming compounds
of limiting composition MH3. Compositions such as LaH, 7, and
CoH «y are found. The structures of these are complex, sometimes
cubic and sometimes hexagonal. The third hydrogen atom is more

loosely held than the others, and rath isi i
cared . rather surprisingly it may occupy an

 

253 |
