Free Energy

It takes energy to break the chemical bonds that hold the
atoms in a molecule together. Heat energy, because it in-
creases atomic motion, makes it easier for the atoms to pull
apart. Both chemical bonding and heat have a significant
influence on a molecule, the former reducing disorder and
the latter increasing it. The net effect, the amount of en-
ergy actually available to break and subsequently form
other chemical bonds, is called the free energy of that
molecule. In a more general sense, free energy is defined as
the energy available to do work in any system. In a mole-
cule within a cell, where pressure and volume usually do
not change, the free energy is denoted by the symbol G
(for “Gibbs’ free energy,” which limits the system being
considered to the cell). G is equal to the energy contained
in a molecule’s chemical bonds (called enthalpy and desig-
nated H) minus the energy unavailable because of disorder
(called entropy and given the symbol S$) times the absolute
temperature, T, in degrees Kelvin (K = °C +273):

G=H-TS

Chemical reactions break some bonds in the reactants
and form new bonds in the products. Consequently, reac-
tions can produce changes in free energy. When a chemical
reaction occurs under conditions of constant temperature,
pressure, and volume—as do most biological reactions—
the change in free energy (AG) is simply:

AG=AH-TAS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Energy
must be
supplied.

Reactant

3

3

8

34

2

5

2

wi

(@ Endergonic
FIGURE 8.6

The change in free energy, or AG, is a fundamental
property of chemical reactions.

In some reactions, the AG is positive. This means that
the products of the reaction contain more free energy than
the reactants; the bond energy (H) is higher or the disorder
(S) in the system is lower. Such reactions do not proceed
spontaneously because they require an input of energy. Any
reaction that requires an input of energy is said to be en-
dergonic (“inward energy”).

In other reactions, the AG is negative. The products of
the reaction contain less free energy than the reactants; ei-
ther the bond energy is lower or the disorder is higher, or
both. Such reactions tend to proceed spontaneously. Any
chemical reaction will tend to proceed spontaneously if the
difference in disorder (T AS) is greater than the difference
in bond energies between reactants and products (AH).
Note that spontaneous does not mean the same thing as in-
stantaneous. A spontaneous reaction may proceed very
slowly. These reactions release the excess free energy as
heat and are thus said to be exergonic (outward energy”).
Figure 8.6 sums up these reactions.

 

Free energy is the energy available to do work. Within
cells, the change in free energy (AG) is the difference
in bond energies between reactants and products (AH),
minus any change in the degree of disorder of the
system (T AS). Any reaction whose products contain
less free energy than the reactants (AG is negative) will
tend to proceed spontaneously.

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

Reactant
Energy is
released.

Product
) Exergonic

Energy in chemical reactions. (a) In an endergonic reaction, the products of the reaction contain more energy than the reactants, and the
extra energy must be supplied for the reaction to proceed. () In an exergonic reaction, the products contain less energy than the reactants,

and the excess energy is released.

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 147
