8.2 Enzymes are biological catalysts.
Enzymes

The chemical reactions within living organisms are regu-
lated by controlling the points at which catalysis takes
place. Life itself is, therefore, regulated by catalysts. The
agents that carry out most of the catalysis in living organ-
isms are proteins called enzymes. (There is increasing evi-
dence that some types of biological catalysis are carried out
by RNA molecules.) The unique three-dimensional shape
of an enzyme enables it to stabilize a temporary association
between substrates, the molecules that will undergo the
reaction. By bringing two substrates together in the correct
orientation, or by stressing particular chemical bonds of a
substrate, an enzyme lowers the activation energy required
for new bonds to form. The reaction thus proceeds much
more quickly than it would without the enzyme. Because
the enzyme itself is not changed or consumed in the reac-
tion, only a small amount of an enzyme is needed, and it
can be used over and over.

As an example of how an enzyme works, let’s consider
the reaction of carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic
acid. This important enzyme-catalyzed reaction occurs in
vertebrate red blood cells:

CO? +H2O—> H)CO3
carbon water
dioxide

carbonic
acid

     

Catalysis: A Closer
Look at Carbonic

FIGURE 8.4
One of the most rapidly acting enzymes in

the human body is carbonic anhydrase,

This reaction may proceed in either direction, but because
it has a large activation energy, the reaction is very slow in
the absence of an enzyme: perhaps 200 molecules of car-
bonic acid form in an hour in a cell. Reactions that proceed
this slowly are of little use to a cell. Cells overcome this
problem by employing an enzyme within their cytoplasm
called carbonic anhydrase (enzyme names usually end in
“—ase”). Under the same conditions, but in the presence of
carbonic anhydrase, an estimated 600,000 molecules of car-
bonic acid form every second! Thus, the enzyme increases
the reaction rate more than 10 million times.

Thousands of different kinds of enzymes are known,
each catalyzing one or a few specific chemical reactions.
By facilitating particular chemical reactions, the enzymes
in a cell determine the course of metabolism—the collec-
tion of all chemical reactions—in that cell. Different types
of cells contain different sets of enzymes, and this differ-
ence contributes to structural and functional variations
among cell types. The chemical reactions taking place
within a red blood cell differ from those that occur within
a nerve cell, in part because the cytoplasm and membranes
of red blood cells and nerve cells contain different arrays
of enzymes.

 

Cells use proteins called enzymes as catalysts to lower
activation energies.

 

 

which plays a key role in blood by convert-
ing dissolved CO) into carbonic acid, which
dissociates into bicarbonate and hydrogen
ions:

CO, + H,O > HCO; > HCO;- + H+

Fully 70% of the CO? transported by
the blood is transported as bicarbonate ion.
‘This reaction is exergonic, but its energy of
activation is significant, so that little con-
version to bicarbonate occurs sponta-
neously. In the presence of the enzyme car-
bonic anhydrase, however, the rate of the
reaction accelerates by a factor of more
than 10 million!

How does carbonic anhydrase catalyze
this reaction so effectively? The active site

of the enzyme is a deep cleft traversing the
enzyme, as if it had been cut with the blade
of an ax. Deep within the cleft, some 1.5
nm from the surface, are located three his-
tidines, their imidazole (nitrogen ring)
groups all pointed at the same place in the
center of the cleft. Together they hold a
zinc ion firmly in position. This zinc ion
will be the cutting blade of the catalytic
process.

Here is how the zinc catalyzes the reac-
tion. Immediately adjacent to the position
of the zinc atom in the cleft are a group of
amino acids that recognize and bind carbon
dioxide. The zinc atom interacts with this
carbon dioxide molecule, orienting it in the
plane of the cleft. Meanwhile, water bound

to the zinc is rapidly converted to hydroxide
ion. This hydroxide ion is now precisely po-
sitioned to attack the carbon dioxide. When
it does so, HCOs- is formed—and the en-
zyme is unchanged (figure 8.A).

Carbonic anhydrase is an effective cata-
lyst because it brings its two substrates into
close proximity and optimizes their orien-
tation for reaction. Other enzymes use
other mechanisms. Many, for example, use
charged amino acids to polarize substrates
or electronegative amino acids to stress
particular bonds. Whatever the details of
the reaction, however, the precise posi-
tioning of substrates achieved by the par-
ticular shape of the enzyme always plays a
key role.

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 149
