 

WERNER’S WORK.

 

 

 

195 |

 

crystalline salts). If aqueous ammonia is added to this solution, the familiar
deep blue cuproammonium ion is formed:

[Cu(H,0),J?* + 4NH3 = [Cu(H20)2(NH3),)?* + 4H,0

Note that this reaction is a substitution reaction, and the NH3 replaces
water in the complex ion.

WERNER’S WORK

Werner's coordination theory in 1893 was the first attempt to explain
the bonding in coordination-vomplexes. It must be remembered that this
imaginative theory was put forward before the electron had been dis-
covered by J.J. Thompson in 1896, and before the electronic theory of
valency. This theory and his painstaking work over the next 20 years won
Alfred Werner the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1913.

Complexes must have been a complete mystery without any knowledge
of bonding or structure. For example, why does a stable salt like CoCl;
react with a varying number of stable molecules of a compound such as
NH; to give several new compounds: CoCl;-6NH3, CoCl,-5NH3 and
CoCl;-4NH3? What are their structures? At that time X-ray diffraction,
which is the most powerful method of determining the structures of
crystals, had yet to be discovered. Werner did not have at his disposal any
of the modern instrumental techniques, and all his studies were made using
simple reaction chemistry’ Werner was able to explain the nature of bonding
in complexes, and he concluded that in complexes the metal shows two dif-
ferent sorts of valency:

1. Primary valencies, These are non-directional. The modern explanation
would be as follows. The complex commonly exists as a positive ion.
The primary valency is the number of charges on the complex ion. In
compounds, this charge is matched by the same number of charges from
negative ions. Primary valency applies equally well to simple salts and
to complexes. Thus in CoCl, (Co?* + 2C1~) there are two primary
valencies, 1.e. two ionic bonds. The complex [Co(NH3),]Cl actually
exists. as [Co(NH3)s}** and 3C1~. Thus the primary valency is 3, as there
are three ionic bonds.

2. Secondary valencies. These are directional. In modern terms the
number of secondary vatencies equals the number of ligand atoms
coordinated to the metat. This is now called the coordination number.
Ligands are commonly negative ions such as CI”, or neutral molecules
such as NH3. Less commonly, ligands may be Positive ions such as
NO _Each metal has a characteristic number Of secondary valencies.
Thus in [Co(NH,),ICh, the three CI> are held by primary valencies. The
six NHj groups are held by secondary valencies. :

Secondary valencies are directi i
| ectional, and so a complex ion has a par-
dean shape. €.g. the complex ion {Co(NH5),}** is octahedral. Werner
ed the shapes of many complexes. He did this by preparing as many
