 

i MOLECULAR ORBITAL THEORY

However, the energies of the 2p orbitals on F~ are much lower than the
energy of the corresponding orbital on N in NH3. This alters the spacing of
the MO energy levels (Figure 7.30). Spectroscopic measurements show
that A, is 13000cm7'. Thus the gap between the non-bonding MOs and
the antibonding eg MOs is less than the pairing energy of 19000cm7!.
Thus the non-bonding d electrons do not pair up as in the [Co(NH3).}**
complex because there is a net gain in energy if electrons are left unpaired.
Thus {CoF,}°~ has four unpaired electrons and is a high-spin. complex,
whilst [Co(NH3)o]°* has no unpaired electrons and is a low-spin complex.

Thus the MO theory explains the magnetic properties and spectra of
complexes equally as well as the crystal field theory. Both theories rely on
spectra to measure the energy of A,. Either theory may be used depending
on which is the most convenient.

The MO theory is based on wave mechanics and so has the disadvantage
that enthalpies of formation and bond energies cannot be calculated
directly. So far we have considered o bonding between ligands and the
central metal. The MO theory hus the great advantage that it is easily
extended to cover x bonding. Pi bonding helps to explain how metals in
low oxidation states (e.g. [Ni?(CO),]) can form complexes. It is impossible
to explain any attractive force in such a complex using the crystal field
theory because of the lack of charge on the metal. Pi bonding also helps to
explain the position of some ligands in the spectrochemical series. There
are two cases:

1. Where the ligands act as % acceptors, by accepting electrons from the
central metal. Examples include CO, CN~, NO* and phosphines.

. Where the ligands act as t donors and transfer charge from ligand to
metal in 7 interactions as well as o interactions. Pi bonding of this kind
commonly occurs in’ oxoions of metals in high oxidation states, e.g.
[Mn¥"0,)}- and [Cr'O,}?~.

2

Tacceptors

Ligands such as CO, CN~ and NO* have empty x orbitals with the correct
symmetry to overlap with the metal fog orbitals, forming 2 bonds. This is
often described as back bonding. Normally the x orbitals on the ligands are
of higher energy than the metal 4g orbitals. No more electrons are added
to the scheme as the ligand x orbitals are empty, but the x interaction
increases the value of Aj. This accounts for the position of these ligands
as ‘strong field ligands’ at the right of the spectrochemical series.

x donors

The ligand has filled x orb:
giving ax bond. Thus elect
metal. The ¢ bonding als:
complex is favoured whet

itals which overlap with the metal hg orbitals,
ton density is transferred from the ligand to the
© transfers charge to the metal. This type of
n the central metal has a high oxidation state,

 

229 |
