How Enzymes Work

Most enzymes are globular proteins with one or more
pockets or clefts on their surface called active sites (figure
8.8). Substrates bind to the enzyme at these active sites,
forming an enzyme-substrate complex. For catalysis to
occur within the complex, a substrate molecule must fit
precisely into an active site. When that happens, amino
acid side groups of the enzyme end up in close proximity to
certain bonds of the substrate. These side groups interact
chemically with the substrate, usually stressing or distorting
a particular bond and consequently lowering the activation
energy needed to break the bond. The substrate, now a
product, then dissociates from the enzyme.

Proteins are not rigid. The binding of a substrate in-
duces the enzyme to adjust its shape slightly, leading to a
better induced fit between enzyme and substrate (figure 8.9).
This interaction may also facilitate the binding of other
substrates; in such cases, the substrate itself “activates” the
enzyme to receive other substrates.

 

Enzymes typically catalyze only one or a few similar
chemical reactions because they are specific in their
choice of substrates. This specificity is due to the active
site of the enzyme, which is shaped so that only a
certain substrate molecule will fit into it.

 

@ The substrate, sucrose, consists

of glucose and fructose bonded
together.
Bond
Active site
Enzyme
FIGURE 8.9

® The substrate binds to the enzyme,
forming an enzyme-substrate

a
H,O
— i

 

FIGURE 8.8

How the enzyme lysozyme works. (2) A groove runs through
lysozyme that fits the shape of the polysaccharide (a chain of
sugars) that makes up bacterial cell walls. (6) When such a chain of
sugars, indicated in yellow, slides into the groove, its entry

induces the protein to alter its shape slightly and embrace the
substrate more intimately. This induced fit positions a glutamic
acid residue in the protein next to the bond between two adjacent
sugars, and the glutamic acid “steals” an electron from the bond,
causing it to break.

Glucose OQ Co Fructose
Aa rotun are released,

and the enzymes free
to bind other substrates.

© The binding of the
substrate and enzyme
places stress on the
glucose-fructose bond,
and the bond breaks.

The catalytic cycle of an enzyme. Enzymes increase the speed with which chemical reactions occur, but they are not altered

themselves as they do so. In the reaction illustrated here, the enzyme sucrase is splitting the sugar sucrose (present in most candy) into
two simpler sugars: glucose and fructose. (1) First, the sucrose substrate binds to the active site of the enzyme, fitting into a depression
in the enzyme surface. (2) The binding of sucrose to the active site forms an enzyme-substrate complex and induces the sucrase
molecule to alter its shape, fitting more tightly around the sucrose. (3) Amino acid residues in the active site, now in close proximity to
the bond between the glucose and fructose components of sucrose, break the bond. (4) The enzyme releases the resulting glucose and
fructose fragments, the products of the reaction, and is then ready to bind another molecule of sucrose and run through the catalytic
cycle once again. This cycle is often summarized by the equation: E + S @ [ES] @ E + P, where E = enzyme, S = substrate, ES =
enzyme-substrate complex, and P = products.

150 Part II Energetics
