 

 

[ HORIZONTAL, VERTICAL AND DIAGONAL RELATIONSHIPS

HORIZONTAL, VERTICAL AND DIAGONAL RELATIONSHIPS
IN THE PERIODIC TABLE

On moving across a period in the periodic table, the number of electrons in
the outer shell increases from one to eight. Thus Group 1 elements all
have one electron in their outer shell. When they react they are univalent,
because the loss of one electron leaves a noble gas structure. Similarly
Group 2 elements have two electrons in their outer shell and are divalent.
The valency of an s-block element is the group number. For p-block
elements, the valency is normally (the group number ~ 10) or (18 — the
group number). This is the same as the number of s and p electrons in the
outer shell, or (8 ~ this number of electrons). Group 15 elements (e.g.
nitrogen) have five outer electrons. If three of these are shared in covalent
bonds with other atoms, the nitrogen atom has a share in eight electrons
and has a stable configuration. Thus nitrogen is trivalent, for example in
ammonia NH3. The halogens are in Group 17 and have seven outer
electrons. The valency should be 18 —- 17 = 1. A stable structure is
attained by gaining one electron either by forming an ionic or a covalent
bond. The number of outer electrons thus determines the valency of the
element,

On moving from left to right across a period, the size of the atoms
decreases because of the additional nuclear charge. Thus the orbital
electrons are more tightly held, and the ionization energy increases. The
metallic character of the element also decreases, and the oxides of the
elements become less basic. Thus Na2O is strongly basic; AlO3 is
amphoteric and reacts with both acids and bases; SO, is an acidic oxide
since it dissolves in water to form sulphurous acid (H.SO3) and reacts with
bases to form sulphites. Generally, metallic oxides are basic, whilst non-
metallic oxides are acidic.

On descending a group in the periodic table, the elements all have the
same number of outer electrons and the same valency, but the size in-
creases. Thus the ionization energy decreases and the metallic character
increases. This is particularly apparent in Groups 14 and 15, which begin
with the non-metals carbon and nitrogen and end with the metals lead and
bismuth. The oxides become increasingly basic on descending the group.

On moving diagonally across the periodic table’ the elements show cer-
oon ee These are usually weaker than the similarities within a

P. but are quite pronounced in the following pairs of elements:

Li Be B C
VON \
Na Mg Al Si
on moving across a period, the charge on the ions increases and the size

ectcases, causing the

3 polarizing power to increase. On moving down
group, the size increas: " ‘"

r es and the polarizing power decreases. On movin
<iagonally these two effects partly cancel each other, so that there is no
‘arked change in properties. The type and strength of bond formed and

 

[189]
