 

METALLIC CHARACTER

 

 

163 |

 

precisely, covalent radii are much less well known because the multiplicity
of the bond is not known for certain, that is the bond may possess some
double bond character.

The electronegativity values given in this book are those due to Pauling,
but others have been calculated from different theoretical assumptions by
Mulliken, Allred and Rochow and Sanderson. For details of these and

_ several modern reviews of electronegativity values see Further Reading.
It is now considered that attempts to measure very accurate values for
electronegativity are unjustified, and it is better to retain a loose definition of
electronegativity, and use it for a more qualitative description of bonds. For
this purpose, it is worth remembering a few electronegativity values (see
Table 6.8). From these it is possible to make a reasonable guess at the
values for other elements, and hence predict the nature of the bonds
formed. Bonds between atoms with similar electronegativity values will be
largely non-polar (covalent), and bonds between atoms with a large elec-
tronegativity difference will be largely polar (ionic). Predictions using
electronegativity in general agree with those made using Fajans’ rules.

The basic properties of elements are inversely related to the electro-
negativity. Thus on descending one of the main groups, the electro-
negativity decreases, and basic properties increase. Similarly, on going
across a period the elements become more electronegative, and less basic.

METALLIC CHARACTER

Metals are electropositive and have a tendency to lose electrons, if
supplied with energy:

M—>M* +e

The Stronger this tendency, the more electropositive and more metallic an
clement is. The tendency to lose electrons depends on the ionization
energy. It is easier to remove an electron from a large atom than from a
small one, so metallic character increases as we descend the groups in the
one ae Thus in Group 14, carbon is a non-metal, germanium shows
characte, 4 lic properties, and tin and lead are metals. Similarly, metallic
size ot Nita from left to right across the periodic table because the
sodium ory ioms decreases and the ionization energy increases. Thus
more Magnesium are more metallic than silicon, which, in turn, is

metallic than chlorine. The most electropositive elements are found

in iodi
top jower left of the periodic table and the most non-metallic in the

Electropositivi i
ity is really the conv ivi it i
convenient to u iy converse of electronegativity, but it is

ise the concept of electropositivity when describi
5 he positivity when describing metals.
and eo clectropositive elements give ionic compounds. Metallic oxides
ydroxides are basic since they ionize, and give hydroxyl ions:
NaOH ~ Na* + OH~
CaO + HO > Ca?* + 20H™
