Activation Energy

If all chemical reactions that release free energy tend to
occur spontaneously, why haven’t all such reactions already
occurred? One reason they haven’t is that most reactions
require an input of energy to get started. Before it is possi-
ble to form new chemical bonds, even bonds that contain
less energy, it is first necessary to break the existing bonds,
and that takes energy. The extra energy required to desta-
bilize existing chemical bonds and initiate a chemical reac-
tion is called activation energy (figure 8.72).

The rate of an exergonic reaction depends on the acti-
vation energy required for the reaction to begin. Reac-
tions with larger activation energies tend to proceed
more slowly because fewer molecules succeed in over-
coming the initial energy hurdle. Activation energies are
not constant, however. Stressing particular chemical
bonds can make them easier to break. The process of in-
fluencing chemical bonds in a way that lowers the activa-
tion energy needed to initiate a reaction is called cataly-
sis, and substances that accomplish this are known as
catalysts (figure 8.7).

Catalysts cannot violate the basic laws of thermody-
namics; they cannot, for example, make an endergonic re-
action proceed spontaneously. By reducing the activation
energy, a catalyst accelerates both the forward and the re-
verse reactions by exactly the same amount. Hence, it
does not alter the proportion of reactant ultimately con-
verted into product.

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

3

2

roa

&

g

3 Activation
e energy

w

Reactant

2

3

8

34

2

S

5

=

w

(a)

FIGURE 8.7

To grasp this, imagine a bowling ball resting in a shal-
low depression on the side of a hill. Only a narrow rim of
dirt below the ball prevents it from rolling down the hill.
Now imagine digging away that rim of dirt. If you remove
enough dirt from below the ball, it will start to roll down
the hill—but removing dirt from below the ball will never
cause the ball to roll UP the hill! Removing the lip of dirt
simply allows the ball to move freely; gravity determines
the direction it then travels. Lowering the resistance to the
ball’s movement will promote the movement dictated by its
position on the hill.

Similarly, the direction in which a chemical reaction
proceeds is determined solely by the difference in free en-
ergy. Like digging away the soil below the bowling ball on
the hill, catalysts reduce the energy barrier preventing the
reaction from proceeding. Catalysts don’t favor endergonic
reactions any more than digging makes the hypothetical
bowling ball roll uphill. Only exergonic reactions can pro-
ceed spontaneously, and catalysts cannot change that.
What catalysts can do is make a reaction proceed much
faster.

 

The rate of a reaction depends on the activation energy
necessary to initiate it. Catalysts reduce the activation
energy and so increase the rates of reactions, although
they do not change the final proportions of reactants
and products.

 

 

Uncatalyzed
_— 7

Catalyzed

  

 

Activation
energy

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

Activation energy and catalysis. (2) Exergonic reactions do not necessarily proceed rapidly because energy must be supplied to destabilize
existing chemical bonds. This extra energy is the activation energy for the reaction. (}) Catalysts accelerate particular reactions by lowering

the amount of activation energy required to initiate the reaction.

148 Part III Energetics
