 

EXTRACTION OF THE METALS

sources are from mined deposits (the Soviet Union 35%, Canada 25%,
Germany 18%, France and the USA 5% each and Israel 4%). Large
‘amounts are recovered from brines such as the Dead Sea (Jordan) and
the Great Salt Lake (Utah USA), where the concentration may be 20-25
times higher than in sea water, but it is not economic to recover potassium
salts from ‘normal’ sea water. ;

There is no convenient source of rubidium and only one of caesium
and these elements are obtained as by-products from lithium processing.

All of the elements heavier than bismuth (atomic number 83) g3Bi are
radioactive. Thus francium (atomic number 89) is radioactive, and as it
has a short half life period of 21 minutes it does not occur appreciably
in nature. Any that existed when the earth was formed will have dis-
appeared, and any formed now from actinium will have a transitory
existence.

Bac > _%e + ?83Th (beta decay)
1%
3He + 733Fr (alpha decay)
half hfe 21 min
as,

23Fr fe + 78Ra (beta decay)

EXTRACTION OF THE METALS

The metals of this group are too reactive to be found in the free state.
Their compounds are amongst the most stable to heat, so thermal de-
composition is impractical. Since the metals are at the top of the elec-
trochemical series they react with water, so displacement of one element
from solution by another higher in the electrochemical series will be
unsuccessful. The metals are the strongest chemical reducing agents
known, and so cannot be prepared by reducing the oxides. Electrolysis
of aqueous solutions in order to obtain the metal is also unsuccessful
unless a mercury: cathode js used, when it is Possible to obtain amalgams,
but recovery of the pure metal from the amalgam is difficult.

The metals may all be isolated by electrolysis of a fused salt, usually the
fused halide, often with impurity added to lower the melting point.

Sodium is made by the electrolysis of a molten mixture of about 40%
NaCl and 60% CaCl, in a Downs cell (Figure 9.1). This mixture melts at
about 600°C compared with 803°C for pure NaCl. The small amount of
calcium formed during the electrolysis is insoluble in the liquid sodium,

and dissolves in the eutectic mixture. There are three advantages to
electrolysing a mixture.

 

It lowers the melting point and so reduces the fuel bill,
The lower temperature results in a lower vapour pressure for sodium,
Which is important as sodium vapour ignites in air.
; 3 At the lower temperature the liberated sodium metal does not dissolve
in the melt, and this is important because if it dissolved it would short-
Circuit the electrodes and thus prevent further electrolysis,
continued overleaf

1.
}2.

 

|
t
t
t

 

| [27
