 

[ CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

ceed the lattice energy. Consider a related group of compounds, such as
the chlorides of all the Group 2 metals. On desending the group the
metal ions become larger and so both the lattice energy and the hydration
energy decrease. A decrease in lattice energy favours increased solubility,
but a decrease in hydration energy favours decreased solubility. These two
factors thus change in opposite directions, and the overall effect depends
on which of the two has changed most. With most compounds, on de-
scending the group, the hydration energy decreases more rapidly than
the lattice energy: hence the compounds become less soluble as the metal
gets larger. However, with fluorides and hydroxides the lattice energy
decreases more rapidly than the hydration energy, and so their solubility
increases on descending the group.

SOLUTIONS OF THE METALS IN LIQUID AMMONIA

The metals all dissolve in liquid ammonia as do the Group 1 metals. Dilute
solutions are bright blue in colour due to the spectrum from the solvated
electron. These solutions decompose very slowly, forming amides and
evolving hydrogen, but the reaction is accelerated by many transition
metals and their compounds.

2NH3 + 2e —- 2NHZ + Hp

Evaporation of the ammonia from solutions of Group 1 metals yields the
metal, but with Group 2 metals evaporation of ammonia gives hexam-
moniates of the metals. These slowly decompose to give amides.

M(NH3)6 > M(NH2)2 + 4NH3 + Hp

Concentrated solutions of the metals in ammonia are bronze coloured,
due to the formation of metal clusters.

CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

|
Reaction with water

The reduction potential of beryllium is much less than those for the rest of
the group. (Standard electrode potentials E° of Be?*|Be —1.85, Mg?*|Mg
~2.31, Ca?*|Ca ~2.87, Sr°*|Sr 2.89, Ba?*|Ba —2.91, Ra’*|Ra —2.92
volts.) This indicates that beryllium is much less electropositive (less met-
allic) than the others, and beryllium does not react with water. There is
Some doubt whether it reacts with steam to form the oxide BeO, or fails
to react at all.

Ca, St and Ba have reduction potentials similar to those of the corre-
sponding Group 1 metals, and are quite high in the electrochemical series.

They react with cold water qui ily, li ii ii
juite readily, liberating hyd id
etal hydroxides, q! ig, rogen and forming

Ca + 2H,O — Ca(OH), + Hp
