8.3 ATP is the energy currency of life.

What Is ATP?

The chief energy currency all cells use is a molecule called
adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Cells use their supply of
ATP to power almost every energy-requiring process they
carry out, from making sugars, to supplying activation en-
ergy for chemical reactions, to actively transporting sub-
stances across membranes, to moving through their envi-
ronment and growing.

Structure of the ATP Molecule

Each ATP molecule is a nucleotide composed of three
smaller components (figure 8.14). The first component is a
five-carbon sugar, ribose, which serves as the backbone to
which the other two subunits are attached. The second
component is adenine, an organic molecule composed of
two carbon-nitrogen rings. Each of the nitrogen atoms in
the ring has an unshared pair of electrons and weakly at-
tracts hydrogen ions. Adenine, therefore, acts chemically as
a base and is usually referred to as a nitrogenous base (it is
one of the four nitrogenous bases found in DNA and
RNA). The third component of ATP is a triphosphate
group (a chain of three phosphates).

How ATP Stores Energy

The key to how ATP stores energy lies in its triphosphate
group. Phosphate groups are highly negatively charged, so
they repel one another strongly. Because of the electrosta-
tic repulsion between the charged phosphate groups, the
two covalent bonds joining the phosphates are unstable.
The ATP molecule is often referred to as a “coiled spring,”
the phosphates straining away from one another.

The unstable bonds holding the phosphates together in
the ATP molecule have a low activation energy and are
easily broken. When they break, they can transfer a consid-
erable amount of energy. In most reactions involving ATP,
only the outermost high-energy phosphate bond is hy-
drolyzed, cleaving off the phosphate group on the end.
When this happens, ATP becomes adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP), and energy equal to 7.3 kcal/mole is released
under standard conditions. The liberated phosphate group
usually attaches temporarily to some intermediate mole-
cule. When that molecule is dephosphorylated, the phos-
phate group is released as inorganic phosphate (P)).

How ATP Powers Energy-Requiring Reactions

Cells use ATP to drive endergonic reactions. Such reac-
tions do not proceed spontaneously, because their products
possess more free energy than their reactants. However, if
the cleavage of ATP’s terminal high-energy bond releases

154 Part II Energetics

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Triphosphate
group
o
|
o=P—o-
=z
°
L High-energy
bonds
a ee Adenine N42
on |
°
AMP
o=P—0——CH, core
|
o
(b)
FIGURE 8.14

The ATP molecule. (a) The model and (b) structural diagram
both show that like NAD+, ATP has a core of AMP. In ATP the
reactive group added to the end of the AMP phosphate group is
not another nucleotide but rather a chain of two additional
phosphate groups. The bonds connecting these two phosphate
groups to each other and to AMP are energy-storing bonds.

more energy than the other reaction consumes, the overall
energy change of the two coupled reactions will be exer-
gonic (energy releasing) and they will both proceed. Be-
cause almost all endergonic reactions require less energy
than is released by the cleavage of ATP, ATP can provide
most of the energy a cell needs.

The same feature that makes ATP an effective energy
donor—the instability of its phosphate bonds—precludes
it from being a good long-term energy storage molecule.
Fats and carbohydrates serve that function better. Most
cells do not maintain large stockpiles of ATP. Instead,
they typically have only a few seconds’ supply of ATP at
any given time, and they continually produce more from
ADP and Pj.

 

The instability of its phosphate bonds makes ATP an
excellent energy donor.

 
