8.4 Metabolism is the chemical life of a cell.

Biochemical Pathways: The
Organizational Units of Metabolism

This living chemistry, the total of all chemical reactions
carried out by an organism, is called metabolism (Greek
metabole, “change”). Those reactions that expend energy to
make or transform chemical bonds are called anabolic reac-
tions, or anabolism. Reactions that harvest energy when
chemical bonds are broken are called catabolic reactions, or
catabolism.

Organisms contain thousands of different kinds of en-
zymes that catalyze a bewildering variety of reactions.
Many of these reactions in a cell occur in sequences called
biochemical pathways. In such pathways, the product of
one reaction becomes the substrate for the next (figure
8.15). Biochemical pathways are the organizational units of
metabolism, the elements an organism controls to achieve
coherent metabolic activity. Most sequential enzyme steps
in biochemical pathways take place in specific compart-
ments of the cell; the steps of the citric acid cycle (chapter
9), for example, occur inside mitochondria. By determining
where many of the enzymes that catalyze these steps are lo-
cated, we can “map out” a model of metabolic processes in
the cell.

How Biochemical Pathways Evolved

In the earliest cells, the first biochemical processes proba-
bly involved energy-rich molecules scavenged from the en-
vironment. Most of the molecules necessary for these
processes are thought to have existed in the “organic soup”
of the early oceans. The first catalyzed reactions are
thought to have been simple, one-step reactions that
brought these molecules together in various combinations.
Eventually, the energy-rich molecules became depleted in
the external environment, and only organisms that had
evolved some means of making those molecules from other
substances in the environment could survive. Thus, a hypo-
thetical reaction,

F
+—H
G

where two energy-rich molecules (F and G) react to pro-
duce compound H and release energy, became more com-
plex when the supply of F in the environment ran out. A
new reaction was added in which the depleted molecule, F,
is made from another molecule, E, which was also present
in the environment:

E—+>F
+—H
G

 

FIGURE 8.15

A biochemical pathway. The original substrate is acted on by
enzyme 1, changing the substrate to a new form recognized by
enzyme 2. Each enzyme in the pathway acts on the product of the
previous stage.

When the supply of E in turn became depleted, organisms
that were able to make it from some other available precur-
sor, D, survived. When D became depleted, those organ-
isms in turn were replaced by ones able to synthesize D
from another molecule, C:

C— D— E—>F
+—H
G

This hypothetical biochemical pathway would have
evolved slowly through time, with the final reactions in the
pathway evolving first and earlier reactions evolving later.
Looking at the pathway now, we would say that the organ-
ism, starting with compound C, is able to synthesize H by
means of a series of steps. This is how the biochemical
pathways within organisms are thought to have evolved—
not all at once, but one step at a time, backward.

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 155
