 

PROBLEMS

. What precautions are necessary when handling beryllium compounds?

What are the usual coordination numbers for Be** and Mg?*? What

is the reason for the difference?

. Compare the extent of hydration of Group 1 and Group 2 halides.

Why do Be salts seldom contain more than four molecules of water
of crystallization?

Give equations to show the reactions between Ca and: (4) H20, (b)
Hg, (c) C, (d) No, (e) O2, (f) Ch. (g) NHs.

. Compare the reaction with water of Group | and Group 2 metals.

How does the basic strength of Group 2 hydroxides vary within the
group? Is this trend typical of the rest of the periodic table?

. The hardness of water may be ‘temporary’ or ‘permanent’.

(a) What causes each of these conditions, and how is each treated?

(b) Find (from other literature sources) how naturally occurring
zeolites, synthetic ion-exchange resins and polyphosphates may be
used for softening water.

. Do the alkaline earth metal ions form many complexes? Are Group 2

better or worse than Group | at forming complexes? What is the rea-
son for the difference? Which of the metal ions in the group are best
at forming complexes? Which are the best complexing agents? Name
one complex of a Group 2 metal which is of biological importance.

- Outline the preparation, properties. structure and use of basic beryl-

lium acetate.

. Under what conditions do the Group 2 metal ions form stable com-

plexes with EDTA? How are the amounts of Ca** and Mg** present
in water estimated by titration with EDTA? (Consult a practical text-
book. e.g. Vogel). Are the EDTA complexes more or less stable than
those of most other metal ions? Why is the titration performed at a
high pH? What indicator is used?

- Describe how you would prepare a Grignard reagent from Mg, and

list five different uses of the reagent in preparative reactions. (Refer
also to the section on silicones.)

. The four general methods of extracting metals are thermal decom-

Position, displacement of one element by another, chemical reduc-
ton, and electrolytic reduction. How are Group 2 metals obtained
and why are the other methods unsuitable?

On treatment with cold water, an element (A) reacted quietly, lib-
crating a colourless, odourless gas (B). and a solution (C). Lithium
Feacted with (B) yielding a solid product (D) which effervesced with
Water to give a strongly basic solution (F). When carbon dioxide was

 

[355 |
