 

 

 

309

 

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LITHIUM AND THE OTHER GROUP 1 ELEMENTS

 

the electrical charges associated with negatively charged organic macro-
molecules in the cell, and also to maintain the osmotic pressure inside the
cell, to keep it turgid and prevent its collapse.

In view of the close similarity of chemical properties between Na and K,
it is surprising that their biological functions are very different. Na* are
actively expelled from cells, whereas K* are not. This ion transport is
sometimes called a sodium pump, and it involves both the active expulsion
of Na* and the active take-up of K*. Analysis of the fluids inside and
outside animal cells shows that ion transport really does occur. In animal
cells the concentration of K* is about 0.15M and the concentration of
Na* is about 0.01 M. In body fluids (lymph and blood) the concentrations
of K* and Na* are about 0.003 M and 0.15 M respectively. The transport
of ions requires energy, and this is obtained by the hydrolysis of ATP. It is
estimated that hydrolysis of one ATP molecule to ADP provides enough
energy to move three Na* ions out of the cell, and two K* and one H*
ions back in to the cell. The mechanism for ion transport involves poly-
ethers natural to the organism.

The different ratio of Na* to K* inside and outside cells produces an
electrical potential across the cell membrane, which is essential for the
functioning of nerve and muscle cells. The movement of glucose into cells
is associated with Na* ions; they enter the cell together. This is favoured
by a high concentration gradient. The Na* ions entering the cell in this
way must then be expelled. The movement of amino acids is similar. K*
ions inside the cell are essential for the metabolism of glucose, the syn-
thesis of proteins, and the activation of some enzymes.:

“ The 1987 Ngbel Prize for Chemistry was awarded t6 C.J. Pedersen, J.M.
Lehn and D. Cram for their work on the discovery and applications of
crown ethers and cryptates.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN LITHIUM AND THE OTHER
GROUP 1 ELEMENTS

The properties of lithium and its compounds differ far more from those of
the other Group 1 elements than the other Group 1 elements and com-
Pounds differ among themselves. Apart from having the same oxidation
number as the rest of Group 1, lithium compounds may show closer
similarities with Group 2 elements (particularly magnesium) than they
show towards their own group. Some of the differences are set out below:

1, The melting and boiling points of lithium metal are much higher than

those for the other Group 1 elements.

2. Lithium is much harder than the other Group 1 metals.

3. Lithium Teacts the least readily with oxygen, forming the normal
oxide. It forms a peroxide only with great difficulty, and the higher
oxides are unstable. , .

~ Lithium hydroxide is Jess basic than the other hydroxides in the group,
and therefore many of its salts are less stable. Li,CO,. LiNO, and

 
