 

PROBLEMS

orbital theory to describe the structure of the oxides formed by sodium
and potassium.

8. Explain the difference in reactivity of the Group 1 metals with water.

10.

il.

12.

13,

14.

16.

17.

18,

19,

. The ionization energies of Group 1 elements suggest that caesium

should be the most reactive, but the standard electrode potentials
suggest that lithium is the most reactive. Reconcile these two
observations.

Describe how you would make lithium hydride. Give equations to
show two important properties of lithium hydride. The compound
contains the isoelectronic ions Lit and H~. Which ion is the larger
and why?

Give equations to show the reactions between sodium and: (a) H,O,
(b) Ho, (c) graphite, (d) Nz, (e) O2, (f) Clo, (g) Pb, (h) NH3.

Group 1 elements generally form very soluble compounds. Name
some insoluble or sparingly soluble compounds. How are these
elements detected and confirmed in qualitative analysis?

Describe the colour and nature of the solutions of Group 1 metals
in liquid ammonia. Give an equation to show how these solutions
decompose.

Draw the crystal structures of NaC] and CsCl.What is the coordination
number of the metal ion in each case? Explain why these two salts
adopt different structures.

. Do the alkali metals form many complexes? Which of the metal ions

in the group are best at forming complexes? Which are the best
complexing agents?

Draw the complexes formed by Lit, Na* and K* with acetyl acetone
and with salicaldehyde. Why do the coordination ‘numbers differ?

What is a crown ether, and what is a crypt? Draw examples of Group 1
complexes with these molecules. In what way is this type of complex
of biological importance?

Which of the following methods would you use to extinguish a fire of
lithium, sodium or potassium metals? Explain why some of these are
unsuitable, and give the reactions involved.

(a) water

(b) dinitrogen

(c) carbon dioxide

(d) asbestos blanket

The four general methods of extracting metals are thermal decom-
Position, displacement of one element by another, chemical reduction,

and electrolytic reduction. How are Group 1 metals obtained and why ~

are the other methods unsuitable?

| (3

 
