9.1 Cells harvest the energy in chemical bonds.

Using Chemical Energy to
Drive Metabolism

Plants, algae, and some bacteria harvest the en-
ergy of sunlight through photosynthesis, convert-
ing radiant energy into chemical energy. These
organisms, along with a few others that use
chemical energy in a similar way, are called au-
totrophs (“self-feeders”). All other organisms
live on the energy autotrophs produce and are
called heterotrophs (“fed by others”). At least
95% of the kinds of organisms on earth—all ani-
mals and fungi, and most protists and bacteria—
are heterotrophs.

Where is the chemical energy in food, and
how do heterotrophs harvest it to carry out the
many tasks of living (figure 9.2)? Most foods
contain a variety of carbohydrates, proteins,
and fats, all rich in energy-laden chemical
bonds. Carbohydrates and fats, for example,
possess many carbon-hydrogen (C—H), as well
as carbon-oxygen (C—O) bonds. The job of ex-
tracting energy from this complex organic mix-
ture is tackled in stages. First, enzymes break
the large molecules down into smaller ones, a
process called digestion. Then, other enzymes
dismantle these fragments a little at a time, har-
vesting energy from C—H and other chemical
bonds at each stage. This process is called ca-
tabolism.

While you obtain energy from many of the constituents
of food, it is traditional to focus first on the catabolism of
carbohydrates. We will follow the six-carbon sugar, glucose
(Cs6H120s), as its chemical bonds are progressively har-
vested for energy. Later, we will come back and examine
the catabolism of proteins and fats.

Cellular Respiration

The energy in a chemical bond can be visualized as poten-
tial energy borne by the electrons that make up the cova-
lent bond. Cells harvest this energy by putting the elec-
trons to work, often to produce ATP, the energy currency
of the cell. Afterward, the energy-depleted electron (associ-
ated with a proton as a hydrogen atom) is donated to some
other molecule. When oxygen gas (O2) accepts the hydro-
gen atom, water forms, and the process is called aerobic
respiration. When an inorganic molecule other than oxy-
gen accepts the hydrogen, the process is called anaerobic
respiration. When an organic molecule accepts the hydro-
gen atom, the process is called fermentation.

Chemically, there is little difference between the catabo-
lism of carbohydrates in a cell and the burning of wood in a

160 Part IMI Energetics

FIGURE 9.2

 

Start every day with a good breakfast. The carbohydrates, proteins, and fats
in this fish contain energy that the bear’s cells can use to power their daily
activities.

fireplace. In both instances, the reactants are carbohydrates
and oxygen, and the products are carbon dioxide, water,
and energy:

C6105 + 6 O: —> 6 CO? + 6 H20 + energy (heat or ATP)

The change in free energy in this reaction is -720 kilo-
calories (-3012 kilojoules) per mole of glucose under the
conditions found within a cell (the traditional value of
686 kilocalories, or -2870 kJ, per mole refers to stan-
dard conditions—room temperature, one atmosphere of
pressure, etc.). This change in free energy results largely
from the breaking of the six C—H bonds in the glucose
molecule. The negative sign indicates that the products
possess Jess free energy than the reactants. The same
amount of energy is released whether glucose is catabo-
lized or burned, but when it is burned most of the energy
is released as heat. This heat cannot be used to perform
work in cells. The key to a cell’s ability to harvest useful
energy from the catabolism of food molecules such as
glucose is its conversion of a portion of the energy into a
more useful form. Cells do this by using some of the en-
ergy to drive the production of ATP, a molecule that can
power cellular activities.
