9.2 Cellular respiration oxidizes food molecules.

An Overview of Glucose

 

Catabolism PEP

 

 

 

Cells are able to make ATP from the
catabolism of organic molecules in two
different ways.

©

0)
)

1. Substrate-level phosphoryla-
tion. In the first, called
substrate- level phosphoryla-
tion, ATP is formed by transfer-

Enzyme

 

ring a phosphate group directly

to ADP from a phosphate-bear- Adenosine

 

 

 

ing intermediate (figure 9.5).
During glycolysis, discussed
below, the chemical bonds of glu-
cose are shifted around in reac-

FIGURE 9.5

tions that provide the energy re-
quired to form ATP.

2. Aerobic respiration. In the
second, called aerobic respira-
tion, ATP forms as electrons are
harvested, transferred along the electron transport

and ATP is created.

chain, and eventually donated to oxygen gas. Eukary-
otes produce the majority of their ATP from glucose
in this way.

In most organisms, these two processes are combined.
To harvest energy to make ATP from the sugar glucose in
the presence of oxygen, the cell carries out a complex se-
ries of enzyme-catalyzed reactions that occur in four
stages: the first stage captures energy by substrate-level
phosphorylation through glycolysis, the following three
stages carry out aerobic respiration by oxidizing the end
product of glycolysis.

Glycolysis

Stage One: Glycolysis. The first stage of extracting en-
ergy from glucose is a 10-reaction biochemical pathway
called glycolysis that produces ATP by substrate-level
phosphorylation. The enzymes that catalyze the glycolytic
reactions are in the cytoplasm of the cell, not bound to any
membrane or organelle. Two ATP molecules are used up
early in the pathway, and four ATP molecules are formed
by substrate-level phosphorylation. This yields a net of
two ATP molecules for each molecule of glucose catabo-
lized. In addition, four electrons are harvested as NADH
that can be used to form ATP by aerobic respiration. Still,
the total yield of ATP is small. When the glycolytic
process is completed, the two molecules of pyruvate that
are formed still contain most of the energy the original
glucose molecule held.

162 Part III Energetics

 

Substrate-level phosphorylation. Some molecules, such as phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP),
possess a high-energy phosphate bond similar to the bonds in ATP. When PEP’s
phosphate group is transferred enzymatically to ADP, the energy in the bond is conserved

Aerobic Respiration

Stage Two: Pyruvate Oxidation. In the second stage,
pyruvate, the end product from glycolysis, is converted into
carbon dioxide and a two-carbon molecule called acetyl-
CoA. For each molecule of pyruvate converted, one mole-
cule of NAD* is reduced to NADH.

Stage Three: The Krebs Cycle. The third stage intro-
duces this acetyl-CoA into a cycle of nine reactions called
the Krebs cycle, named after the British biochemist, Sir
Hans Krebs, who discovered it. (The Krebs cycle is also
called the citric acid cycle, for the citric acid, or citrate,
formed in its first step, and less commonly, the tricar-
boxylic acid cycle, because citrate has three carboxyl
groups.) In the Krebs cycle, two more ATP molecules are
extracted by substrate-level phosphorylation, and a large
number of electrons are removed by the reduction of
NAD* to NADH.

Stage Four: Electron Transport Chain. In the fourth
stage, the energetic electrons carried by NADH are em-
ployed to drive the synthesis of a large amount of ATP by
the electron transport chain.

Pyruvate oxidation, the reactions of the Krebs cycle, and
ATP production by electron transport chains occur within
many forms of bacteria and inside the mitochondria of all
eukaryotes. Recall from chapter 5 that mitochondria are
thought to have evolved from bacteria. Although plants and
algae can produce ATP by photosynthesis, they also pro-
duce ATP by aerobic respiration, just as animals and other
nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes do. Figure 9.6 provides an
overview of aerobic respiration.
