Chapter 8

Summary

zi

Questions

 

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e

http://www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

8.1 The laws of thermodynamics describe how energy changes.

 

¢ Energy is the capacity to bring about change, to
provide motion against a force, or to do work.

* Kinetic energy is actively engaged in doing work,
while potential energy has the capacity to do so.

¢ An oxidation-reduction (redox) reaction is one in
which an electron is taken from one atom or
molecule (oxidation) and donated to another
(reduction).

¢ The First Law of Thermodynamics states that the

amount of energy in the universe is constant; energy
is neither lost nor created.

¢ The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that
disorder in the universe (entropy) tends to increase.

¢ Any chemical reaction whose products contain less
free energy than the original reactants can proceed
spontaneously. However, the difference in free
energy does not determine the rate of the reaction.

¢ The rate of a reaction depends on the amount of
activation energy required to break existing bonds.

* Catalysis is the process of lowering activation
energies by stressing chemical bonds.

8.2 Enzymes are biological catalysts.

1, What is the difference
between anabolism and
catabolism?

* Energy Conversion
Catalysis

@
@

2. Define oxidation and
reduction. Why must these two
reactions always occur in
concert?

* Thermodynamics
Coupled Reactions

3. State the First and Second
Laws of Thermodynamics.

4, What is heat? What is
entropy? What is free energy?

5. What is the difference
between an exergonic and an
endergonic reaction? Which
type of reaction tends to proceed
spontaneously?

6. Define activation energy.
How does a catalyst affect the
final proportion of reactant
converted into product?

 

* Enzymes are the major catalysts of cells; they affect
the rate of a reaction but not the ultimate balance
between reactants and products.

* Cells contain many different enzymes, each of which

7. How are the rates of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions
affected by temperature? What
is the molecular basis for the
effect on reaction rate?

 

 

catalyzes a specific reaction. * Enzymes
Yass 3 SP 8. What is the difference
¢ The specificity of an enzyme is due to its active site, between the active site and an
which fits only one or a few types of substrate allosteric site on an enzyme?
molecules.
8.3 ATP is the energy currency of life.
* Cells obtain energy from photosynthesis and the 9. What part of the ATP + ATP
oxidation of organic molecules and use it to molecule contains the bond that
manufacture ATP from ADP and phosphate. is employed to provide energy

¢ The energy stored in ATP is then used to drive
endergonic reactions.

8.4 Metabolism is the chemical life of a cell.

for most of the endergonic
reactions in cells?

 

* Generally, the final reactions of a biochemical
pathway evolved first; preceding reactions in the
pathway were added later, one step at a time.

158 Part II Energetics

10. What is a biochemical * Feedback Inhibition
pathway? How does feedback
inhibition regulate the activity of

a biochemical pathway?

 
