 

 

[___OXOSALTS ~ CARBONATES, BICARBONATES, NITRATES AND NITRITES [295

 

‘The cellulose fibres are then turned into corrugated cardboard and brown
paper. . .

OXOSALTS - CARBONATES, BICARBONATES, NITRATES AND
NITRITES .

Group 1 metals are highly electropositive and thus torm very strong
bases, and have quite stable oxosalts.

The carbonates are remarkably stable, and will melt before they even-
tually decompose into oxides at temperatures above 1000°C., LizCO; is
considerably less stable and decomposes more readily.

Because Group 1 metals are so strongly basic, they also form solid
bicarbonates {also called hydrogencarbonates). No other metals form
solid bicarbonates, though NH;HCOs also exists as a solid. Bicarbonates
evolve carbon dioxide and turn into carbonates on gentle warming. This
is one test for bicarbonates in qualitative analysis. The crystal structures of
NaHCO, and KHCO; both show hydrogen bonding, but are different.
In NaHCO, the HCO} ions are linked into an infinite chain, whilst in
KHCO, a dimeric anion is formed.

O-H-:-O a

/ \
o-c c~o

O--:H—O

Lithium is exceptional in that it does not form a solid bicarbonate, though
LiHCO, can exist in solution. All the carbonates and bicarbonates are
soluble in water.

Over 50000 tonnes of Li,CO; are produced annually. Most of it is
added as an impurity to Al,O; to lower its melting pojnt in the extraction
of aluminium by electrolysis. Some is used to toughen glass (sodium in the
glass is replaced by lithium). Na,COs is used as washing soda to soften
water in hard water areas, and NaHCO; is used as baking powder.

The nitrates can all be prepared by the action of HNO; on the corre-
sponding carbonate or hydroxide, and they are all very soluble in water.
LINO, is used for fireworks and red-coloured distress flares. Large de-
Dosits of NaNO, are found in Chile, and are used as a nitrogenous fer-
tihzer, Solid LiNO, and NaNO; are deliquescent, and’ because of this
KNO, is used in preference to NaNO, in gunpowder (gunpowder is a
mixture of KNO,, sulphur and charcoal). KNO, is usually obtained from
synthetic nitric acid and K;COs, but at one time it was made from NaNO;:

2HNOs + K3CO, -> 2KNO, + CO, + H,0
NaNO, + KCl > KNO, + NaCl .

eeu 1 nitrates are fairly low melting solids, and are amongst the most
le nitrates known. However, on strong heating they decompose into

 
