 

ELECTROLYTIC PROCESSES

In this process, the chemicals used are HySO,, NaCl, CaCO; and C, and
the products are NaOH and Cl, (and to a lesser extent NazSO,). The raw
materials were obtained:

S or FeS; + O2 + SO2— SO3 > H2SOx4
NaCl — mined or extracted as brine solution
CaCO; — mined as limestone

caco, 5s cao 8° Ca(OH),

In 1874 world production of NaOH was 525000 tonnes, of which 94%
was produced by the Leblanc process. Production of NaOH had risen’
to 1800000 tonnes by 1902, but by then only 8% was produced by the
Leblanc process. The Leblanc process became obsolete because cheaper
methods were found. it was replaced in turn by the Weldon process, the
Deacon process, and eventually by electrolysis.

WELDON AND DEACON PROCESSES

The Leblanc process used MnO, to oxidize the HCI, but the MnCl, formed
was wasted. The Weldon process (1866) recycled the MnCl, and was
therefore cheaper.

In the Deacon process (1868), air was used to oxidize the HCl instead
of using MnO. A gas phase reaction was performed between HCI and
air on the surface of bricks soaked in a solution of CuClz, which acted as
a catalyst. The reaction is reversible, and a conversion of about 65% is
possible.

CuCly catalyst

 

4HCl + O2 2Clz + 2H,O + heat

 

440°C

Nowadays about 90% of the world supply of chlorine comes from the
electrolysis of an aqueous solution of sodium chloride (brine). Most of
the remainder is produced by the electrolysis of molten NaCl in the pro-
duction of sodium metal, electrolysis of aqueous KCI in the production of
KOH, and electrolysis of molten MgCl, in the extraction of magnesium
metal. However, a small amount is made by the oxidation of HCI with
air, in a slightly modified Deacon process. This started in 1960, and uses
a didymium promoted catalyst of Dm 2O3 and CuCl, at a slightly lower
temperature of 400°C. (Didymium is an old name and means ‘twin’. It was
once thought to be an element, but was later resolved into two lanthanide
elements, praseodymium and neodymium. The catalyst is a finely powdered

may of solids which flows like a liquid, and this is termed a fluidized
ed.

ELECTROLYTIC PROCESSES

Electrolysis of brine was first described in 1800 by Cruickshank, but it was
Rot until 1834 that Faraday put forward the Laws of Electrolysis. At that

| [317]
