 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

omic where there is a source of cheap electricity, usually hydroelectric
power.

Uses of aluminium

Aluminium metal is moderately soft and weak when pure, but is much
stronger when alloyed with other metals. Its main advantage is its lightness
(low density 2.73gcm7*). Some alloys are used for special. purposes:
duralumin which contains about 4% Cu, and several aluminium bronzes
(alloys of Cu and Al with other metals such as Ni, Sn and Zn). The metal
produced in the largest quantity is iron/steel (712 million tonnes in 1992)
but production of aluminium is the second largest. (Total production of Al
was 24.4 million tonnes in 1991, made up of 19.4 million tonnes primary
production and 5 million tonnes recycled.) The largest producers of Al
metal are the USA 21%, the Soviet Union 17%, Canada 10%, and
Australia, Brazil and China 6% each. There are many uses for aluminum
and its alloys:

1. As structural metals in aircraft, ships, cars, and heat exchangers.

2. In buildings (doors, windows, cladding panels and mobile homes).

3. Containers such as cans for drinks, tubes for toothpaste etc. and metal
foil.

4. For cooking utensils.

5. To make electric power cables (on a weight for weight basis they
conduct twice as well as copper).

6. Finely divided aluminium powder is called ‘aluminium bronze’, and is
used in preparing aluminium paint.

It has been assumed for many years that Al>* is completely harmless and
hon-toxic to humans. Al(OH); is widely used as an anti-acid treatment for
indigestion. Al,(SO,)3 is used to treat drinking water, and cooking utensils
are made of aluminium. However, there are indications that aluminium
may not be as harmless as was once thought. Aluminium is acutely toxic to
ae with kidney failure, who are unable to excrete the element. Patients
atin from Alzheimer’s disease (which causes senility) have deposits of
oxen wn salts in the brain. This element, though toxic, is normally
by plants ery efficiently. Any abundant element will inevitably be taken up
a on then by animals, and in general the biosphere either makes
reject panents (in which case they are classed as essential) or positively

Jects them. Elements are hardly ever toxicologically neutral.

Gallium, indium and thallium

Traces of gallium are found in bauxite, and the ratio of Ga to Al is about
of Ga jn ee the Bayer Process for purifying alumina the concentration
eutracted Hi alkaline solution gradually increases to about 1/250. Ga is
minute y electrolysis of this solution. Indium and thallium occur in
Quantities in ZnS and PbS ores. These sulphide ores are roasted
continued overleaf

 

_| [363]
