 

THE SOLVAY (OR AMMONIA — SODA) PROCESS

 

 

323 |

 

used for these purposes. With the increased use of detergents, there has
been a decline in the use-of ‘washing soda’ Na,CO3-10H2O for water
softening.

THE SOLVAY (OR AMMONIA-SODA) PROCESS

There have been many attempts to make Na,CO3 more cheaply than by
the Leblanc process, by using the overall reaction:

2NaCl + CaCO; —> Na2CO; + CaCl2

The reaction was first studied by Freshnel in 1811, and several commercial
plants were built but were quickly abandoned because they failed to make
a profit, or they encountered technica! problems such as corrosion of the
plant, contamination of the product and blocked pipes. Ernest Solvay was
the first to operate a commercial plant successfully, in Belgium (1869).

The process is much more complicated than the overall equation im-
plies, and to make things worse the reaction is reversible and only 75% of
the NaCI is converted. The first stage in the process is to purify saturated
brine, and then react it with gaseous ammonia. The ammoniated brine
is then carbonated with CO2, forming NaHCOs. This is insoluble in the
brine solution because of the common ion effect and so can be filtered off,
and on heating to 150°C it decomposes to anhydrous NazCO; (called light
soda ash in industry because it is a fluffy solid with a low packing density
of about 0.5gcm™*). Next COs is stripped (removed) by heating the sol-
ution, and the CO, is reused. Then the NHs is driven off by adding alkali
(a slurry of lime in water), and the ammonia is reused. Lime (CaQ) is
obtained by heating limestone (CaCO3), and this also provides the CO,
required. When lime is mixed with water it gives Ca(OH)).

NH; + H,O + CO, NH4- HCO,
NaCl + NH,- HCO;-—» NaHCO, + NH,Cl

2NaHCO;""s NasCO, + COz + H,O

Caco, "", cao + CO,

lime kiln
* CaO + HO — Ca(OH),
2NH,Cl + Ca(OH), > 2NH; + CaCl, + 2H,0

Thus the materials consumed are NaCl and CaCQs, and there is one
useful product, NaxCO3, and one by-product, CaCl>. There is little re-
quirement for CaCla, so only a little is recovered from solution, and the
rest 1s wasted, The largest use of Na,COs is for glass making (Table 10.5)
and this requires “heavy ash’, which is Na,CO,- H20. To obtain this, the

“light ash’ produced in the Solvay ich i
ig YY process (which is i
fecrystallized from hot water. ° ‘ Banbydrous Nass)
