 

 

DIFERENCES BETWEEN BERYLLIUM AND OTHER GROUP 2 ELEMENTS

titrations of Ca?* and Mg?* are carried out at higher pH than those of
many other metals (e.g. Zn?*, Cd?* and Pb?*) as their complexes are less
stable, and at lower pH values the EDTA is protonated instead of the
Ca or Mg complex forming. EDTA is sometimes added to detergents to
soften the water. Various polyphosphate ions also form complexes in
solution, and this is also important in water softening.

Stable solid complexes with crown ethers and crypts have been isolated.
Details of these are given in ‘Complexes crowns and crypts’ in Chapter 9.

BIOLOGICAL ROLE OF Mg?* AND Ca?*

Mg?* ions are concentrated in animal cells, and Ca?* are concentrated
in the body fluids outside the cell, in much the same way that K* concen-
trates inside the cell and Na* outside. Mg?* ions form a complex with
ATP, and are constituents of phosphohydrolases and phosphotransfer-
ases, which are enzymes for reactions involving ATP and energy release.
They are also essential for the transmission of impulses along nerve fibres.
Mg’* is important in chlorophyll, in the green parts of plants. Ca?* is
important in bones and teeth as apatite Ca,(PO.)2, and the enamel on
teeth as fluoroapatite [3(Ca3(PO,4)2)-CaF2]. Ca?* ions are important in
blood clotting, and are required to trigger the contraction of muscles and
to maintain the regular beating of the heart.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BERYLLIUM AND THE OTHER
GROUP 2 ELEMENTS

Beryllium is anomalous in many of its properties and shows a diagonal
relationship to aluminium in Group 13:

pot

Be is very small and has a high charge density so by Fajans’ rules it

has a strong tendency to covalency. Thus the melting points of its

compounds are lower (BeF, m.p. 800°C whilst the fluorides of the

Test of group melt about 1300°C). The Be halides are all soluble in

organic solvents and hydrolyse in water rather like the aluminium

halides. The other Group 2 halides are ionic.

. Beryllium hydride is electron deficient and polymeric, with multi-
centre bonding, like aluminium hydride.

s The halides of beryllium are electron deficient. and are polymeric,
With halogen bridges. BeCl, usually forms chains but also exists as the
dimer. AICI; is dimeric.

- Be forms many complexes — not typical of Groups | and 2.

Be is amphoteric, liberating H> with NaOH and forming beryllates.
Al forms aluminates.

- Be(OH),, like Al(OH)s. is amphoteric.

- Be, like AL. is rendered passive by nitric acid.

. The standard electrode potentials for Be and Al, —1.85 volts and
—1.66 volts respectively, are much closer than the value for Be is to the
Values for Ca, Sr and Ba (—2.87, 2.89 and —2.90 volts) respectively.

 

353

 
