 

SULPHATES

 

 

 

341

 

metal ions become larger. Barium peroxide BaO, is formed by passing air
over BaO at 500°C. SrO, can be formed in a similar way but this requires
a high pressure and temperature. CaO; is not formed in this way, but can
be made as the hydrate by treating Ca(OH), with H,O2 and then de-
hydrating the product. Crude MgO, has been made using H,O2, but no
peroxide of beryllium is known. The peroxides are white ionic solids con-
taining the [O—O}*~ ion and can be regarded as salts of the very weak
acid hydrogen peroxide. Treating peroxides with acid liberates hydrogen
peroxide.

BaO, + 2HCl > BaClh, + H,02

SULPHATES

The solubility of the sulphates in water decreases down the group, Be >
Mg >> Ca > Sr > Ba. Thus BeSO, and MgSO, are soluble, but CaSO,
is sparingly soluble, and the sulphates of Sr, Ba and Ra are virtually in-
soluble. The significantly higher solubilities of BeSO, and MgSO, are
due to the high enthalpy of solvation of the smaller Be?* and Mg?* ions.
Epsom salt MgSO, - 7H2O is used as a mild laxative. Calcium sulphate can
exist as a hemihydrate CaSO,-4H2O which is important in the building
trade as plaster of Paris. This is made by partially dehydrating gypsum.
CaSO,-2H,0 =", caso,-$H20 S, caso, WS, cao + $0,

Eypsum: plaster of Party anhydrite,

When powdered plaster of Paris CaSO, + $HO is mixed with the the cor-
Tect amount of water it sets into a solid mass of CaSO,-2H2O (gypsuin).
Plaster of Paris is used for plastering walls. and also to make plaster casts
(moulds) for a variety of purposes. industrial, sculptural. and in hospitals
to encase limbs so that broken bones are set straight. Alabaster is a fine
grained form of CaSO,-2H20 which is shiny like marble, and is used to
make ornaments. CaSO, is slightly soluble in water (2g per litre), so ob-
Jects made from alabaster or gypsum cannot be kept outdoors. BaSO, is
both insoluble in water and opaque to X-rays, and is used as a ‘barium
meal’ to provide a shadow of the stomach or duodenum on an X-ray pic-
lure, which is useful in diagnosing stomach or duodenal ulcers. The sul-
Phates all decompose on heating. giving the oxides:

MgSO,“ MgO + SO;

In the same way as with the stability and thermal decomposition of the
carbonates, the more basic the metal is, the more stable the sulphate is.
This is shown by the temperatures at which decomposition occurs:

BeSO,; MgSO, CaSO, SrSO,

500°C = 895°C 1149°C —-1374°C
Heating the sulphates with C reduces them to sulphides. Most barium
Compounds are made from barium sulphide.

 
