 

 

 

MERCURY CATHODE CELL | | 319
Chlorine out, | Hydrogen out
+ -
Brine in - | ' .
Carbon
anode

   
 

Carbon
Asbestos cathode

diaphragm

 

Sodium hydroxide out

Figure 10.1 A diaphragm cell.

The diaphragm also separates the anode and cathode compartments.
This reduces the chance that NaOH produced in the cathode compartment
can mix and react with Cl, produced in the anode compartment. This
reduces the chance of the side reaction producing sodium hypochlorite,
NaOCl. However, some sodium hydroxide or OH™ may diffuse into the
other compartment, and this is inhibited by maintaining the level of elec-
trolyte higher in the anode compartment than in the cathode compartment,
so there is a small positive flow from the anode to the cathode compart-
ment. Traces of dioxygen are produced in a side reaction. This reacts with
the carbon electrodes, gradually destroying them and forming CO2.

There is considerable interest in using thin synthetic plastic membranes
for the diaphragm instead of asbestos. These membranes are made of a
polymer called nafion, supported on a teflon mesh. (Nafion is a copoly-
mer of tetrafluoroethylene and a perfluorosulphonylethoxy ether.) Plastic
membranes have a lower resistance than asbestos.

Less than half the NaCl is converted to NaOH, and a mixture of about
11% NaOH and 16% NaCl is usually obtained. This solution is concen-
trated in a steam evaporator, when a considerable amount of NaCl cry-
stallizes out, giving a final solution containing 50% NaOH and 1% NaCl.
It is important to note that NaOH made in this way always contains some
NaCl. This may or may not matter, depending on how the NaOH is to be
used. For most industrial purposes, the product is sold as a solution, as

the cost of evaporating it to give the solid exceeds the increased cost of
transporting the solution.

MERCURY CATHODE CELL

During the electrolysis of brine, Na* ions migrate towards the cathode,
and when they get there the ions are discharged.

Na* + e— Nametaty

If the cathode is made of mercury, the Na atoms produced dissolve in the
mercury and form an amalgam, or loose alloy. The amalgam is pumped to
a different compartment called the denuder, where water trickles over

 
