 

 

[ SIZE OF ATOMS AND IONS

 

329

 

 

[CaCO;-MgCO;] “> CaO-MgO “". Mg + Ca,Si0, + Fe
2. Electrolysis may be carried out either on fused MgClo, or on partially
hydrated MgCl. The MgCl. is produced in two ways.

Dow sea water process

Sea water contains about 0.13% Mg-* ions, and the extraction of mag-
nesium depends on the fact that Mg(OH), is very much less soluble than
Ca(OH)». Slaked lime Ca(OH) is added to sea water, and the calcium
ions dissolve and Mg(OH), is precipitated. This is filtered off, treated with
HCI to produce magnesium chloride, and electrolysed.

Ca(OH). + MgCl, > Mg(OH), + CaCl,

staked sea precipitate
lime water

Mg (OH): + HCI" MgCl,

Dow natural brine process

Dolomite [MgCO,- CaCO, ] is calcined (heated strongly) to give calcined
dolomite MgO - CaO. This is treated with HCl, giving a solution of CaCl,
and MgCl). This is treated with more calcined dolomite and CO) is bub-

bled in. CaCOs is precipitated, leaving a solution of MgCl, which is then
electrolysed.

CaCl,-MgCh + CaO-MgO + 2CO2— 2MgCl + 2CaCO;
precipitated
| Ca metal is used to make alloys with Al for bearings. It is used in the
iron and steel industry to control carbon in cast iron and as a scavenger for
P, O and S. Other uses are as a reducing agent in the production of other
metals ~ Zr, Cr, Th and U — and for removing traces of N2 from argon.
Chemically CaH, is sometimes used as a source of H,. World production
of Ca is about 1000 tonnes/year. The metal is obtained by electrolysis of
the fused CaCl), which is obtained either as ‘a waste product from the
Solvay process, or from CaCO; and HCl.
The Temaining metals Sr and Ba ere produced on a very much smaller
seale by electrolysis of their fused chlorides, or from their oxides by re-
duction with aluminium (a thermite reaction).

SIZE OF ATOMS AND IONS
Group 2 atoms are large, but are smaller than the corresponding Group 1
5 aes as the extra charge on the nucleus draws the orbital electrons in
ial ny the tons are large, but are smaller than those of Group 1, espec-

y use i i i
nuclers charg © removal of two orbital electrons increases the effective

¢ even further. Thus, these elements have hi iti
than Group t mone igher densities

 

 
