The ATP Molecule

Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is the energy currency of
the cell, the molecule that transfers the energy captured
during respiration to the many sites that use energy in the
cell. How is ATP able to transfer energy so readily? Recall
from chapter 8 that ATP is composed of a sugar (ribose)
bound to an organic base (adenine) and a chain of three
phosphate groups. As shown in figure 9.3, each phosphate
group is negatively charged. Because like charges repel
each other, the linked phosphate groups push against the
bond that holds them together. Like a cocked mousetrap,
the linked phosphates store the energy of their electrostatic
repulsion. Transferring a phosphate group to another mol-
ecule relaxes the electrostatic spring of ATP, at the same
time cocking the spring of the molecule that is phosphory-
lated. This molecule can then use the energy to undergo
some change that requires work.

How Cells Use ATP

Cells use ATP to do most of those activities that require
work. One of the most obvious is movement. Some bacte-
ria swim about, propelling themselves through the water by
rapidly spinning a long, tail-like flagellum, much as a ship
moves by spinning a propeller. During your development
as an embryo, many of your cells moved about, crawling
over one another to reach new positions. Movement also
occurs within cells. Tiny fibers within muscle cells pull
against one another when muscles contract. Mitochondria
pass a meter or more along the narrow nerve cells that con-
nect your feet with your spi
microtubules during cell division. All of these movements
by cells require the expenditure of ATP energy.

Asecond major way cells use ATP is to drive endergonic
reactions. Many of the synthetic activities of the cell are en-
dergonic, because building molecules takes energy. The
chemical bonds of the products of these reactions contain
more energy, or are more organized, than the reactants.
The reaction can’t proceed until that extra energy is sup-
plied to the reaction. It is ATP that provides this needed
energy.

 
  

Chromosomes are pulled by

How ATP Drives Endergonic Reactions

How does ATP drive an endergonic reaction? The en-
zyme that catalyzes the endergonic reaction has two bind-
ing sites on its surface, one for the reactant and another
for ATP. The ATP site splits the ATP molecule, liberat-
ing over 7 kcal (30 kJ) of chemical energy. This energy
pushes the reactant at the second site “uphill,” driving the
endergonic reaction. (In a similar way, you can make
water in a swimming pool leap straight up in the air, de-
spite the fact that gravity prevents water from rising spon-
tancously—just jump in the pool! The energy you add
going in more than compensates for the force of gravity

holding the water back.)

Adenine
NH,

Triphosphate group 2
N.
° ° SSN
tl Il la |
—P—O—P—O-—CH Zz
'N N’
O.

 
   

OH OH
Sugar

FIGURE 9.3

Structure of the ATP molecule. ATP is composed of an organic
base and a chain of phosphates attached to opposite ends of a five-
carbon sugar. Notice that the charged regions of the phosphate
chain are close to one another. These like charges tend to repel
one another, giving the bonds that hold them together a
particularly high energy transfer potential.

- &
Inactive C Active

FIGURE 9.4

How ATP drives an endergonic reaction. In many cases, a
phosphate group split from ATP activates a protein, catalyzing an
endergonic process.

When the splitting of ATP molecules drives an energy-
requiring reaction in a cell, the two parts of the reaction—
ATP-splitting and endergonic—take place in concert. In
some cases, the two parts both occur on the surface of the
same enzyme; they are physically linked, or “coupled,” like
two legs walking. In other cases, a high-energy phosphate
from ATP attaches to the protein catalyzing the ender-
gonic process, activating it (figure 9.4). Coupling energy-
requiring reactions to the splitting of ATP in this way is
one of the key tools cells use to manage energy.

 

The catabolism of glucose into carbon dioxide and
water in living organisms releases about 720 kcal

(3012 kJ) of energy per mole of glucose. This energy is
captured in ATP, which stores the energy by linking
charged phosphate groups near one another. When the
phosphate bonds in ATP are hydrolyzed, energy is
released and available to do work.

 

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 161
