How Cells Harvest Energy

Concept Outline

9.1 Cells harvest the energy in chemical bonds.

Using Chemical Energy to Drive Metabolism. ‘The
energy in C—H, C—O, and other chemical bonds can be
captured and used to fuel the synthesis of ATP.

9.2 Cellular respiration oxidizes food molecules.

An Overview of Glucose Catabolism. The chemical
energy in sugar is harvested by both substrate-level
phosphorylation and by aerobic respiration.

Stage One: Glycolysis. The 10 reactions of glycolysis
capture energy from glucose by reshuffling the bonds.

Stage Two: The Oxidation of Pyruvate. Pyruvate, the
product of glycolysis, is oxidized to acetyl-CoA.

Stage Three: The Krebs Cycle. Ina series of reactions,
electrons are stripped from acetyl-CoA.

Harvesting Energy by Extracting Electrons. The
respiration of ghucose is a series of oxidation-reduction
reactions which involve stripping electrons from glucose and
using the energy of these electrons to power the synthesis of
ATP.

Stage Four: The Electron Transport Chain. The
electrons harvested from glucose pass through a chain of
membrane proteins that use the energy to pump protons,
driving the synthesis of ATP.

Summarizing Aerobic Respiration. ‘The oxidation of
glucose by aerobic respiration in eukaryotes produces up to
three dozen ATP molecules, over half the energy in the
chemical bonds of glucose.

Regulating Aerobic Respiration. High levels of ATP
tend to shut down cellular respiration by feedback-inhibiting
key reactions.

9.3 Catabolism of proteins and fats can yield
considerable energy.
Glucose Is Not the Only Source of Energy. Proteins
and fats are dismantled and the products fed into cellular
respiration.

9.4 Cells can metabolize food without oxygen.

Fermentation. Fermentation allows continued metabolism
in the absence of oxygen by donating the electrons harvested
in glycolysis to organic molecules.

 

FIGURE 9.1
Harvesting chemical energy. Organisms such as these harvest
mice depend on the energy stored in the chemical bonds of the
food they eat to power their life processes.

L* is driven by energy. All the activities organisms
carry out—the swimming of bacteria, the purring of a
cat, your reading of these words—use energy. In this chap-
ter, we will discuss the processes all cells use to derive
chemical energy from organic molecules and to convert
that energy to ATP. We will consider photosynthesis,
which uses light energy rather than chemical energy, in de-
tail in chapter 10. We examine the conversion of chemical
energy to ATP first because all organisms, both photosyn-
thesizers and the organisms that feed on them (like the
field mice in figure 9.1), are capable of harvesting energy
from chemical bonds. As you will see, though, this process
and photosynthesis have much in common.

159
