 

ELECTRONEGATIVITY AND BOND TYPE

for metals to have low densities. and in contrast most of the transition
metals have densities greater than Sgcem7*, for example iron 7.9gcm™*,
mercury 13.6gcm™*, and osmium and iridium (the two most dense ele-
ments) 22.57 and 22.61 gcm~* respectively.

IONIZATION ENERGY

The first ionization energies for the atoms in this group are appreciably
lower than those for any other group in the periodic table. The atoms are
very large so the outer electrons are only held weakly by the nucleus:
hence the amount of energy needed to remove the outer electron is not
very large. On descending the group from Li to Na to K to Rb to Cs, the
size of the atoms increases: the outermost electrons become less strongly
held, so the ionization energy decreases.

The second ionization energy — that is the energy to remove a second
electron from the atoms — is extremely high. The second ionization energy
is always larger than the first. often by a factor of two, because it involves
removing an electron from a smaller positive ion, rather than from a larger
neutral atom. The difference between first and second ionization energies
is much larger in this case since in addition it corresponds to removing an
electron from a closed shell. A second electron is never removed under
normal conditions, as the energy required is greater than that needed to
ionize the noble gases. The elements commonly form M* ions.

Table 9.4 Ionization energies

 

First Second
ionization ionization
energy energy
(kJ mol!) (kJ mol"!)
Li 520.1 7296
Na 495.7 4563
K 418.6 3069
Rb 402.9 2650
Cs 375.6 2420

 

ELECTRONEGATIVITY AND BOND TYPE

The electronegativity values for the elements in this group are very small —
in fact the smallest values of any element. Thus when these elements react
With other elements to form compounds, a large electronegativity dif-
ference between the two atoms is probable, and ionic bonds are formed.
Na clectronegativity 0.9
Cl electronegativity 3.0

1

Electronegativity difference

N

 
