 

EXTRACTION OF THE METALS

forms colourless rhombohedral crystals. Aragonite is orthorhombic, and
is commonly red—brown or yellow in colour, and this accounts for the
colour of the landscape of the Red Sea area, the Bahamas and the Florida
keys. Limestone is commercially important as a source of lime CaO. Lime is
produced on an enormous scale (127.9 million tonnes in 1993), second in
volume only to H2SOq. Limestone chippings are also used for making roads.

Fluoroapatite [3(Ca3(PO.)2)+CaF2] is commercially important as a
source of phosphate. Gypsum CaSO,-2H2O and anhydrite CaSO, are
major minerals. World production of gypsum was 88.2 million tonnes in
1992. The major sources were the USA 17%, China 14%, Iran 9%,
Canada and Thailand 8% each, and France and Spain 6% each. A much
smaller amount of anhydrite was mined. Gypsum is used in making
Portland cement, plasterboard and plaster, and in glass making. Its use
in plaster is not just recent, since in the Valley of the Kings in Egypt the
walls of the ancient burial tombs of Tutankhamun and those of the other
kings were plastered with CaSO, and then engraved with hieroglyphics.
The White Sands National Park and missile range in New Mexico, USA
(where the first atomic bomb was tested) have an area of 100 miles by 40
miles of pure white sand dunes composed of gypsum. Fluorite CaF, is
important as the main source of fluorine.

Strontium (384ppm) and barium (390ppm) are much less abundant,
but are well known because they occur as concentrated ores which are
easy to extract. Strontium is mined as celestite SrSO, and strontianite
StCO3. World production of Sr minerals was 283 100 tonnes in 1993. The
main producers are Mexico 30%, Turkey 25%, Spain 19%, China 12%
and Iran 11%. Ba is mined as barytes BaSO,. World production was 4.9
million tonnes in 1992. It is found throughout the world and the largest
producers are China 21%, the former Soviet Union 11%, Mexico 8%,
India 7%, Turkey 6% and USA 6%. Radium is extremely scarce and is
radioactive. It was first isolated by Pierre and Marie Curie by processing
many tons of the uranium ore pitchblende. It was used for radiotherapy
treatment of cancer at one time: other forms of radiation are now used
(Co, X-rays or a linear accelerator). Marie Curie was awarded the

Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1911 for isolating and studying radium and
polonium.

EXTRACTION OF THE METALS

The metals of this group are not easy to produce by chemical reduction
because they are themselves strong reducing agents, and they react with
carbon to form carbides. They are strongly electropositive and react with
| Water, and so aqueous solutions cannot be used for displacing them with

another metal, or for electrolytic prodiction, Electrolysis of aqueous solu-
| fons can be carried out using a mercury cathode, but recovery of the metal
wn the amalgam is difficult. All the metals can be obtained by electrolysis
| of the fused chloride, with sodium chloride added to lower the melting
point. although strontium and barium tend to form a colloidal suspension.

 

continued overleaf

 

| [327

 
