 

COLOUR OF COMPOUNDS

 

 

287

 

level. When the excited electron drops back to its original energy level it
gives out the extra energy it obtained. The energy E is related to the wave
number v by the Einstein relationship:

,

E = by (where h is Planck’s constant)

For Group 1 metals, the energy emitted appears as visible fight, thus
giving the characteristic flame colorations.

The colour actually arises from’ electronic transitions in short-lived
species which are formed momentarily in the flame. The flame is rich in
electrons, and in the case, of sodium the ions are temporarily reduced to
atoms.

Nat +e— Na

The sodium D-line (which is actually a doublet at 589.0nm and 589.6 nm)
arises from the electronic transition 3s' — 3p' in sodium atoms formed in
the flame. The colours from different elements do not all arise from the
same transition, or from the same species. Thus the red line for lithium
arises from a short-lived LiOH species formed in the flame.

These characteristic flame colorations of the emission spectra are used
for the analytical determination of these elements by flame photometry. A
solution of a Group I salt is aspirated into an oxygen—gas flame in a flame
photometer. The energy from the flame excites an electron to a higher
energy level, and when it falls back to the lower energy level the extra
energy is given out as light. The intensity of the flame coloration 1s mea-
sured with a photoelectric cell. The intensity depends on the concentration
of metal present. A calibration graph is produced by measuring intensities
with known standard solutions, and the exact concentration of the un-
known solution can be found by comparison with the standard graph.

Alternatively atomic absorption spectroscopy may be used to estimate
Group 1 metals. Here a lamp that emits a wavelength appropriate for a
particular electronic transition is used to irradiate the sample in the flame.
Thus a sodium lamp is used to detect sodium in the sample: other lamps
are used to detect other elements. The amount of light absorbed, this time
by the ground state atoms, is measured, and is proportional to the amount
of the particular element being tested for.

COLOUR OF COMPOUNDS

Colour arises because the energy absorbed or emitted in electronic transi-
tions corresponds to a wavelength in the visible region. The Group 1 metal
ions all have noble gas configurations in which all the electrons are paired.

'us promoting an electron requires some energy to unpair an electron,
some to break a full shell of electrons and some to promote the electron
toa higher level. The total energy 1s large: hence there are no suitable
anos and the compounds are typically white. Any transitions which
nn ur wil ‘be of high energy, will appear in the ultraviolet region rather

n in the visible region. and will be invisible to the human eye. Com-

 
