 

 

 

 

[ USES OF GROUP 1 METALS AND THEIR COMPOUNDS

for thermonuclear purposes, since when bombarded with neutrons it
produces tritivm (see the section on Nuclear Fusion in Chapter 31).
Lithium is also used to make electrochemical cells (both primary and
secondary batteries). Primary batteries produce electricity bya chemical
change, and are discarded when they ‘run down’. These have Li anodes,
carbon cathodes and SOCI; as the electrolyte. There is interest in Li/S
batteries which could power battery cars in the future, and in secondary
cells, which may provide a practical way of storing off-peak electricity.
LiH is used to generate hydrogen, and LiOH to absorb CO.

Caustic soda NaOH is the most important alkali used in industry and
is used for a wide variety of purposes including making many inorganic
and organic compounds, paper making, neutralizations, and making
alumina, soap and rayon. Soda ash NayCO3 may be used interchangeably
with NaOH in many applications such as making paper, ‘soap and deter-
gents. Large amounts are used in making glass, phosphates, silicates,
and cleaning preparations and removing SO, pollution from the flue gases
at coal-fired electricity generating stations. Large amounts of Na2SO, are
used to make soap and detergents, paper, textiles and glass. NaOCl is
used as a bleach and a disinfectant, and production was about 950000
tonnes (chlorine equivalent) in 1990. NaHCO; is used in baking powder.
The use of sodium metal is declining, but about 80000 tonnes were
produced in 1994. The largest use of sodium is to make a Na/Pb alloy
needed to make PbEt, and PbMe,. These organolead compounds are
used as anti-knock additives to petrol, but this use of sodium continues to
decrease as more cars use lead-free petrol. Another important use is to
reduce TiCl, and ZrCl, to the metals. Other uses are making Na,O, and
NaH, and in sodium street lights. Liquid sodium metal is used as,a
coolant in fast breeder nuclear reactors. It transfers heat from the reactor
to turbines, where the heat produces steam which is used to generate
electricity. A fast breeder reactor is still operational at Grenoble (France),
but another at Dounray (Scotland) -has now been decommisioned. These
Teactors operate at a temperature of about 600°C; being a metal, sodium
conducts heat very well, and as its boiling point is 881°C it is ideal for this
Purpose. Small amounts of the metal are used in organic synthesis, and
for drying organic solvents. ,

Potassium is an essential element for life. Roughly 95% of potassium

 

compounds are used as fertilizers for plants— KCI 90%, K2SO4 9%, KNO;
ve. Potassium salts are always more expensive than sodium salts, usually
ey a factor of 10 or more. KOH (which is prepared by electrolysing aque-
US, KCl) is used to make potassium phosphates and also soft soap, e.g.
Harri Stearate, both of which are used in liquid detergents. KNO; is
on explosives. KMnO, is used in the manufacture of saccharin, as an
tah zing agent and for titrations. K»COs is used in ceramics, colour TV
lubes and fluorescent light tubes. Potassium superoxide KOz is used in

bi i A .
Nehing apparatus and in submarines, and KBr is used in photography.

 

much i is pro it i
o, Potassium metal is produced, and most of it is used to make

I

| 279]
