 

 

 

 

‘THE GROUP 13 ELEMENTS

 

 

‘with airn a smelter, to convert them to ZnO and PbO The Ga and In are
recovered from the flue dust, and they are extracted by electrolysis of,
aqueous solutions of therr salts

The metals are soft silver coloured and reactive They dissolve i acids
‘There are no large scale uses for Ga, In or TI, but small amounts of Ga are
used to dope crystals to make transistors. Semiconductor manufacture
requites ultra-high punty Ga. This obtained by zone refining. Gallum
also used in other semiconductor devices Galltum arsenide GaAs 1s s0-
‘lectromic with Ge, and 1s used an hight ermtting diodes (LEDs) and laser
diodes There 1a lot or research mto using GaAs to make memory chips
for computers, since these work 5 to 10 times faster than those made from
silicon Indium 1s used to dope crystals to make p-n=p transistors, and in
thermstors (InAs and InSb) It 1s also used 1n tow melting point solder
{commonly used to solder semuconductor chips) and other low melting
alloys

   
     
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    

OXIDATION STATES AND TYPE OF BONDS

‘The (4111) oxidation state

‘The elements all have three outer electrons Apatt feom TI they normally
use these to form three bonds, giving an oxidation state of (+111) Ate the
‘bonds tone or covalent? Covalency 1s suggested by the following

1 Fayans' rules~ small size of the 1ons and their high charge of 3+ favours
the formation of covalent bonds

2 The sum ofthe first three ronrzation energies 1s very large, and this aso
suggests that bonds will be largely covalent

3. The electronegatvity values are higher than for Groups 1 and 2, and
‘when reacting vith other elements the difference 1s not likely £0 be
large

Boron ts considerably smaller than the other elements and thus has &
hugher tomzation energy than the others The ionization energy 1s so high
that B is always covalent

“Many simple compounds of the remaining elements, such as AICI and
GaCh are covalent when anhydrous However. Al. Ga, In end Tall form
metal tone un sotunon The type of bonds formed depends on whic
1 most favourable in terms of energy This change from covalent 10
rowie happens because the ons are hydrated, and the amount of hydca
tion energy evolved exceeds the sonization energy Consider AIC
5137kS mol~! are requited to convert Al to AU*, AHyyacauon for AP* 18
4665 kI mot! and AHayénuon for CI” 15 ~38L KI mol~* Thus the total
hydration energy 15

 

  

4665 + (3X =381) = —Sg08KI mol"!
