 

 

[ HARDNESS OF WATER

the usual trend that basic properties increase on descending a group.

Solutions of Ca(OH)2 and Ba(OH)) are called lime water and baryta
water respectively, and are used to detect carbon dioxide. When COz is
bubbled through these solutions, they become ‘turbid’ or ‘milky’ due to
the formation of a suspension of solid particles of CaCO3 or BaCO3. If
excess CO, is passed through these ‘milky’ solutions then the turbidity
disappears as soluble bicarbonates form with the excess CO2. Baryta
water is rather too sensitive as it gives a positive test for CO by exhaling
breath on it, whereas with lime water, breath (or other gas) must be blown
through the solution as bubbles.

Excess

Ca?*(OH™), + COz—> CaCO, + H,0 £2 Ca?*(HCOZ)2
insoluble soluble +
white precipitate

The bicarbonates of Group 2 metals are only stable in solution. Caves
in limestone regions often have stalactites growing down from the roof,
and stalagmites growing up from the floor. Water percolating through the
limestone contains some Ca?*(HCO3)2 in solution. The soluble bicar-
bonate decomposes slowly into the insoluble carbonate, and this results
in the slow growth of the stalactites and stalagmites.

Ca**(HCO;)2 > CaCO; + CO, + HO

HARDNESS OF WATER

Hard water contains dissolved salts such as magnesium and calcium car-
bonates, bicarbonates or sulphates. It is difficult to produce lather from
soap with hard water, and an insoluble scum is formed. The metal ions
Ca?* and Mg?* react with the stearate ions from the soap, forming an
insoluble scum of calcium stearate before any lather is produced. Hard
water also produces scale (insoluble deposits) in water pipes, boilers,
and kettles.

‘Temporary hardness’ is due to the presence of Mg(HCOs), and
Ca(HCOs),. It is called ‘temporary’ because it can be removed by boil-
ing, which drives off CO. and upsets the equilibrium.

2HCOx = COZ" + CO, + HO

Thus the bicarbonates decompose into carbonates, and calcium carbonate

is Precipitated. If this is filtered off, or allowed to settle, the water is free .

from hardness. Temporary hardness can also be removed by adding slaked
lime to Precipitate calcium carbonate. This is called ‘lime softening’, and
by Operating at pH 10.5, temporary hardness due to HCO} can be almost
completely removed.

Ca(HCOs)2 + Ca(OH); = 2CaCO; + 2H,0

Meeemanent hardness’ is not removed by boiling, and is due mainly to
880, or CaSO, in solution. Small quantities of pure water are prepared

 

337 |
