 

How Biochemical Pathways Are
Regulated

For a biochemical pathway to operate effi-
ciently, its activity must be coordinated
and regulated by the cell. Not only is it
unnecessary to synthesize a compound
when plenty is already present, doing so
would waste energy and raw materials that
could be put to use elsewhere. It is, there-
fore, advantageous for a cell to temporar-
ily shut down biochemical pathways when
their products are not needed.

The regulation of simple biochemical interme
pathways often depends on an elegant B
feedback mechanism: the end product of
the pathway binds to an allosteric site on
the enzyme that catalyzes the first reaction
in the pathway. In the hypothetical path-
way we just described, the enzyme catalyz-
ing the reaction C —> D would possess
an allosteric site for H, the end product of
the pathway. As the pathway churned out
its product and the amount of H in the
cell increased, it would become increas- |_@)

 
     
 

  

Initial
substrate

 

Enzyme 1}__——-»]

 

 

Enzyme 2} _____»|

 

 

Enzyme 3 }-_——»

End product

No end-product inhibition

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

End
product

 

 

 

   

End product

End-product inhibition

(b)

 

 

 

ingly likely that one of the H molecules
would encounter the allosteric site on the
C— D enzyme. If the product H fune-
tioned as an allosteric inhibitor of the en-
zyme, its binding to the enzyme would es-
sentially shut down the reaction C —>
D. Shutting down this reaction, the first
reaction in the pathway, effectively shuts
down the whole pathway. Hence, as the cell produces in-

FIGURE 8.16

end product stops the pathway.

Feedback inhibition. (a) A biochemical pathway with no feedback inhibition. (6) A
biochemical pathway in which the final end product becomes the allosteric effector for
the first enzyme in the pathway. In other words, the formation of the pathway’s final

 

creasing quantities of the product H, it automatically in-
hibits its ability to produce more. This mode of regulation

A biochemical pathway is an organized series of
reactions, often regulated as a unit.

 

is called feedback inhibition (figure 8.16).

endergonic reaction A chemical reaction
to which energy from an outside source
must be added before the reaction proceeds;
the opposite of an exergonic reaction.

A Vocabulary of

Metabolism

 

entropy A measure of the randomness or
disorder of a system. In cells, it is a measure

activation energy ‘The energy required to of how much energy has become so dis-

destabilize chemical bonds and to initiate a
chemical reaction.

catalysis Acceleration of the rate of a
chemical reaction by lowering the activa-
tion energy.

coenzyme A nonprotein organic mole-
cule that plays an accessory role in enzyme-
catalyzed reactions, often by acting as a
donor or acceptor of electrons. NAD* is a
coenzyme.

156 Part II Energetics

persed (usually as evenly distributed heat)
that it is no longer available to do work.
exergonic reaction. An energy-yielding
chemical reaction. Exergonic reactions tend
to proceed spontaneously, although activa-
tion energy is required to initiate them.

free energy Energy available to do work.
kilocalorie 1000 calories. A calorie is the
heat required to raise the temperature of
1 gram of water by 1°C.

metabolism The sum of all chemical
processes occurring within a living cell or
organism.

oxidation The loss of an electron by an
atom or molecule. It occurs simultaneously
with reduction of some other atom or mole-
cule because an electron that is lost by one
is gained by another.

reduction The gain of an electron by an
atom or molecule. Oxidation-reduction re-
actions are an important means of energy
transfer within living systems.

substrate A molecule on which an en-
zyme acts; the initial reactant in an enzyme-
catalyzed reaction.
