The Evolution of Metabolism

Metabolism has changed a great deal as life on earth has
evolved. This has been particularly true of the reactions or-
ganisms use to capture energy from the sun to build or-
ganic molecules (anabolism), and then break down organic
molecules to obtain energy (catabolism). These processes,
the subject of the next two chapters, evolved in concert
with each other.

Degradation

The most primitive forms of life are thought to have ob-
tained chemical energy by degrading, or breaking down,
organic molecules that were abiotically produced.

The first major event in the evolution of metabolism was
the origin of the ability to harness chemical bond energy.
At an early stage, organisms began to store this energy in
the bonds of ATP, an energy carrier used by all organisms
today.

Glycolysis

The second major event in the evolution of metabolism
was glycolysis, the initial breakdown of glucose. As proteins
evolved diverse catalytic functions, it became possible to
capture a larger fraction of the chemical bond energy in or-
ganic molecules by breaking chemical bonds in a series of
steps. For example, the progressive breakdown of the six-
carbon sugar glucose into three-carbon molecules is per-
formed in a series of 10 steps that results in the net produc-
tion of two ATP molecules. The energy for the synthesis of
ATP is obtained by breaking chemical bonds and forming
new ones with less bond energy, the energy difference
being channeled into ATP production. This biochemical
pathway is called glycolysis.

Glycolysis undoubtedly evolved early in the history of life
on earth, since this biochemical pathway has been retained
by all living organisms. It is a chemical process that does not
appear to have changed for well over 3 billion years.

Anaerobic Photosynthesis

The third major event in the evolution of metabolism was
anaerobic photosynthesis. Early in the history of life, some
organisms evolved a different way of generating ATP,
called photosynthesis. Instead of obtaining energy for ATP
synthesis by reshuffling chemical bonds, as in glycolysis,
these organisms developed the ability to use light to pump
protons out of their cells, and to use the resulting proton
gradient to power the production of ATP, a process called
chemiosmosis.

Photosynthesis evolved in the absence of oxygen and
works well without it. Dissolved H)S, present in the oceans
beneath an atmosphere free of oxygen gas, served as a ready
source of hydrogen atoms for building organic molecules.
Free sulfur was produced as a by-product of this reaction.

Nitrogen Fixation

Nitrogen fixation was the fourth major step in the evolu-
tion of metabolism. Proteins and nucleic acids cannot be
synthesized from the products of photosynthesis because
both of these biologically critical molecules contain ni-
trogen. Obtaining nitrogen atoms from N) gas, a process
called nitrogen fixation, requires the breaking of an N=N
triple bond. This important reaction evolved in the
hydrogen-rich atmosphere of the early earth, an atmos-
phere in which no oxygen was present. Oxygen acts as a
poison to nitrogen fixation, which today occurs only in
oxygen-free environments, or in oxygen-free compart-
ments within certain bacteria.

Oxygen-Forming Photosynthesis

The substitution of H2O for H)S in photosynthesis was the
fifth major event in the history of metabolism. Oxygen-
forming photosynthesis employs H)O rather than H)S as a
source of hydrogen atoms and their associated electrons.
Because it garners its hydrogen atoms from reduced oxygen
rather than from reduced sulfur, it generates oxygen gas
rather than free sulfur.

More than 2 billion years ago, small cells capable of car-
rying out this oxygen-forming photosynthesis, such as
cyanobacteria, became the dominant forms of life on earth.
Oxygen gas began to accumulate in the atmosphere. This
was the beginning of a great transition that changed condi-
tions on earth permanently. Our atmosphere is now 20.9%
oxygen, every molecule of which is derived from an
oxygen-forming photosynthetic reaction.

Aerobic Respiration

Aerobic respiration is the sixth and final event in the his-
tory of metabolism. This cellular process harvests energy
by stripping energetic electrons from organic molecules.
Aerobic respiration employs the same kind of proton
pumps as photosynthesis, and is thought to have evolved as
a modification of the basic photosynthetic machinery.
However, the hydrogens and their associated electrons are
not obtained from H)S or H)0, as in photosynthesis, but
rather from the breakdown of organic molecules.

Biologists think that the ability to carry out photosyn-
thesis without H)S first evolved among purple nonsulfur
bacteria, which obtain their hydrogens from organic com-
pounds instead. It was perhaps inevitable that among the
descendants of these respiring photosynthetic bacteria,
some would eventually do without photosynthesis en-
tirely, subsisting only on the energy and hydrogens de-
rived from the breakdown of organic molecules. The mi-
tochondria within all eukaryotic cells are thought to be
their descendants.

 

Six major innovations highlight the evolution of
metabolism as we know it today.

 

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 157
