 

 

ACIDS AND BASES

 

 

267

 

 

The Lux—Flood definition

Lux originally proposed a different definition of acids and bases which was
extended by Flood. Instead of using protons, or ions characteristic of the
solvent, they defined acids as oxides which accept oxygen, and bases as
oxides which donate oxygen. Thus:

CaO + CO, — Ca?*[CO;]?~

SiO, +CaO — Ca?*[SiO3]?~

6Na,O + PsO19 > 4Naz [PO4]>-

acid base
This. system is very useful in dealing with anhydrous reactions in fused
melts of oxides, and other high temperature reactions such as are found in
metallurgy and ceramics.
This theory has an inverse relationship to aqueous chemistry, since

Lux-Flood acids are oxides which react with water, giving bases in water,
and Lux-Flood bases react with water, giving acids.

Na,O + HO — 2NaOH
P4Oy9 + 6H2O > 4H3PO4

The Usanovich definition

This defines an acid as any chemical species which reacts with bases,
gives up cations, or accepts anions or electrons. Conversely a base is any
chemical species which reacts with acids, gives up anions or electrons, or
combines with cations. This is a very wide definition and includes all the
Lewis acid~base type of reactions, and in addition it includes redox
reactions involving the transfer of electrons.

Hard and soft acids and bases

Metal ions may be divided into two types depending on the strength of
their complexes with certain ligands.

Type (a) metals include the smaller ions from Groups 1 and 2, and the
left hand side of the transition metals, particularly when in high oxidation
states, and these form the most stable complexes with nitrogen and oxygen
sages (ammonia, amines, water, ketones, alcohols), and also with F~

Type (b) metals include ions from the right hand side of the transition

Series, and also transition metal complexes with low oxidation states, such
as the carbonyls. These form the most sta

ne ble complexes with ligands s

as I, SCN and CN-. ® . eh

fiom classification was useful in predicting the relative stabi-

aide complexes, Pearson extended the concept into a broad range of
ase interactions. Type (a) metals are small and not very polariz-

 
