Enzyme Cofactors

Enzyme function is often assisted by additional chemical
components known as cofactors. For example, the active
sites of many enzymes contain metal ions that help draw
electrons away from substrate molecules. The enzyme
carboxypeptidase digests proteins by employing a zinc ion
(Zn**) in its active site to remove electrons from the
bonds joining amino acids. Other elements, such as
molybdenum and manganese, are also used as cofactors.
Like zinc, these substances are required in the diet in
small amounts. When the cofactor is a nonprotein organic
molecule, it is called a coenzyme. Many vitamins are
parts of coenzymes.

In numerous oxidation-reduction reactions that are cat-
alyzed by enzymes, the electrons pass in pairs from the ac-
tive site of the enzyme to a coenzyme that serves as the
electron acceptor. The coenzyme then transfers the elec-
trons to a different enzyme, which releases them (and the
energy they bear) to the substrates in another reaction.
Often, the electrons pair with protons (H*) as hydrogen
atoms. In this way, coenzymes shuttle energy in the form of
hydrogen atoms from one enzyme to another in a cell.

One of the most important coenzymes is the hydrogen
acceptor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD*)
(figure 8.13). The NAD* molecule is composed of two
nucleotides bound together. As you may recall from
chapter 3, a nucleotide is a five-carbon sugar with one or
more phosphate groups attached to one end and an or-
ganic base attached to the other end. The two nu-
cleotides that make up NAD*, nicotinamide monophos-
phate (NMP) and adenine monophosphate (AMP), are
joined head-to-head by their phosphate groups. The two
nucleotides serve different functions in the NAD* mole-
cule: AMP acts as the core, providing a shape recognized
by many enzymes; NMP is the active part of the mole-
cule, contributing a site that is readily reduced (that is,
easily accepts electrons).

When NAD* acquires an electron and a hydrogen atom
(actually, two electrons and a proton) from the active site of
an enzyme, it is reduced to NADH. The NADH molecule
now carries the two energetic electrons and the proton.
The oxidation of energy-containing molecules, which pro-
vides energy to cells, involves stripping electrons from
those molecules and donating them to NAD+. As we'll see,
much of the energy of NADH is transferred to another
molecule.

 

Enzymes have an optimum temperature and pH, at
which the enzyme functions most effectively. Inhibitors
decrease enzyme activity, while activators increase it.
The activity of enzymes is often facilitated by cofactors,
which can be metal ions or other substances. Cofactors
that are nonprotein organic molecules are called
coenzymes.

 

Competitive
inhibitor
inteferes with
active site of
enzyme so
substrate
cannot bind

   

Allosteric inhibitor
changes shape of
enzyme so it cannot
bind to substrate

(a) Competitive inhibition (b) Noncompetitive inhibition

FIGURE 8.12

How enzymes can be inhibited. (a) In competitive inhibition, the
inhibitor interferes with the active site of the enzyme. (}) In
noncompetitive inhibition, the inhibitor binds to the enzyme ata
place away from the active site, effecting a conformational change
in the enzyme so that it can no longer bind to its substrate.

NMP
reactive

group

AMP
group

 

 

FIGURE 8.13

The chemical structure of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+). This key cofactor is composed of two nucleotides, NMP
and AMP, attached head-to-head.

Chapter 8 Energy and Metabolism 153
