 

COMPLEXES

RMgBr + BeCl, ——> BeRz
RMgBr + LiR ——> MgR2
RMgBr + BCI; ——> BR;
RMgBr + SiCl, —— RSICls, RSiClz, R3SiCl, RySi
alkyl and aryl chlorositanes

The alkyl and aryl chlorosilanes are commercially important in the
manufacture of silicones (see Group 14). .

BeCl, reacts with Grignard compounds, forming reactive alkyls and
aryls. The compound Be(Me), is dimerized in the vapour state, and poly-
merized in the solid. The structure formed is a chain structure which
resembles that in BeCl,. The bonding is, however, very different. The
bonding in Be—Me—Be is best described as two electrons forming a
three-centre bridge bond involving both Be atoms and the CH; group,
similar to the three-centre bonds in (BeH)),,. This is different from the
halogen bridging in (BeCl2),, where the bridging chlorine atom forms two
normal two-electron bonds.

Though much less studied than Grignard compounds, the other Group
2 metals also form dialkyl and diaryl compounds. These may be prepared
using Grignard compounds, lithium alkyls/aryls or mercury alkyls/aryls.

BeCl, + 2MeMgCl =2s BeMe:(EtO), + 2MgCls
BeCl, + 2LiEt 2°. BeEt,: (Et,0),
Be + HgMe, 5 BeMe, + Hg

Similar reactions may be used to make dialkyls and diaryls of Mg, Ca, Sr
and Ba. The Ca, Sr and Ba compounds are much more reactive than the
Corresponding magnesium compound. The beryllium alkyls react with
BeCl, to form ‘beryllium Grignard’ compounds.

BeMe, + BeCl, > 2MeBeCl

These are less reactive than the corresponding magnesium (Grignard)
compounds,

COMPLEXES

ote 2 Metals are not noted for their ability to form complexes. The
suite favouring complex formation are small highly charged ions with
thet le empty orbitals of low energy which can be used for bonding. All
thes “ements in the group form divalent ions, and these are smaller than
forminee Ponding Group 1 ions: hence Group 2 elements are better at
the atte complexes than Group 1 elements. Be is appreciably smaller than

chon and so Be forms many complexes. of the others, only Mg and
usualh, ‘much tendency to form complexes in solution, and these are

Y With oxygen-donor ligands.

 

[349
