 

 

OXYGEN COMPOUNDS

| [419]

 

SiC is often dark purple, black or dark green due to traces of Fe and other
impurities, but pure samples are pale yellow to colourless. SiC has a three-
dimensional structure of Si and C atoms, each atom tetrahedrally sur-
rounded by four of the other kind. There are a large number of different
crystal forms based on either the diamond or wurtzite structures. Boron
carbide is even harder than silicon carbide and is used both as an abrasive
and as a shield from radiation. Jt is manufactured in tonne quantities. Its
formula is more correctly represented by B,3C2 (see Chapter 12, under
‘Borides’).

OXYGEN COMPOUNDS

Carbon forms more oxides than the other elements, and these oxides differ
from those of the other elements because they contain px—px multiple
bonds between C and O. Two of these oxides, CO and COg, are extremely
stable and important. Three are less stable: CsO2, CsO2 and C;2O9. Others
which are even less stable include graphite oxide, C,O and C203.

Carbon monoxide CO

CO is a colourless, odourless, poisonous gas. It is formed when C is burned
in a limited amount of air. In the laboratory it is prepared by dehydrating
formic acid with concentrated H2SO,.

H-COOH + H2SO, > CO + H,0

CO can be detected because it burns with a blue flame. It also reduces an
aqueous PdCl, solution to metallic Pd, and when passed through a solution
of 1,0s it liberates Ip, i.e. it reduces 1,05 to I. The latter reaction is used to
estimate CO quantitatively. The I, is titrated with Na2S,03.

PdCl, + CO + H,0 > Pd + CO, + 2HCI
SCO + 1,05 > 5CO, + In

CO is toxic because it forms a complex with haemoglobin in the blood,
and this complex is more stable than oxy-haemoglobin. This prevents the
haemoglobin in the red blood corpuscles from carrying oxygen round the
body. This causes an oxygen deficiency, leading to unconsciousness and
then death. CO is sparingly soluble in water and is a neutral oxide. CO is
an important fuel, because it evolves a considerable amount of heat when it

burns in air.
2CO + O02 2COz AH® = ~56SkJ mol"!
The following are all important industrial fuels:
1. Water gas: an equimolecular mixture of CO and Hp.
2. Producer gas: a mixture of CO and Np.

3. Coal gas: a mixture of CO, Hz, CHy and CO, produced at a gasworks
by distilling coal, and stored in large gas holders. This was the ‘town gas’
