 

 

418)

 

 

THE GROUP 14 ELEMENTS

 

Interstusal carbides

“These are formed mostly by transition elements, and some of the latha-
rides and actinides The Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni groups form a large
‘number of carbides with a wide range of stoxchiometnies. They are typealy
infusible or are verv high melting, and are very hard. For example, TaC
has a melting pornt of 3900°C, and 1s very hard (9-10 on Mohs" scale of,
hardness), and WC 1s also very hard Both are used to make cutting tools
for lathes’ Intersutl carbides retain many of the properties of metals
They conduct electnieny by metalhe conduction, and have a lustre ike 2
etal

In these compounds C atomis occupy octahedral holes in the close:
packed metal latuee. and so do not affect the electrical conductivity ofthe
metal Provided that the stze of the metal ws greater than 135A, the
‘octahedra! holes are large enough to accommodate C atoms without di-
forting the metal lattice (Since we are considering a metal lattice, 12-
coordinate radu must be used ) Ifall the octahedral holes are occupred the
formula 1s MC Intersttal carbides are generally unreactive They do not
react with H,O ike ionic carbides Most react slowly with concentrated HF
or HNO,

‘Some metals, including Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni, have radu below 135A
hence the metal fathce 1s distorted “Thus the structures are more com
pleated, for compounds such as V.C, MnxCo, FexC, VsCy and others
Cementite FexC 1s an important constituent of steel These carbides are
more reactive. and are hydrolysed by dilute acids, and in some cases by
water, giving a mixture of hydrocarbons and Ha

‘Some carbides are based on the NaCl structure, with C occupying all of
the CI” positions These include carbides of some of the early transition
metals TIC, ZrC. HIC. VC, NbC. TaC, CrC and MoC, and those of some
actimdes such as THC, UC and PuC

Covalent carbndes

SiC and B,C are the most important Silicon carbide 1s hard (9 5 on Mohs!
scale), nfusible and chemucally inert Its widely used as an abrasive called
carborendum, and about 300000 tonnes are produced annually by heating
quartz or sand with an excess of coke an an electric furnace at 2000-
280°C
SiO; +20 S1 +260
St+C— SC

SiC1s very unreactive It1s unaffected by acids (except HyPOs), but st does
react with NaOH and air, and with Cz at 100°C.

SiC + 2N2OH + 20; + Na,SiO, + CO, + H,0
SiC + 20h; + SC,
