The Reactions of the Krebs Cycle

The Krebs cycle consists of nine sequential reactions that
cells use to extract energetic electrons and drive the synthe-
sis of ATP (figure 9.13). A two-carbon group from acetyl-
CoA enters the cycle at the beginning, and two CO) mole-
cules and several electrons are given off during the cycle.

Reaction 1: Condensation. The two-carbon group from
acetyl-CoA joins with a four-carbon molecule, oxaloac-
etate, to form a six-carbon molecule, citrate. This conden-
sation reaction is irreversible, committing the two-carbon
acetyl group to the Krebs cycle. The reaction is inhibited
when the cell’s ATP concentration is high and stimulated
when it is low. Hence, when the cell possesses ample
amounts of ATP, the Krebs cycle shuts down and acetyl-
CoA is channeled into fat synthesis.

Reactions 2 and 3: Isomerization. Before the oxidation
reactions can begin, the hydroxyl (OH) group of citrate
must be repositioned. This is done in two steps: first, a
water molecule is removed from one carbon; then, water is
added to a different carbon. As a result, an —H group and
an —OH group change positions. The product is an iso-
mer of citrate called isocitrate.

Reaction 4: The First Oxidation. In the first energy-
yielding step of the cycle, isocitrate undergoes an oxidative
decarboxylation reaction. First, isocitrate is oxidized, yield-
ing a pair of electrons that reduce a molecule of NAD* to
NADH. Then the oxidized intermediate is decarboxylated;
the central carbon atom splits off to form CO), yielding a
five-carbon molecule called o-ketoglutarate.

Reaction 5: The Second Oxidation. Next, o-ketoglutarate
is decarboxylated by a multienzyme complex similar to
pyruvate dehydrogenase. The succinyl group left after the
removal of CO; joins to coenzyme A, forming succinyl-
CoA. In the process, two electrons are extracted, and they
reduce another molecule of NAD* to NADH.

Reaction 6: Substrate-Level Phosphorylation. The
linkage between the four-carbon succinyl group and CoA is
a high-energy bond. In a coupled reaction similar to those
that take place in glycolysis, this bond is cleaved, and the

170 Part IM Energetics

energy released drives the phosphorylation of guanosine
diphosphate (GDP), forming guanosine triphosphate
(GTP). GTP is readily converted into ATP, and the four-
carbon fragment that remains is called succinate.

Reaction 7: The Third Oxidation. Next, succinate is
oxidized to fumarate. The free energy change in this re-
action is not large enough to reduce NAD*. Instead,
flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is the electron accep-
tor. Unlike NAD*, FAD is not free to diffuse within the
mitochondrion; it is an integral part of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane. Its reduced form, FADH2, con-
tributes electrons to the electron transport chain in the
membrane.

 

Reactions 8 and 9: Regeneration of Oxaloacetate. In
the final two reactions of the cycle, a water molecule is
added to fumarate, forming malate. Malate is then oxi-
dized, yielding a four-carbon molecule of oxaloacetate and
two electrons that reduce a molecule of NAD* to NADH.
Oxaloacetate, the molecule that began the cycle, is now
free to combine with another two-carbon acetyl group
from acetyl-CoA and reinitiate the cycle.

The Products of the Krebs Cycle

In the process of aerobic respiration, glucose is entirely
consumed. The six-carbon glucose molecule is first cleaved
into a pair of three-carbon pyruvate molecules during gly-
colysis. One of the carbons of each pyruvate is then lost as
CO) in the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA; two
other carbons are lost as CO? during the oxidations of the
Krebs cycle. All that is left to mark the passing of the glu-
cose molecule into six CO? molecules is its energy, some of
which is preserved in four ATP molecules and in the re-
duced state of 12 electron carriers. Ten of these carriers are
NADH molecules; the other two are FADH).

 

The Krebs cycle generates two ATP molecules per
molecule of glucose, the same number generated by
glycolysis. More importantly, the Krebs cycle and the
oxidation of pyruvate harvest many energized electrons,
which can be directed to the electron transport chain to
drive the synthesis of much more ATP.

 
