 

 

442,

 

 

Ti GROUP 14 ELEMENTS 7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘AIOH), Gite sheet MoIOH), Bite sheet
Sacate sheet ‘Siicate sheet
‘Siieate sheet ‘Seate sheet

‘ICH, Gide sheet NalOH, Bructe meet
‘Sheate sheet Steals sheet

 

 

 

 

Figure 13.16 Two and three layer structures

ratnely brucite may combine with two SisOs layers forming a tiple
sheet structure called tale or soapstone Mg(OH);{(S1;O4)] These tiple
sheets are electrically neutral and there ate no metal rons holding one
sheet 10 the next. so the structure breaks very easily. and 1s very seit
Soapstone hasa slippery feeling (hence ts name) Itacts asa dry lubricant
‘World production of tale was 8 4 rulion tonnes in 1992 Its used mainly 9
making ceramies, paper and paint Small amounts are used m cosmets,
as talc can be ground into a fine powder and used as taleum powder

Substitution of atoms may occur in the triple-layer structures of the
pytophylite types If Sis partly replaced by Al (un tetrahedra holes) then
the sheet becomes negatively charged These charges are balanced by
positwely charged metal 1ons which are placed between the layers TAS
ives nse to the mica minerals These ate a group of minerals charactev2el
by the fact that they are readily spht into ghstening transparent fesble
sheets of vanied colour Muscovite has the formula KAl(OH),{AIS0r0)
ands called white mica Matgante has the formula CaA(OH),(A1Si,0%0
Substitution ot atoms may also occur in tale Mg(OH){SiO] Repla®
ing St by Al + K gives a mica called phlogopite KMgx(OH),{AISnOvl
Farnal replacement of Mg by Fe! gwes the common mineral brotte
K(MgFe!")(OH} ALSO ul oF black mica Micas are much harder than
tale and the other minerals in this secon because of the electrostatic
attraction between the negatively charged irple sheets and the posttN®
metal sons However this is still a point of weakness in the structure, 2
micas cleave between the layers quite readily World production of ct
was 214000 tonnes in 1992 ‘The man sources are the USA 40%, Some!
‘Union 16% and Canada 8% Sheet mica 1s used as an electrical insulator
and as a former on which to wind electric heating elements (ef!
electnc trons) It ss also used in electrical capacitors and for windo*s ©
fanaces Finely ground mica 1s used as a filler rm plastics and rubber!
insulating board, and in polychromatic and ghtter paint (¢ g for mi0tor
cars)

"The clay minerals are formed from other sikcates by weathering, of BY
hydrothermal processes. by the action of water under heat and presst©
‘They contam electncally neutral layers. e g kaohinnie, and pyrophy/lite
‘The clay minerals. also include the montmorillonites which have negatel?
‘charged layers but the number of charges is much lower than an the mis

 

 

 
