 

 

 

405

 

 

 

| EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

industry) is made by converting Si to SiCl,, purifying this by distillation,
and reducing the chloride with Mg or Zn.

SiO, + 2C > Si + 2CO
Si + 2Cl, > SiCl,
SiCl, + 2Mg — Si + MgCl,

The electronics industry requires small quantities of ultrapure silicon and
germanium (with a purity better than 1: 10°). These materials are insula-
tors when pure, but become p-type or ”-type semiconductors when doped
with a Group 15 or Group 13 element respectively. These are used as
transistors and semiconductor devices. Very pure Si is also used to make
computer chips (see Chapter 3 under ‘Micro-minaturised semiconductor
devices’). To obtain ultrapure Si or Ge, the materials are first purified as
much as possible. for example by careful fractional distillation of SiCl, to
get pure Si. For the final stage of purification a process called zone refining
is used. This is an excellent method for small quantities. A rod of the
element, which has already been purified extensively, is placed in a long
quartz tube filled with an inert gas. A heating coil melts a thin disc of the
rod. The heater moves slowly from one end to the other, and pure Si or
metal crystallizes from the melt. The impurities are more soluble in the
liquid, and are carried to the end of the rod, where they are cut off and
discarded. Semiconductor quality Si can also be made by sodium reduction
of Na){SiF,], which is a by-product from making phosphate fertilizers from
fluoroapatite.

Na,[SiF,] + 4Na > Si + 6NaF

Germanium

Ge has been recovered from coal ash, but it is now recovered from the flue
dust from smelting Zn ores. A number of steps are required in the recovery
of Ge from flue dust to concentrate and purify it. These give pure GeO,
which is reduced by Hz to Ge at 500°C. Transistor grade (ultrapure)
material is obtained by zone refining. World production was about 50
tonnes in 1993 (20% of it from the USA). It is used mainly for making
transistors and semiconductor devices. It is transparent to infra-red light
and is therefore also used for making prisms and lenses and windows in
infra-red spectrophotometers and scientific apparatus.

Tin
The only important ore is cassiterite SnOQ 2. Mine production was 177000
tonnes (metal content) in 1992. The main supplies now come from China

25%, Indonesia 17%, and Brazil 15%. In the UK, tin was mined in

Cornwall from Roman times until this century, but these mines are now
uneconomic.

SnO, is reduced to the metal using carbon at 1200~1300°C in an electric
continued overieaf

 

 
