 

THE CARBON CYCLE

 

 

427

 

 

solid structures of these contain polymeric chains of HCO groups
hydrogen bonded together.

THE CARBON CYCLE

Though carbon is the seventeenth most abundant clement in the earth's
crust, and totals about 2 x 10'® tonnes, most of this is in the form of
coal, oil and various carbonates (limestone and dolomite) which are
immobilized.

In contrast there is a rapid turnover of CO2 in the atmosphere, carbon
compounds in living matter, CO; dissolved in the oceans, and more slowly
with carbonate minerals formed on the sea bed. An equilibrium exists
between them. The proportion of CO; in the atmosphere is approximately
0.046% by weight, and 0.031% by volume. Though only a small percent-
age, CO; is essential for life, and amounts to 2500 billion tonnes (2500 x
10” tonnes).

Photosynthesis by the.green parts of plants and some brown and blue
algae removes about 360 billion tonnes of CO, from the atmosphere a year
-roughly 15%. Glucose sugar is the first product formed. This may be used
for respiration and energy release by the plant, or incorporated into plant
cells. These may be eaten by animals, and used for respiration or for
producing animal cells. Eventually the same amount of CO; is returned to
the atmosphere either by respiration of the plant or animal, or by death
and putrefaction of plant or animal remains.

Combustion of fossil fuels, mainly coal, oil and natural gas, and burning
tropical rain forests adds about 25 billion tonnes of CO) to the atmosphere
each year. (Coal production in 1992 was 4545 million tonnes, crude oil
3034 million tonnes, natural gas 2.1 x 10'?m*. Important amounts of CO,
are released by burning limestone to make lime for making cement. Lime

* production in 1992 was 127.9 million tonnes so about 100 million tonnes
of CO, was produced.

CaCO; CaO + CO,

Itis estimated that in 1992 the USA added 1.2 billion tonnes of CO, to the
atmosphere, the USSR 1 billion tonnes and western Europe 0.8 billion
tonnes. If all of this CO, remained in the atmosphere, it is estimated that
the CO, content will double by the year 2020. With the ever increasing use
of fossil fuels the amount of CO, could double even sooner.

The CO, molecule absorbs strongly in the infrared region, and its
Presence in the atmosphere decreases the loss of heat from the earth by
radiation. This global warming is called the ‘greenhouse effect’. (Other
gases, including the oxides of nitrogen from car exhausts, Freons from
acrosols and refrigerators and methane from bacteria in the soil and in the
Tumen of cows, also add to the greenhouse effect.) The magnitude of this
efféct, and whether it exists at all are controversial. The concentration of
atmospheric CO. has increased by 10% since 1958, and on the basis of
measurements of CO. from ice cores is some 25% higher than before the

 
