 

 

THE OTHER GROUP 13 OXIDES

 

[3st |

 

 

MB», MB, and MBg, though formulae as diverse as MsB and MBes are
known. Some of the compounds are nonstoichiometric. The formulae of
some of the compounds cannot be rationalized by the application of simple
valency rules, and are best explained by multi-centre bonding.

They may be prepared by heating the metal with boron, and by a variety
of other methods. The metal-rich borides are mostly with transition metals.
{iiey are hard, and have very high melting points: ZrB2, HfB2, NbB, and
TaB, all melt over 3000°C. The melting points and the electrical con-
ductivities are often higher than for the parent metals. Thus TiBz conducts
five times as well as Ti metal. Borides are often chemically inert, and they
have several uses:

1. Boron carbide is commonly written as B,C. It is produced in quantities
of tonnes by reducing B,O, with C at 1600°C. It is a useful source of B,
and is also used as an abrasive for polishing. It is used in brake linings
for cars. Fibres of ByC have an enormous tensile strength, and are used
to make bullet-proof clothing. These fibres are made as follows:

6H2 + 4BCls + Cottey > BaCinipresy + 12HCI
Boron carbide should be written B,;C2, but its composition varies and
may approach B,>C;. The structure comprises a series of B,2 icosahedra.
Each icosahedron is linked to six others through either four B—C—B
linkages and two B—B linkages, or through six B—C—B linkages. The
structure is a cluster compound, and can only be explained by multi-
centre bonding.

2. Powder fabrication techniques are used to fabricate parts such as
turbine blades and rocket nozzles from powdered borides such as CrB2,
TiB2, and ZrB3.

3. Boron steel is used in the nuclear industry for'shielding and for control
rods in reactors because '’B has a very high absorption cross-section for
thermal neutrons.

THE OTHER GROUP 13 OXIDES

Alumina Al,O; exists principally in two crystalline forms called a-Al,O,
or corundum, and y-Al,O3, and in addition there is a fibrous form which
is made commercially.

Corundum is found as a mineral, and a-Al,O; is also made by heating
Al(OH); or y-Al:O, above 1000°C. Corundum is extremely hard (9 on
Moh’s scale) and is used as ‘jewellers’ rouge’ to polish glass. (See
Appendix N). An impure form of corundum. contaminated with iron
oxide and silica, is called emery. This is used to make emery paper
Csandpaper’ used to-polish metals). Corundum 1s unaffected by acids. It
has a high melting point of over 2000°C. It is used as a refractory to line
furnaces and to make containers for high temperature reactions. The
crystal structure of corundum is hexagonally close-packed oxygen atoms,
With two thirds of the octahedral holes filled by Al* ions.
