With oxygen

H,O

X

NAD*

 

 

Oz

 

NADH

 

 

 

 

Acetyl-CoA

 

 

Cun

rebs
cycle

FIGURE 9.9

NAD*

Without oxygen

 
  

Acetaldehyde

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ethanol

 

 

What happens to pyruvate, the product of glycolysis? In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate is oxidized to acetyl-CoA, which enters the
Krebs cycle. In the absence of oxygen, pyruvate is instead reduced, accepting the electrons extracted during glycolysis and carried by
NADH. When pyruvate is reduced directly, as in muscle cells, the product is lactate. When CO) is first removed from pyruvate and the
product, acetaldehyde, is then reduced, as in yeast cells, the product is ethanol.

2. Fermentation. When oxygen is unavailable, an or-
ganic molecule can accept the hydrogen atom instead.
Such fermentation plays an important role in the me-
tabolism of most organisms (figure 9.10), even those
capable of aerobic respiration.

The fate of the pyruvate that is produced by glycolysis
depends upon which of these two processes takes place.
The aerobic respiration path starts with the oxidation of
pyruvate to a molecule called acetyl-CoA, which is then
further oxidized in a series of reactions called the Krebs
cycle. The fermentation path, by contrast, involves the re-
duction of all or part of pyruvate. We will start by examin-
ing aerobic respiration, then look briefly at fermentation.

 

Glycolysis generates a small amount of ATP by
reshufiling the bonds of glucose molecules. In
glycolysis, two molecules of NAD* are reduced to
NADH. NAD* must be regenerated for glycolysis to
continue unabated.

 

 

FIGURE 9.10

Fermentation. The conversion of pyruvate to ethanol takes place
naturally in grapes left to ferment on vines, as well as in
fermentation vats of crushed grapes. Yeasts carry out the process,
but when their conversion increases the ethanol concentration to
about 12%, the toxic effects of the alcohol kill the yeast cells.
What is left is wine.

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 167
