 

 

 

‘THE GROUP 13 ELEMENTS

 

 

‘Watton R A (2972) Coordiation complexes ofthe thalum( II halides and ther
‘behaviour in non aqueous media Coordination Chem Rev 6 1-25

Wiberg E and Amberger (1971) Hydrides of he Elemens of Mam Groups
TeIV (Chapters 5 and 6) Eltewer Amsterdam

PROBLEMS

1 The first element in each of the main groups in the perrodic table shows
anomalous properties when compared with other members of the same
‘group Discuss this statement with particular reference to the elements
Lt Be and B

2. What s the main source of boron” Outhne the steps in the extraction
of boron

3. Draw the structure of the Byz umt found 1m the solid structure of
boron What 15 this shape called”

4 (@) List features which make borax a useful primary standard and
give a balanced equation to show suse in ttrations
{@) Work oot the shape of the BO} ron and explain why 1 has ths
structure

5. Orthobone acid may be written as HyBO, or B(OH): How does it
tone in water and which way of wating the formula 1S the most
helpful? How strong an acids? Why does glycerol enhance ns acide
properties? Wate arbalanced equation for a neutralization reaction
with bore acid

6 Gave an account of sopolyacids with special reference to borates

7 Give one method for the preparation of diborane BzH, Why 1s it
called an electron deficient compound? Draw the structure of ¢i
borane and give the bond lengths. What s unusual about the bonding
sm this compound?

8 How does diborane react with (a) ammonia (b) boron tibromde and
{© tnmethylboron?

9. Deseribe the use of diborane in hydroboration

10 Guve the preparation structure and uses of sodium borohydnde

A Compare the structures of BF, gas AICh, gas and AICh in aqueous
solution

12. Explain the following
(2) BF, has no dipole moment but PFy has a substantial dipole
(b) BF) and BrF) molecules have different shapes

13. Desenbe the preparation and give the structures of the dihalides of B
Ga and In

14 What ss the principal ore of aluminum? How isthe ore purified and
