 

[ SIZE OF ATOMS AND IONS

 

 

367

 

less dense than the liquid. This property is unique to Ga, Ge and Bi.

Though the melting points decrease from Al to In as expected on
descending a group, it increases again for Tl. The boiling point of B is
unusually high, but the values for Ga, In and Tl decrease on descending the
group as expected. Note that the boiling point for Ga is in line with the
others, whereas its melting point is not. The very low melting point is due
to the unusual crystal structure, but the structure no longer exists in the
liquid.

SIZE OF ATOMS AND IONS

The metallic radii of the atoms do not increase regularly on descending
the group (Table 12.4). However, the values are not strictly comparable.
Boron is not a metal, and the radius given is half the closest approach in the
structure. Ga has an unusual structure, and the value given is half the
closest approach. The others have close-packed metal structures.

The ionic radii for M?* increase down’ the group, though not in the
regular way observed in Groups 1 and 2. There are two reasons for this:

1. There is no evidence for the existence of B>* under normal conditions,
and the value is an estimate.

2. The electronic structures of the elements are different. Ga, In and TI
follow immediately after a row of ten transition elements. They there-
fore have ten d electrons, which are less efficient at shielding the
nuclear charge than the s and p electrons. (Shielding is in the order s >
Pp > d > f.) Poor shielding of the nuclear charge results in the outer
electrons being more firmly held by the nucleus. Thus atoms with a d!°
inner shell are smaller and so have higher ionization energies than
would otherwise be expected. This contraction in size is sometimes
called the d -block contraction. In a similar way TI follows immediately
after 14 f-block elements. The size and ionization energy of TI are
affected even more by the presence of 14 f electrons, which shield the
nuclear charge even. less effectively. The contraction in size from these
Flock elements is called the lanthanide contraction.

Table 12.4 Tonic and covalent radii and electronegativity values
eee

Metallic Tonic radius Pauling’s
radius ——————— __ electronegativity
M+ M
(A) (A) (A)
B (0.885) (0.27) - 2.0
Al 1.43 0.535 = 1.5
Ga (1.225) 0.620 1.20 1.6
In 1.67 0.800 1.40 17
Tl 1,70 0.885 1.50 1.8

For values in brackets see text.

 
