‘THE GROUP 13 ELEMENTS >

the hair very black, but larger doses cause loss of hair and death ‘Th
toxic because they upset the enzyme systems in the body.

in aqueous solution the TI” fon is much more stable than THU THe
ionic radius of TI" (LS0A) is between that of K (13BAY! deg
Rb* (1.52). For this reason TI* resembles Group 1 ions in aitnbee ‘of
ways. TIOH and TiO are both soluble in water, and are strongly basi.
‘They absorb CO2 from the air, forming ThCOs. The solubility of most of
the salts is slightly lower than for potassium salts. TI* can replace K* in
some enzymes, and can thus be used as a biological tracer in the body.
‘There are some differences. TIOH is yellow, and on heating to 100°C it
turns into black TO, The coordination number of TI* is usvally 6 or 8,
compared wit 6 for Group 1 fons. TIF is soluble in water, but the ante
halides are almost insoluble, There is also some similarity with Ag,
Ti CHissenstve to light. It darkens when exposed to ight rath bke AgC,
but TICL is not soluble in NH,OH whilst AgCl is soluble,

 

 

 

  

COMPOUNDS OF BORON AND OXYGEN; :

Boron sesquioxide and the borates,

‘These are the mest important compounds of boron. Sesqui means one and
a half, so the oxide should have a formula MOyy, or MzOs. All the
elements in the group form sesquioxides when heated in dioxygen, BO;
18 made more conveniently by dehydrting boric acid:

 

swe dhe

HBO HBO," B,05
srthobont weston
aed od

 

B,Os is a typical non-metallic oxide and is acidic in its propels -It is
the anhydride of orthoborie acid, and it reacts with basic (ntetalic)Gkides,
forming sats called borates or metaborates. In the bgrax bead test, BO;
‘or borax Nar{B,0s(OH)4]: SH,0 is heated in a Bunsen burner flame with
‘metal oxides on a loop of platinum wire. The mixtire fuses to give a glass-
like metaborate bead. Metaborate beads of many transition metals have
charactenstic colours, and so this reaction provides a meins of idemtfjing,
the metal, This simple test provided the first proof that vitamin Bx
contained cobalt,

CoO + B,0;——+ Co(BO2):
‘alt metaborate (Be eo)
However, 1t is possible to force B03 to behave as a basic oxide by
reacting with very strongly aide compounds. Thus with P,05 oF As.Os,
boron phosphate or boron arsenate are formed. bey

, BOs +7,0,52070, )°

 

ve
