The Nature
of Molecules

Concept Outline

2.1 Atoms are nature’s building material.

Atoms. All substances are composed of tiny particles called
atoms, each a positively charged nucleus around which orbit
negative electrons.

Electrons Determine the Chemical Behavior of Atoms.
Electrons orbit the nucleus of an atom; the closer an
electron’s orbit to the nucleus, the lower its energy level.

2.2 The atoms of living things are among the smallest.

Kinds of Atoms. Of the 92 naturally occurring elements,
only 11 occur in organisms in significant amounts.

2.3 Chemical bonds hold molecules together.

Tonic Bonds Form Crystals. Atoms are linked together
into molecules, joined by chemical bonds that result from
forces like the attraction of opposite charges or the sharing of
electrons.

Covalent Bonds Build Stable Molecules. Chemical
bonds formed by the sharing of electrons can be very strong,
and require much energy to break.

2.4 Water is the cradle of life.

Chemistry of Water. Water forms weak chemical
associations that are responsible for much of the organization
of living chemistry.

Water Atoms Act Like Tiny Magnets. Because electrons
are shared unequally by the hydrogen and oxygen atoms of
water, a partial charge separation occurs. Each water atom
acquires a positive and negative pole and is said to be “polar.”
Water Clings to Polar Molecules. Because the opposite
partial charges of polar molecules attract one another, water
tends to cling to itself and other polar molecules and to
exclude nonpolar molecules.

Water Ionizes. Because its covalent bonds occasionally
break, water contains a low concentration of hydrogen (H*)
and hydroxide (OH) ions, the fragments of broken water
molecules.

 

FIGURE 2.1

Cells are made of molecules. Specific, often simple, combina-
tions of atoms yield an astonishing diversity of molecules within
the cell, each with unique functional characteristics.

bout 10 to 20 billion years ago, an enormous explo-

sion likely marked the beginning of the universe.
With this explosion began the process of evolution, which
eventually led to the origin and diversification of life on
earth. When viewed from the perspective of 20 billion
years, life within our solar system is a recent development,
but to understand the origin of life, we need to consider
events that took place much earlier. The same processes
that led to the evolution of life were responsible for the
evolution of molecules (figure 2.1). Thus, our study of life
on earth begins with physics and chemistry. As chemical
machines ourselves, we must understand chemistry to
begin to understand our origins.

19
