 

 

L SILICATES OF TECHNOLOGY .

 

445

 

 

brighteners, synthetic ultramarine was used as a blueing agent (called
dolly blue) to make domestic washing appear white by masking “any
yellowness. .

SILICATES IN TECHNOLOGY

Many silicates are used as a direct result of their physical properties. For
example, clay minerals are used for absorbing chemicals, micas are used
for electrical insulation, asbestos is used for thermal insulation, agate and
flint are used as hard or sharp surfaces, and a variety of gemstones are used
for ornaments and jewellery. :

Silicates are extremely important because the cement, ceramic and glass
industries are based on their chemistry. Metallurgical extraction processes
often produce silicates as waste products or slag. either because the
minerals are silicates. or because the minerals contain silicate impurities.
Some of the main technological applications are as follows.

Alkali silicates

These are used mainly as glue, as described earlier.

Cement

Both Portland and high alumina cement are described in Chapter 12. '

Ceramics

Ceramics are inorganic materials that can be made into a paste and shaped
at normal temperatures: the shape is then ‘fired’ at a high temperature.
Firing gives the product strength, either .by sintering the crystallites
together, or partly melting the paste. A number of carbides, oxides, and, in
Particular, clays, are treated in this way. The process is important for
making bricks, tiles and pottery.

On heating, kaolinite Al,(OH)4[Si,Os] loses water at 500-600°C, giving
AlO3:2Si03, and at about 950°C forms a solid solution of mullite
(approximate formula 31,03: 2SiO2) and SiO2. This remains solid till at
least 1595°C, and then softens only slowly. Since this is an iron-free clay,
the product is white. , ,

The porosity of the product depends on the temperature reached. If the
firing temperature is high, the product does not absorb liquids. The
Presence of Fe** in the clay imparts a red or purple colour, and clays with a
high Proportion of CaO give a yellow or buff coloured product. Most
ti except bricks and floor tiles are covered with a glassy coating
Ste he Blaze. This is done by dipping the article in an aqueous suspension
bea Te metal oxide such as SnOz or PbO; before firing. Pigments may
ts 7 ied either before glazing (underglaze colour), or after firing and on

P of the glaze, when a second firing is required.

 
