 

 

Ea

 

 

‘THE GROUP 13 ELEMENTS

 

 

 

Figure 12.1 (3) By
lxiaheron (0) Since of
‘shombohedral bore

‘The (+1) oxidation state soe vot
Gatlum is apparently divalent in a few compounds, such, 2s’ GaCh,
However, Ga is not really divalent, as the structure of GaCls has been
shown to'be Ga"[GaCl]” which contains Ga(l) and Ga(Iit),

 

MELTING POINTS, BOILING POINTS AND STRUCTURES

‘The melting points of the Group 13 elements do not show a regular trend
a did the metals of Groups 1 and 2. The Group 13 values are not sticly
comparable because B and Ga have unusual crystal structu -

‘Boron has an unusual erystal structure which results inthe melting point
being very high. There are at least four different allotropic forms. Boron
thas insufficient electrons to fil the valence shell even after forming bonds.
‘The variety and complexity ofthe allotropic formsllustrates the number of
‘ways in which boron attempts to solve this problem. Other elements solve
this problem by metallic bonding, but small size and high ionization energy
make this impossible for boron. All four allotropic forms, conta
hhedral units with boron atoms at all 12 corners. (Note that an icosahedron
isa regular shape with 12 comers and 20 faces.) In these units twelve B
atoms form a regular shape, and each B atom is bonded to five equivalent
neighbours (ata distance of 1.77 A). The difference between the allotropi
forms arises in the way the icosahedra are bonded together. The simplest‘
form is a-rhombohedral boron. In this, half the atoms are bondéd to one
atom in another icosahedron (ata distance of 1-71 A), and half the atoms
are bonded to atoms in two different icosahedra (at a distance of 2.03),
Plainly thisis neither a regular structure nor a métallicstructure. Only 37%
of space is occupied by the atoms, compared with 74% for a close-packed
arrangement. This shows that icosahedra fill up space ineffectively. The
‘other allotropes have even more complicated structures. *

‘The elements Al, In and Tl all have close-packed metal structures.
Galtiur has an unusual structure. Each metal atom has one close neigh
bour at a distance of 2.43, and six more distant neighbours at distances
‘between 2.70A and 2.79A. This remarkable structure tends towards
discrete diatomic molecules rather than a metallic structure, This accounts
for the incredibly low melting point of gallium of 30°C. Ga is also un-
usual because the liquid expands when it forms the soli, i.e. the solid is

 

 

 

    

 

   

Table 12.3 Melting and boiling points’
Melting point Bowing point
co, co

 

B 3680
al 267 '
Ga 2403

: le 2080.
T 4s?

 

 
