 

 

 

 

[ DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BORON AND THE OTHER ELEMENTS

structures (Figure 12.8) have a closed cage or polyhedron of B atoms,
where each B atom is bonded to three other B atoms and to one Cl atom.
Since B has only three valency electrons there are not enough electrons to
form normal electron pair bonds. It is probable that multi-centre o bonds
cover all the B atoms in the cage.

Al, Ga and In all form monohalides MX in the gas phase at elevated
temperatures, ¢.g.

high
AICI, + 2Al ————> 3AlCl

temperature

These compounds are not very stable, and are covalent.
Thallium forms univalent thallous halides which are more stable tk ~ the
thallium trihalides. This illustrates the inert pair effect, and TIF is ionic.

COMPLEXES

Group 13 elements form complexes much more readily than the s-block
elements, because of their smaller size and increased charge. Tetrahedral
hydride and halide complexes such as Li[AIH,] and H[BF,] have al-
ready been mentioned. In addition many octahedral complexes such as
(GaCi}-, [InClg>- and [TICI.~ are known. The most important
octahedral complexes are those with chelate groups, for example B-
diketones such as acetylacetone, oxalate ions, dicarboxylic acids, pyro-
catechol, and also 8-hydroxyquinoline. (See Figure 12.9.) The latter
complex has been used in the gravimetric determination of aluminium.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN BORON AND THE
OTHER ELEMENTS

Boron differs significantly from the other elements in Group 13, mainly
because the atoms are very small. It is always covalent, and it is non-
metallic. In addition, boron shows a diagonal relationship with silicon in
Group 14.

1, B3Q; is an acidic oxide; like SiO. This is in contrast to Al,O3, which is

amphoteric.

H3BOs, which may be written B(OH), is acidic, whilst Al(OH)3 is

amphoteric. .

Simple borates and silicate ions can polymerize, forming isopolyacids.

Both are built on similar structural principles, namely by sharing oxygen

atoms. Complicated chains, rings, sheets and other structures are

formed in this way. Aluminium forms no analogous compounds.

. The hydrides of B are gaseous, readily hydrolysed and spontaneously in-
flammable. In contrast aluminium hydride is a polymeric solid (AIH3),..
SiH, is gaseous, readily hydrolysed and jnflammable. : :

- Apart from BF3, the halides of B and Si hydrolyse readily and vig-
orously. The aluminium halides are only partly hydrolysed in water.

2.

3.

acetyl acet .ae wort

ov 9
a
‘07 Noy

3
oxalate complex

° ¢
" (
N C)
3
8 hydroxyquinoline complex

Figure 12.9 Some complex
