Stage One: Glycolysis

The metabolism of primitive organisms focused on glu-
cose. Glucose molecules can be dismantled in many ways,
but primitive organisms evolved a glucose-catabolizing
process that releases enough free energy to drive the syn-
thesis of ATP in coupled reactions. This process, called
glycolysis, occurs in the cytoplasm and involves a se-
quence of 10 reactions that convert glucose into 2 three-
carbon molecules of pyruvate (figure 9.7). For each mole-
cule of glucose that passes through this transformation,
the cell nets two ATP molecules by substrate-level phos-
phorylation.

Priming

The first half of glycolysis consists of five sequential reac-
tions that convert one molecule of glucose into two mole-
cules of the three-carbon compound, glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate (G3P). These reactions demand the expenditure
of ATP, so they are an energy-requiring process.

Step A: Glucose priming. Three reactions “prime”
glucose by changing it into a compound that can be
cleaved readily into 2 three-carbon phosphorylated mole-
cules. Two of these reactions require the cleavage of ATP,
so this step requires the cell to use two ATP molecules.
Step B: Cleavage and rearrangement. In the first of
the remaining pair of reactions, the six-carbon product
of step A is split into 2 three-carbon molecules. One is
G3P, and the other is then converted to G3P by the sec-
ond reaction (figure 9.8).

OVERVIEW OF GLYCOLYSIS

1 00000 2
6-carbon glucose
(Starting ome

00008

moe sugar diphosphate

6-carbon sugar diphosphate

2 %y

osb

3-carbon sugar
phosphate

008 25 00d

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3-carbon sugar 3-carbon sugar 3-carbon sugar
phosphate phosphate phosphate
NADH NADH
wel Soe
3 eee) eee)
pyruvate pyruvate

 

Priming reactions. Glycolysis begins
with the addition of energy. Two high-
energy phosphates from two molecules
of ATP are added to the six-carbon
molecule glucose, producing a six-carbon
molecule with two phosphates.

 

 

Cleavage reactions. Then, the six-carbon
molecule with two phosphates is split in
two, forming two three-carbon sugar
phosphates.

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 9.7
How glycolysis works.

164 Part II Energetics

 

Energy-harvesting reactions, Finally, in
a series of reactions, each of the two three-
carbon sugar phosphates is converted to
pyruvate. In the process, an energy-rich
hydrogen is harvested as NADH, and two
ATP molecules are formed.

 

 
