Substrate-Level Phosphorylation

In the second half of glycolysis, five more reactions convert
G3P into pyruvate in an energy-yielding process that gen-
erates ATP. Overall, then, glycolysis is a series of 10 en-
zyme-catalyzed reactions in which some ATP is invested in
order to produce more.
Step C: Oxidation. Two electrons and one proton are
transferred from G3P to NAD*, forming NADH. Note
that NAD* is an ion, and that both electrons in the new
covalent bond come from G3P.
Step D: ATP generation.
G3P into another three-carbon molecule, pyruvate. This
process generates two ATP molecules (see figure 9.5).

Four reactions convert

Because each glucose molecule is split into two G3P
molecules, the overall reaction sequence yields two mol-
ecules of ATP, as well as two molecules of NADH and

two of pyruvate:

4 ATP (2 ATP for each of the 2 G3P molecules in step D)
—2 ATP (used in the two reactions in step A)
2 ATP

Under the nonstandard conditions within a cell, each
ATP molecule produced represents the capture of about 12
kcal (50 kJ) of energy per mole of glucose, rather than the
7.3 traditionally quoted for standard conditions. This
means glycolysis harvests about 24 kcal/mole (100
kJ/mole). This is not a great deal of energy. The total en-
ergy content of the chemical bonds of glucose is 686 kcal
(2870 kJ) per mole, so glycolysis harvests only 3.5% of the
chemical energy of glucose.

Although far from ideal in terms of the amount of en-
ergy it releases, glycolysis does generate ATP. For more
than a billion years during the anaerobic first stages of
life on earth, it was the primary way heterotrophic organ-
isms generated ATP from organic molecules. Like many
biochemical pathways, glycolysis is believed to have
evolved backward, with the last steps in the process being
the most ancient. Thus, the second half of glycolysis, the
ATP-yielding breakdown of G3P, may have been the
original process early heterotrophs used to generate
ATP. The synthesis of G3P from glucose would have ap-
peared later, perhaps when alternative sources of G3P
were depleted.

All Cells Use Glycolysis

The glycolytic reaction sequence is thought to have been
among the earliest of all biochemical processes to evolve. It
uses no molecular oxygen and occurs readily in an anaero-
bic environment. All of its reactions occur free in the cyto-
plasm; none is associated with any organelle or membrane
structure. Every living creature is capable of carrying out

166 Part II Energetics

glycolysis. Most present-day organisms, however, can ex-
tract considerably more energy from glucose through aero-
bic respiration.

Why does glycolysis take place even now, since its en-
ergy yield in the absence of oxygen is comparatively so
paltry? The answer is that evolution is an incremental
process: change occurs by improving on past successes. In
catabolic metabolism, glycolysis satisfied the one essential
evolutionary criterion: it was an improvement. Cells that
could not carry out glycolysis were at a competitive disad-
vantage, and only cells capable of glycolysis survived the
early competition of life. Later improvements in catabolic
metabolism built on this success. Glycolysis was not dis-
carded during the course of evolution; rather, it served as
the starting point for the further extraction of chemical
energy. Metabolism evolved as one layer of reactions
added to another, just as successive layers of paint cover
the walls of an old building. Nearly every present-day or-
ganism carries out glycolysis as a metabolic memory of its
evolutionary past.

Closing the Metabolic Circle: The Regeneration
of NAD+

Inspect for a moment the net reaction of the glycolytic se-
quence:

Glucose +2 ADP +2 Pj + 2 NAD+ —>
2 Pyruvate + 2 ATP + 2 NADH + 2 H+ +2 H,0

You can see that three changes occur in glycolysis: (1) glu-
cose is converted into two molecules of pyruvate; (2) two
molecules of ADP are converted into ATP via substrate
level phosphorylation; and (3) two molecules of NAD* are
reduced to NADH.

The Need to Recycle NADH

As long as food molecules that can be converted into glu-
cose are available, a cell can continually churn out ATP to
drive its activities. In doing so, however, it accumulates
NADH and depletes the pool of NAD* molecules. A cell
does not contain a large amount of NAD*, and for glycoly-
sis to continue, NADH must be recycled into NAD*. Some
other molecule than NAD* must ultimately accept the hy-
drogen atom taken from G3P and be reduced. Two mole-
cules can carry out this key task (figure 9.9):

1. Aerobic respiration. Oxygen is an excellent elec-
tron acceptor. Through a series of electron transfers,
the hydrogen atom taken from G3P can be donated
to oxygen, forming water. This is what happens in the
cells of eukaryotes in the presence of oxygen. Because
air is rich in oxygen, this process is also referred to as
aerobic metabolism.
