 

 

C SILICATES _| [433]
olivine MiSiO,
fst pyroxenes M4(SiO3)2
amphiboles MUALSi)4O11-(OH)2
biotite micas (K,H)2(Mg,Fe'")2(Al,Fe™)2(SiO4)3
orthocase feldspars KAISi;05
muscovite micas KAI2(AISI30 40) (OH) 2
quartz SiOz
last zeolites Na2(Al2Si3010)2H20

(Leaving a small amount of water, SO2, S, Pb, Cu, Ag, Sn, As, Sb, Bi and other transition
metals in solution under a very high temperature and pressure)

Figure 13.6 Sequence in which minerals are thought to have crystallized.

The three most abundant elements are QO. Si and Al. Together they
make up 81% of the earth's crust, that is four out of five atoms are one of
these. This is a much higher abundance than in the earth as a whole or in
the universe. During the cooling of the earth the lighter silicate materials
crystallized and floated to the surface, resulting in the concentration of
silicates in the earth's crust.

N.L. Bowen has summarized the sequence in which these crystalline
minerals appeared as the magma cooled. and this is called Bowen's
Reaction Series (Figure 13.6).

Several points arise:

. The simpler silicate units crystallized first.

2. Hydroxyl groups appear in the later minerals, and F may be substituted
instead of OH.

. Isomorphous replacement, i.e. changing one metal for another without
changing the structure, occurs particularly in the later minerals.

. The orthoclase feldspars, muscovite mica-and quartz are the major
minerals of granite.

. As the silicates cooled further. they shrank and cracked. The hydro-
thermal (hot water) solution moved through the cracks nearer the sur-
face to regions of lower temperature and pressure where the elements
precipitated and then combined with S, forming veins of sulphides.

Soluble silicates

Silicates can be prepared by fusing an alkali metal carbonate with sand in
an electric furnace at about 1400°C. °

1400°C 50.
Na,CO;"*s CO, + NazO “3°, Na,SiO,, (NaSiO;), and others

we Product is a soluble glass of sodium or potassium silicate. It is
issolved in hot water under pressure, and is filtered from any insoluble
peril The composition of the product varies, but is approximately
'a2Si,05 - 6H,0. In 1991, 2.6 million tonnes of soluble sodium silicates
Were produced (measured in terms of SiO, content). They are used in
