 

 

HYDRIDES

 

 

451

 

silicone greatly reduces foaming in sewage disposal. textile dyeing, beer
making (fermentation) and frothing of cooking oil in making potato crisps
or chips. Silicone oils are used as dielectric insulating material in high
voltage transformers. They are also used as hydraulic fluids. Methyl
silicones can be used as light duty lubricating oil, but are not suitable for
heavy duty applications like gearboxes, because the oil film breaks down
under high pressure. Silicones with some phenyl groups are better lubri-
cants. These oils can be mixed with lithium stearate soaps to give greases.
Silicone rubbers are made of long, straight chain polymers, (dimethyl-
polysiloxanes) between 6000 and 600 000 Si units long, mixed with a filler -
usually finely divided SiO. or occasionally graphite. They are usually
produced by hydrolysis of dimethyldichlorosilane with KOH. Great care
must be taken to exclude chain blocking and cross-linking groups. Rubbers
make up about 25% of the silicones produced. Silicone rubbers are useful
because they retain their elasticity from —90°C to +250°C. which is a
, much wider range than for natural, rubber. They are also good electrical
insulators. They may be vulcanized to give hard rubber as follows:

1, By oxidizing with a small amount of benzoyl peroxide which produces
occasional cross-links (up to 1% of the Si atoms may be cross-linked).
2. By building a cross-linking unit into the chain.

The most heat-stable side groups are phenyl groups, followed by the
methyl, ethyl and propyl groups in descending order of stability. On heat-
-ing in air to 350—400°C, silicones are rapidly oxidized and cross-links
are formed. The-polymer becomes brittle and cracks, and low molecular
weight polymers and cyclic structures are evolved. Strong heating in the
absence of air causes silicones to soften and form volatile products, but
oxidation and cross-linking do not occur.

Silicone resins are rigid polymers rather like bakelite. They are made by
dissolving a mixture of PhSiC}, and (Ph).SiCl2 in toluene and hydrolysing
with water. The partly polymerized product is washed to remove HCI, and
can then be shaped or moulded. Finally the product is heated with a

‘quaternary ammonium salt as catalyst to condense any remaining OH

groups in the structure. The final product is extensively cross-linked.
About 12% of silicones produced are resins. These resins are used as
-¢lectrical insulators, often mixed with glass fibre for additional strength.
They are used to make printed circuit boards and to encapsulate integrated
Circuit chips and resistors. They are also used as non-stick coatings for
Pans. and for moulds for car tyres and bread.

HYDRIDES

7 the elements form covalent hydrides. but the number of compounds
formed and the ease with which they form differs greatly. Carbon forms a
vast number of chain and ring compounds including:

L The alkanes (paraffins) C,, Ha,
2. The alkenes (olefines) C,,H:,,

 
