 

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.

23.
24.

PROBLEMS

how is the metal extracted? What is the process called? What is the
function of cryolite in the process? What is aluminium used for?

From the position of Al in the electrochemical series, would you
expect it to be stable in water? Why is it stable in air and water?

Give equations to show the reactions between Al and: (a) Hitq)>
(b) NaOH, (c) No, (d) O2, (e) Ch.

Give two examples of alums. What species are present when these
materials dissolve in water?

How is aluminium chloride prepared? What is its structure when
anhydrous and when dissolved in water? Give an example of the use of
AICI; as a Friedel-Crafts catalyst.

How would you prepare LiH and LiAIH,. What are they used for?

Give two different preparations for Et;Al and describe its use as a
catalyst for polymerizing C,H,. Compare the products formed with
those described in the section on titanium in Chapter 20,

Compare and contrast the chemistry of boron and aluminium.

Give reasons for trivalency and monovalency in Group 13 elements,
and comment on the validity of divalent compounds such as GaCia.

Write notes on the chemistry of thallium in the (+1) oxidation state.

Substance (A) is a yellowish-white deliquescent solid which sublimes
and has a vapour density of 133. (A) reacted violently with water,
forming solution (B). A sample of (B) gave a curdy white precipitate
(C) on addition of dilute HNO; and AgNO; solution, but this readily
dissolved on the addition of dilute NH,OH, though a gelatinous white
Precipitate was formed in its place. (D) was filtered off and dissolved in
excess NaOH, forming a clear solution (E). When CO, was passed
into (E), compound (D) was reprecipitated.

Substance (A) dissolved unchanged in dry ether, and when this
solution was reacted with LiH one of two products (F) or (G) was
formed, depending on whether the LiH was in excess or not.
Qualitative analysis of solution (B) gave a white gelatinous precipitate
in Group III. When 0.1333 g of (A) was dissolved in water and treated
With 8-hydroxyquinoline, 0.4594 g of precipitate was obtained.

Identify the compounds (A) to (G) and give equations for all of the
Teactions.

 

401 |
