 

SOME PROPERTIES OF THALLIUM(I)

 

 

 

373

 

Cement

Aluminium compounds, particularly tricalcium aluminate Ca3Al,0¢, are
very important as constituents of Portland and high alumina cements. The
formula of tricalcium aluminate is better written Cao[AlsO1], because it
contains 12-membered rings of Si—O—Si—O made by joining six AlO,
tetrahedra. Portland cement is made by heating the correct mixture of
limestone (CaCO) with sand (SiOz) and clay (aluminosilicate) at a
temperature of 1450-1600°C in a rotary kiln. When mixed with sand and
water Portland cement sets to give concrete, a hard whitish insoluble solid,
similar in appearance to Portland stone. (Portland stone is limestone
quarried on Portland Bill in Dorset, England.) Between 2% and 5% of
gypsum CaSO, -2H,0 is added to slow down the setting process, as slow
setting greatly increases the strength. The composition of cement is usually
given in terms of the oxides. A typical composition for Portland cement is
CaO 70%, SiOz 20%, Al,O3 5%, Fe2O3 3%, CaSO,-2H2O 2%. Total
world production of cement was 1396 million tonnes in 1993, about 70%
of which was Portland cement.

High alumina cement is made by fusing limestone and bauxite with small
amounts of SiO, and TiO2 at 1400-1500°C in either an open hearth
furnace or a rotary kiln. High alumina cement is more expensive than is
Portland cement, but has one major advantage over Portland cement — it
sets much quicker and develops high strength within one day. It is used to
make beams for bridges and buildings. High alumina cement has good
resistance to sea water and dilute mineral acids. It withstands temperatures
up to 1500°C and so may be used with refractory bricks in furnaces. A
typical analysis of high alumina cement is CaO 40%, Al,O3 40%, SiO,
10%, FeO; 10%. There has been much publicity over structural failures of
beams made of high alumina cement. Failure is due to prolonged exposure
to hot wet conditions, or using too much water when mixing the sand and
cement. This latter results in it setting too quickly ahd thus not having time
to crystallize properly.

Reactions of Ga, In and Tl

Gallium and indium are stable in air and are not attacked by water unless
free oxygen is present. Thallium is a little more reactive and is superficially
oxidized by air. All three metals dissolve in dilute acids, liberating hydro-
gen. Gallium is amphoteric like aluminium, and it dissolves in aqueous
NaOH, liberating Hz and forming gallates. The oxides and hydroxides of
Al and Ga are also amphoteric. In contrast, the oxides and hydroxides of
In and TI are purely basic.
All three metals react with the halogens on gentle warming.

SOME PROPERTIES OF THALLIUM(I)

Thallium) or thallous compounds are well known. They are typically
colourless. They are also extremely poisonous. When ingested, traces turn

 
