 

| TRIHALIDES

 

 

385

 

LiH + AIC, > (AIH), LifAlH,]
‘Li[AIH,] is a most useful organic reducing agent because it will reduce
functional groups, but in general it does not attack double bonds. It is
analogous to the borohydrides but cannot be used in aqueous solutions.
Gallium forms compounds analogous to the borohydrides, e.g.
Li[GaHj]. Indium forms a polymeric hydride (InH3),, but there is some
doubt about the existence of a hydride of thallium.

TRIHALIDES

All the elements form trihalides. The boron halides are covalent. BF; is
gaseous, BCI; liquid and BI; is solid. BF; is by far the most important. It is
a colourless gas, boiling point — 101°C, and is made in large quantities:

BO, + 3CaF, + conc, 3H,SO,“"s2BF; + 3CaSO, + 3H,O

B,O + 6NH,BF, “> 8BF; + 6NH; + 3H,0

Both BF; gas and its complex with diethyl ether (C,Hs)20 — BF; (a
viscous liquid) are commercially available.

The shape of the BF; molecule is a planar triangle with bond angles of
120°. This is predicted by VSEPR theory as the most stable shape for three
outer electron pairs round B. The valence bond theory also predicts a
planar triangle with hybridization of one s and two p orbitals used for
bonding. However, the B atom only has six electrons in its outer shell and
this is termed electron deficient.

Electronic structure of bad 2s 2p

boron atom — excited state

  

i _t
three singly occupied orbitals form bonds
with unpaired electrons from three halogen
atoms — shape plane triangle
(sp? hybridization)

The bond lengths in BF; are 1.30A, and are significantly shorter than the
sum of the covalent radii (B = 0.80A, F = 0.72 A). The bond energy is
very high: 646kJ mol~!, which is higher than for any single bond. The
shortness and strength of the bonds is interpreted in terms of a pu-pn
interaction, that is the bonds possess some double bond character. The
empty 2p: atomic orbital on B which is not involved in hybridization is
Perpendicular to the triangle containing the sp? hybrid orbitals. This pz
orbital May accept an electron pair from a full p, orbital on any one of the
three fluorine atoms. Thus a dative x bond is formed, and the B atom
attains an octet of electrons. If one localized double bond existed, then

 
