Anaerobic Respiration

In the presence of oxygen, cells can respire aerobically,
using oxygen to accept the electrons harvested from food
molecules. In the absence of oxygen to accept the electrons,
some organisms can still respire anaerobically, using inor-
ganic molecules to accept the electrons. For example,
many bacteria use sulfur, nitrate, or other inorganic com-
pounds as the electron acceptor in place of oxygen.

Methanogens. Among the heterotrophs that practice
anaerobic respiration are primitive archaebacteria such as
the thermophiles discussed in chapter 4. Some of these,
called methanogens, use CO) as the electron acceptor, re-
ducing CO) to CH, (methane) with the hydrogens derived

from organic molecules produced by other organisms.

Sulfur Bacteria. Evidence of a second anaerobic respi-
ratory process among primitive bacteria is seen in a
group of rocks about 2.7 billion years old, known as the
Woman River iron formation. Organic material in these
rocks is enriched for the light isotope of sulfur, 32S, rela-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Plasma
membrane

 

Extracellular fluid

 

FIGURE 9.6
An overview of aerobic respiration.

         
    
 

tive to the heavier isotope 34S. No known geochemical
process produces such enrichment, but biological sulfur
reduction does, in a process still carried out today by cer-
tain primitive bacteria. In this sulfate respiration, the
bacteria derive energy from the reduction of inorganic
sulfates (SO4) to H)S. The hydrogen atoms are obtained
from organic molecules other organisms produce. These
bacteria thus do the same thing methanogens do, but
they use SO4 as the oxidizing (that is, electron-accepting)
agent in place of CO.

The sulfate reducers set the stage for the evolution of
photosynthesis, creating an environment rich in HyS. As
discussed in chapter 8, the first form of photosynthesis ob-
tained hydrogens from H)S using the energy of sunlight.

 

In aerobic respiration, the cell harvests energy from
glucose molecules in a sequence of four major
pathways: glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, the Krebs
cycle, and the electron transport chain. Oxygen is the
final electron acceptor. Anaerobic respiration donates
the harvested electrons to other inorganic compounds.

 

 

 

 

 

Mitochondrion

Cytoplasm

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 163
