Stage Two: The Oxidation of Pyruvate

In the presence of oxygen, the oxidation of glucose that be-
gins in glycolysis continues where glycolysis leaves off—
with pyruvate. In eukaryotic organisms, the extraction of
additional energy from pyruvate takes place exclusively in-
side mitochondria. The cell harvests pyruvate’s consider-
able energy in two steps: first, by oxidizing pyruvate to
form acetyl-CoA, and then by oxidizing acetyl-CoA in the
Krebs cycle.

Producing Acetyl-CoA

Pyruvate is oxidized in a single “decarboxylation” reaction
that cleaves off one of pyruvate’s three carbons. This car-
bon then departs as CO} (figure 9.11, top). This reaction
produces a two-carbon fragment called an acetyl group, as
well as a pair of electrons and their associated hydrogen,
which reduce NAD* to NADH. The reaction is complex,
involving three intermediate stages, and is catalyzed
within mitochondria by a multienzyme complex. As chapter
8 noted, such a complex organizes a series of enzymatic
steps so that the chemical intermediates do not diffuse
away or undergo other reactions. Within the complex,
component polypeptides pass the substrates from one en-
zyme to the next, without releasing them. Pyruvate deby-
drogenase, the complex of enzymes that removes CO) from
pyruvate, is one of the largest enzymes known: it contains
60 subunits! In the course of the reaction, the acetyl
group removed from pyruvate combines with a cofactor
called coenzyme A (CoA), forming a compound known as

acetyl-CoA:
Pyruvate + NAD* + CoA —> Acetyl-CoA + NADH + CO,

This reaction produces a molecule of NADH, which is
later used to produce ATP. Of far greater significance than
the reduction of NAD* to NADH, however, is the produc-
tion of acetyl-CoA (figure 9.11, bottom). Acetyl-CoA is im-
portant because so many different metabolic processes gen-
erate it. Not only does the oxidation of pyruvate, an
intermediate in carbohydrate catabolism, produce it, but
the metabolic breakdown of proteins, fats, and other lipids
also generate acetyl-CoA. Indeed, almost all molecules ca-
tabolized for energy are converted into acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-
CoA is then channeled into fat synthesis or into ATP pro-
duction, depending on the organism’s energy
requirements. Acetyl-CoA is a key point of focus for the
many catabolic processes of the eukaryotic cell.

Using Acetyl-CoA

Although the cell forms acetyl-CoA in many ways, only a
limited number of processes use acetyl-CoA. Most of it is
either directed toward energy storage (lipid synthesis, for
example) or oxidized in the Krebs cycle to produce ATP.
Which of these two options is taken depends on the level
of ATP in the cell. When ATP levels are high, the oxida-

168 Part II Energetics

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Glycolysis
Pyruvate
NAD*
NADH
Protein Lipid

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 9.11

The oxidation of pyruvate. This complex reaction involves the
reduction of NAD+ to NADH and is thus a significant source of
metabolic energy. Its product, acetyl-CoA, is the starting material
for the Krebs cycle. Almost all molecules that are catabolized for
energy are converted into acetyl-CoA, which is then channeled
into fat synthesis or into ATP production.

tive pathway is inhibited, and acetyl-CoA is channeled
into fatty acid synthesis. This explains why many animals
(humans included) develop fat reserves when they con-
sume more food than their bodies require. Alternatively,
when ATP levels are low, the oxidative pathway is stimu-
lated, and acetyl-CoA flows into energy-producing oxida-
tive metabolism.

 

In the second energy-harvesting stage of glucose
catabolism, pyruvate is decarboxylated, yielding acetyl-
CoA, NADH, and CO). This process occurs within the
mitochondrion.

 
