 

TETRAHALIDES

radiation from reaching the earth. Excessive exposure to UV radiation
should be avoided as it causes skin cancer (melanoma) in humans.

In the upper atmosphere Freons undergo a photolytic reaction and
produce free chlorine atoms (which are radicals). These react readily with
ozone. The CIO radicals formed decompose slowly, re-forming chlorine
radicals, which react with more ozone. . .and so on. The chlorine radicals
do not recombine to form Cl, because they need a three-body collision to
dissipate the energy, and such collisions are extremely rare in the upper
atmosphere. There is no effective sink for chlorine radicals. Once formed
they are used again and again, so a small number of radicals make a very
effective scavenger for ozone.

CFC]
crc Prowiss cl
CF;Cl

cl +0; 0, + clo
L

 
  
  

clo——> Cl+O
clo +O Cl + O,

Overall reaction: 20; + 302

Several less harmful aerosol propellants are now in use. Hydrofluoro-
carbons (HFCs) such as CH2FCF; and hydrochlorofiuorocarbons (HCFCs)
such as CHCI,CF; are being used as substitutes. They are also greenhouse
gases, and may damage the ozone layer, but they do less damage than
CFCs because they do not remain in the atmosphere for so long. The H
atoms are attacked by hydroxy] radicals in the upper atmosphere, forming
trifluoroacetic acid. The latter is not very toxic, and is eventually decom-
posed by bacteria in the soil. CO, is an alternative propellant, but when
cold it has a low vapour pressure and is therefore no use for windscreen

de-icers. Butane also gives difficulties, since it is flammable, and cannot
be used with food.

Silicon

The silicon halides can be prepared by heating either Si or SiC with the
appropriate halogen. In marked contrast to the inertness of CF,, CCl,
and the Freons, SiF, is readily hydrolysed by alkali.

SiF, + 80H™ > SiO” + 4F~ + 4H,O
The silicon halides are rapidly hydrolysed by water to give silicic acid.
SiCl, + 4H,O — Si(OH), + 4HCI
In the case of the tetrafluoride, a secondary reaction occurs between the

israee HF and the unchanged SiF,, forming the hexafluorosilicate ion
IF.

| [459]
