 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

 

 

OCCURRENCE OF THE ELEMENTS

The elements are all well known, apart from germanium. Carbon is the
seventeenth, and silicon the second most abundant element by weight in
the earth’s crust (Table 13.2). Germanium minerals are very rare. Ge
occurs as traces in the ores of other metals and in coal, but it is not well
known. Both Si and Ge are important for making semiconductors and
transistors. Though the abundances of tin and lead are comparatively low,
they occur as concentrated ores which are easy to extract, and both metals
have been well known since before Biblical times.

Carbon occurs in large quantities combined with other elements and
compounds mainly as coal, crude oil, and carbonates in rocks such as
calcite CaCO, and magnesite MgCO; and dolomite [MgCO3-CaCOs3].

Table 13.2 Abundance of the elements in the-
earth's crust by weight

 

 

ppm Relative abundance
Cc 180 17
Si 272000 2
Ge 15 54
Sn 21 49 =
Pb 133 36

 

Carbon is also found in the native form: large amounts of graphite are
mined, and extremely small quantities (in tonnage terms) of diamonds are
mined too! Both CO, and CO are important industrially. CO, occurs in
small amounts in the atmosphere, but this is important as CO; has a vital
role in the carbon cycle with photosynthesis and respiration. CO is an
important fuel, and forms some interesting carbonyl complexes. Silicon
occurs very widely, as silica SiO (sand and quartz), and in a wide variety
of silicate minerals and clays. Germanium is only found as traces in some
silver and zinc ores, and in some types of coal. Tin is mined as cassiterite
SnO;, and lead is found as the ore galena PbS.

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS
Carbon

Carbon black (soot) is produced in large amounts (4.5 million tonnes in
1991). It is made by the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons from
natural bas or oil. The particle size is very small. Over 90% is used in the
tubber industry to make car tyres. Its other main use is in newspaper ink.
nok is produced in very large amounts (390 million tonnes in 1991).
eee hundred and thirty-nine million tonnes were produced by high
temperature carbonization of coal, in which coal is heated in large ovens
7 the absence of air. Fifty-one million tonnes were produced by distilling

favier petroleum oils. Coke is extremely important in the metallurgical

continued overleaf

 

 

[403]
