 

CC OXIDES OF SILICON

 

 

amorphous, and contains a disordered mixture of rings, chains and three-
dimensional units.

Silica in any form is unreactive. It is an acidic oxide and so does not react
with acids. However, it does react with HF, forming silicon tetrafluoride
SiFs. This reaction is used in qualitative analysis to detect silicates: when
the SiF, comes into contact with a drop of water it is hydrolysed to silicic
acid. This can be seen as a white solid forming on the surface of the drop of
water.

H,80, + CaF, > HF 72° sir, 89. HF + {
+ H,0

SiO, is an acidic oxide: it dissolves slowly in aqueous alkali, and more rap-
idly in fused alkalis MOH or fused carbonates MjCOs, forming silicates.

SiO, + NaOH — (Na2SiOs), and Na,SiOg

This reaction accounts for ground glass stoppers sticking in reagent bottles
containing NaOH. Of the halogens, only fluorine attacks SiO2.

SiO2 + 2F2 > SiF; + O2

Quartz is important as a piezo-electric material for the crystals in
gramophone pickups, for cigarette and gas lighters and for making crystal
oscillators for radios and computers. There is insufficient natural quartz of
high enough purity, and so it is made synthetically by hydrothermal growth
of seed crystals from aqueous NaOH and vitreous silica at 400°C under
pressure.

Vitreous silica has a low coefficient of expansion, is quite resistant to
shock, and is very transparent to visible and ultraviolet light. It is used for
laboratory glassware, and for optical components such as lenses and prisms
and cells to hold samples in UV-visible spectrophotometers.

; Silica gel is amorphous and very porous. It is obtained by dehydrating
silicic acid, and contains about 4% water. It is widely used as a drying
agent, a catalyst, and in chromatography. The mineral opal, which is used
as a white or pearl-like gemstone, is hard (amorphous) silica gel. The
beginnings of ordered structures are shown by various minerals, many of
which are cut and polished as gemstones:

agate (often banded colours)

onyx (often white and black bands)

carnelian (yellow or red)

bloodstone (green with red spots)

jasper (usually red or brown but sometimes green, blue or yellow)
flint (colourless-or black if C present)

Si(OH), or
SiO2-2H,O

These are best written SiO2- nH 0.

Kieselguhr is another form of SiO3. It is a fine white powder, and about
2 million tonnes/year are obtained by open cast mining in Europe and
North America. It is used in filtration plants, as an abrasive, and as an inert
