 

 

382

 

‘THE GROUP 15 ELEMENTS

 

 

 

yAbOs 1s made by dehydrating Al(OH): below 450°C and in con
trast to d ALO it dissolves in acids absorbs water and 1s used for
chromatography

Fibrous ALOn 1s made commercally by ICI and Du Pont Fibres bf
‘ALO and (Z10,) are sold under the trade name Safil These fibres feel
Iike silk are 2-5em in Jength and are 1/20th the diameter of a human
hhatr The fibres are hollow and are fexible though they have a high
tensile strength in addition they ere chemically inert and withstand pro
longed heating up to 1400°C ‘The fibres can be woven unto ropes or
fabric. and are also used for making chemically inert paper and a support
for catalysts Fibres are also used to strengthen certain metals (Mg Al
and Pb) for example Al reinforced by 50% fibre 1s five times siffer than
pure Al Fibres also have excellent thermal and electrical insulating
properties

‘Alumina 1s white but 1t can be coloured by the addition of C150, or
Fe,Oy White sapphires are gem quality corundum Synthetic rubies can'be
made by strongly heating a muxture of AbOx and CrsOy for example man
‘oxy hydrogen flame Rubies are very hard and are used for jewellery and
to make bearings in watches and instruments: Thus ruby 1s a mixed oxide
Blue sapphires are another mixed oxide containing traces of Fe"* Fe”
and Ti!*_ ‘The mineral spinel MgAlsOs 1s another mixed oxide It gwes its
name to the structure adopted by many M'M'"O, compounds

Alurninnum has a very strong affiity for oxygen The enthalpy vf Forma
tion of ALO: 15 ~1670KS mol ', higher (more negative) than for practi
‘ally ll other metal oxides. Thus Al may be used in the thermute reductio#
of less stable metal oxides

3Mn,O, + 8AL—+ 4A10, + 9Mn

‘Qualitative analysis of aluminsum ‘
Jn quahtauve analysis ACOH). 1s precipitated as 2 white gelatinous
substance when NH,OH 1s added to the solution (efter previously
Femoving acid insoluble sulphides with HS) Fe(OH), C(OH). and
‘Za(OH); ate also precipitated. but Fe(OH). 1s brown Cr(OH)s grey
green of grey-blue Zn(OH). 1s white like AI(OH), but tus not gela
‘unous Zn(OH); dissolves in excess NHOH whereas Al(OH), does not
‘A confirmatory test for aluminium 1s the formation of a fed precipitate
from A(OH), and the dye aluminon

' cot

Amphotene behaviour — alumunates :

Al(OH), s amphotenc It resets prneplly a5 a base ye xt reacts with
acids to form salts that contain the {AU(H{O}P* ton. However AIH).
shows some acidic properties when t dissolves p NaOH. forming sodium
aluminate (However, Al(OH) 1s repreciptated bythe addition of carbon
dhoude- showing thatthe acdie properties are very weak )
