 

L STRUCTURE AND ALLOTROPY OF THE ELEMENTS

_] [407]

 

some time the air is turned off and heating is continued, and the mixture
undergoes self-reduction.
heat in heat in

3PbS ~~" PbS + 2PLO ————> 3Pbguay + SOzgas)

or absence of air

The metal contains a number of metallic impurities: Cu, Ag, Au, Sn, As,
Sb, Bi and Zn. These are removed by cooling to near the freezing point of
Pb, when first Cu and then Zn containing most of the Ag and Au solidify.
Preferential oxidation converts As, Sb and Sn to As,O3, Sb2O3, and SnO
which float on the surface of the molten metal and may be skimmed off.
World production of Pb was 5.3 million tonnes in 1992. Of this, 3.1
million tonnes was primary production from PbS. The main sources of
ores are Australia 19%, the USA 13%, Canada 11% and China 10%. The
recycling of scrap lead yielded 2.2 million tonnes. About 55% of the
Pb produced is used to make lead/acid storage batteries. More than 158
million car batteries were produced in 1985. In these the supporting grid
for the electrodes is made of an alloy of 91% Pb and 9% Sb. The active
anode material is PbO2, and the cathode material is spongy Pb. Over 80%
of ‘battery lead’ is recovered from worn-out batteries and recycled. About
15% of lead production is used for lead sheets, lead pipes and solder. The
manufacture of PbEt, as an additive to petrol at one time used 10-20%,
but this is declining rapidly. About 10% is used in paints and pigments.
Red lead paint containing Pb3O, is used for rustproofing metal and white
lead (PbCO3)2- Pb(OH)2 was at one time widely used as an opacifier in
paint. Their use has declined because lead is toxic, and TiOz is a good
alternative opacifier. Calcium plumbate CajPbO, is used for rustproofing
corrugated steel sheets, and PbCrO, is used as a strong yellow pigment
for road signs and markings. Lead compounds are also included in crown
| glass and cut glass, and in ceramic glazes.

 

STRUCTURE AND ALLOTROPY OF THE ELEMENTS

Carbon exists in a large number of allotropic forms. These include dia-
mond, a- and B-graphite, a rare hexagonal form of diamond, and a variety
of discrete molecules such as Ceo, which are really clusters of carbon
atoms, and are called collectively fullerenes.

Si, Ge and Sn also have a diamond type of structure, though Sn exists as
a metallic form. Pb exists only in the metallic form. Ge is unusual because

the liquid expands when it forms the solid. This property is unique to Ga,
Ge and Bi.

132°C
a-Sn === B-Sn
grey tn white tin

(diamond structure) (metallic)

Diamond is extremel

n ly unreactive, and in contrast graphite is quit
Teactive, Brap ame

 
