Harvesting Energy by Extracting
Electrons

To understand how cells direct some of the energy released
during glucose catabolism into ATP production, we need
to take a closer look at the electrons in the C—H bonds of
the glucose molecule. We stated in chapter 8 that when an
electron is removed from one atom and donated to an-
other, the electron’s potential energy of position is also
transferred. In this process, the atom that receives the elec-
tron is reduced. We spoke of reduction in an all-or-none
fashion, as if it involved the complete transfer of an elec-
tron from one atom to another. Often this is just what hap-
pens. However, sometimes a reduction simply changes the
degree of sharing within a covalent bond. Let us now revisit
that discussion and consider what happens when the trans-
fer of electrons is incomplete.

A Closer Look at Oxidation-Reduction

The catabolism of glucose is an oxidation-reduction reac-
tion. The covalent electrons in the C—H bonds of glucose
are shared approximately equally between the C and H
atoms because carbon and hydrogen nuclei have about the
same affinity for valence electrons (that is, they exhibit sim-
ilar electronegativity). However, when the carbon atoms of
glucose react with oxygen to form carbon dioxide, the elec-
trons in the new covalent bonds take a different position.
Instead of being shared equally, the electrons that were as-
sociated with the carbon atoms in glucose shift far toward
the oxygen atom in CO) because oxygen is very electroneg-
ative. Since these electrons are pulled farther from the car-
bon atoms, the carbon atoms of glucose have been oxidized
(loss of electrons) and the oxygen atoms reduced (gain of
electrons). Similarly, when the hydrogen atoms of glucose
combine with oxygen atoms to form water, the oxygen
atoms draw the shared electrons strongly toward them;
again, oxygen is reduced and glucose is oxidized. In this re-
action, oxygen is an oxidizing (electron-attracting) agent
because it oxidizes the atoms of glucose.

Releasing Energy

The key to understanding the oxidation of glucose is to
focus on the energy of the shared electrons. In a covalent
bond, energy must be added to remove an electron from an
atom, just as energy must be used to roll a boulder up a hill.
The more electronegative the atom, the steeper the energy
hill that must be climbed to pull an electron away from it.
However, energy is released when an electron is shifted
away from a less electronegative atom and closer to a more
electronegative atom, just as energy is released when a
boulder is allowed to roll down a hill. In the catabolism of
glucose, energy is released when glucose is oxidized, as
electrons relocate closer to oxygen (figure 9.14).

172 Part IMI Energetics

Glucose is an energy-rich food because it has an abun-
dance of C—H bonds. Viewed in terms of oxidation-
reduction, glucose possesses a wealth of electrons held far
from their atoms, all with the potential to move closer to-
ward oxygen. In oxidative respiration, energy is released
not simply because the hydrogen atoms of the C—H
bonds are transferred from glucose to oxygen, but be-
cause the positions of the valence electrons shift. This
shift releases energy that can be used to make ATP.

Harvesting the Energy in Stages

It is generally true that the larger the release of energy in
any single step, the more of that energy is released as heat
(random molecular motion) and the less there is available
to be channeled into more useful paths. In the combustion
of gasoline, the same amount of energy is released whether
all of the gasoline in a car’s gas tank explodes at once, or
whether the gasoline burns in a series of very small explo-
sions inside the cylinders. By releasing the energy in gaso-
line a little at a time, the harvesting efficiency is greater and

Electrons from food

  

Energy for
synthesis of

\S

 

Low energy

<6 |

Formation of water

FIGURE 9.14

How electron transport works. This diagram shows how ATP is
generated when electrons transfer from one energy level to
another. Rather than releasing a single explosive burst of energy,
electrons “fall” to lower and lower energy levels in steps, releasing
stored energy with each fall as they tumble to the lowest (most
electronegative) electron acceptor.
