 

CARBON, SILICON AND THE REMAINING ELEMENTS

electron forms a m bond. The x electrons are delocalized over the whole
sheet, and as they are mobile, graphite conducts electricity. Conduction
can occur in a sheet, but not from one sheet to another. |

Graphite is thermodynamically more stable than diamond, and its free
energy of formation is 1.9kJ mol"! lower at room temperature and
ordinary pressure. Thermodynamically it is favourable for diamonds to
turn into graphite. They do not normally do so because there isa high
energy of activation for the process. If this activation energy is available,
the change does occur, and diamond tipped drills do burn out and form
graphite if they get too hot. The reverse process is not thermodynamically
possible, and it requires very forcing high energy conditions to convert
graphite to diamond. Graphite can be converted to synthetic diamonds at
1600°C by a pressure of 50000-60000 atmospheres.

When an electric spark is struck between graphite electrodes, soot is
produced. (An atmosphere of argon is required to prevent the formation
of CO, and CO.) This soot is mainly carbon black, but contains significant
amounts of a Cg carbon cluster compound sometimes called buckminster
fullerene. Smaller amounts of other similar fullerenes C32, Csp, C70, C76
and Cg, may also be produced. The fullerenes are easily extracted from
the soot by dissolving them in benzene or hydrocarbon solvents, giving a
wine red solution and finally mustard-coloured crystals. The different
compounds are separated chromatographically.

This isomer of carbon differs from diamond and graphite (which form
lattices), in that the fullerenes form discrete molecules. The Cg molecule
looks rather like a soccer ball, and is sometimes called ‘a bucky ball’.
It consists of a fused system of five- and six-membered rings (Figure
13.3). Fullerenes are covalent; hence their solubility in organic solvents.
However, they can easily be reduced electrochemically, and react with
Group 1 metals, forming solids such as K3Cgo. This compound behaves as
a superconductor below 18K, which means that it carries an electric
current with zero resistance. Cgg reacts with OsO,, which adds across one
of the double bonds in the cage. It also forms platinum complexes.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN CARBON, SILICON AND THE
REMAINING ELEMENTS

In general, the first element in a group differs from the rest of the group
because of its smaller size and higher electronegativity. These result in the
first clement having a higher ionization energy, being more covalent,.and
being less metallic,

Using the classical theory of bonding, the first atom is limited to forming
@ maximum of four covalent bonds, because only s and p orbitals are
malable for bonding. This would limit the coordination number to 4 in
fo se Compounds. The majority of carbon compounds are either three- or
ur-coordinate. However, multi-centre bonds are now well established,

a a number of compounds are known where carbon has higher co-
Tdination numbers, as shown in Table 13.3.

 

 

Figure 13.3 Structure of
buckminster fullerene.
