Stage Three: The Krebs Cycle

After glycolysis catabolizes glucose to produce pyruvate,
and pyruvate is oxidized to form acetyl-CoA, the third
stage of extracting energy from glucose begins. In this third
stage, acetyl-CoA is oxidized in a series of nine reactions
called the Krebs cycle. These reactions occur in the matrix
of mitochondria. In this cycle, the two-carbon acetyl group
of acetyl-CoA combines with a four-carbon molecule called
oxaloacetate (figure 9.12). The resulting six-carbon mole-
cule then goes through a sequence of electron-yielding oxi-
dation reactions, during which two CO) molecules split off,
restoring oxaloacetate. The oxaloacetate is then recycled to
bind to another acetyl group. In each turn of the cycle, a
new acetyl group replaces the two CO) molecules lost, and

more electrons are extracted to drive proton pumps that
generate ATP.

Overview of the Krebs Cycle

The nine reactions of the Krebs cycle occur in two steps:

Step A: Priming. Three reactions prepare the six-
carbon molecule for energy extraction. First, acetyl-
CoA joins the cycle, and then chemical groups are
rearranged.

Step B: Energy extraction.
in this step are oxidations in which electrons are re-
moved, and one generates an ATP equivalent directly by
substrate-level phosphorylation.

Four of the six reactions

OVERVIEW OF THE KREBS CYCLE

1 vo 2
CoA
(AcetyFCOA) Coa

y -

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C000 ©CCOCO
4-carbon molecule 4-carbon molecule
(Starting material) 6-carbon molecule 6-carbon molecule (Starting material)

NADH
NADH]
Oo
CO, FADHa
COO QO000
4-carbon molecule _5-carbon molecule 4-carbon molecule
NADH
Qo
CO

 

The Krebs cycle begins when a two-
carbon fragment is transferred from
acetyl-CoA to a four-carbon molecule
(the starting material).

 

 

 

FIGURE 9.12

How the Krebs cycle works.

 

Then, the resulting six-carbon mole-
cule is oxidized (a hydrogen removed
to form NADH) and decarboxylated

(a carbon removed to form CO,). Next,
the fivecatbon molecules onideed
and decarboxylated again, and a
coupled reaction generates ATP.

 

Finally, the resulting four-carbon molecule
is further oxidized (hydrogens removed
to form FADH, and NADH). This
regenerates the four-carbon starting
material, completing the cycle.

 

 

 

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy

 

169
