 

INERT PAIR EFFECT

 

413

 

CHEMICAL REACTIVITY 1

The elements in this group are relatively unreactive, but reactivity
increases down the group. The M'' oxidation state becomes increasingly
stable on descending the group. Pb often appears more noble (unreactive)
than expected from its standard electrode potential of —0.13 volts., The
unreactiveness is partly due to a surface coating of oxide, and partly due
to the high overpotential for the reduction of H* to H2 at a Pb surface.
The production of H; from H* at a lead electrode is kinetically unfavour-
able, so a much larger potential is required than the standard reduction
potential. .

C. Si and Ge are unaffected by water. Sn reacts with steam to give SnOz
and Hy. Pb is unaffected by water, probably because of a protective oxide
film.

C. Siand Ge are unaffected by dilute acids. Sn dissolves in dilute HNO,,
torming Sn(NO3)2. Pb dissolves slowly in dilute HCI. forming the sparingly
soluble PbCl, and quite readily in dilute HNOs, forming Pb(NO3)2 and

oxides of nitrogen. Pb also dissolves in organic acids (e.g. acetic, citric and ,

oxalic acids). Pb does not dissolve in dilute H2SO, because a surface
coating of PbSO, is formed.

Diamond is unaffected by concentrated acids, but graphite reacts with
hot concentrated HNO , forming mellitic acid, and with a mixture of
hot concentrated HF/HNOQ,, forming graphite oxide. Si is oxidized and
fluorinated by concentrated HF/HNO3. Ge dissolves slowly in hot con-
centrated H2SO, and in HNO. Sn dissolves in several concentrated acids.
Pb does not dissolve in concentrated HCl because a surface coating of
PbCl, is formed.

Cis unaffected by alkalis. Si reacts slowly with cold aqueous solutions
of NaOH. and readily with hot solutions, giving solutions of silicates
[SiO,}*~. Sn and Pb are slowly attacked by cold alkali, and rapidly by hot
alkali, giving stannates Na2{Sn(OH),] and plumbates Naj[Pb(OH).]. Thus
Sn and Pb are amphoteric.

Diamond does not react with the halogens, but graphite reacts with F, at
500°C, forming intercalation compounds or graphite fluoride (CF),,. Si and
Ge react readily with all the halogens, forming volatile halides SiX, and
GeX,. Sn and Pb are less reactive. Sn reacts with Clz and Bry in the cold,
and with F) and I, on warming, giving SnX,4. Pb reacts with F, in the cold,
forming PbF3, and with Cl) on heating, giving PbCl).

INERT PAIR EFFECT

The inert pair effect shows itself increasingly in the heavier members of the
Stroup. There is a decrease in stability of the (+1V) oxidation state and an
increase in the stability of the (+II) state on descending the group.
Ge( +11) Is a strong reducing agent whereas Ge(+IV) is stable. Sn(+II)
eXists as simple ions which are strongly reducing but Sn(+IV) is covalent
and stable. Pb(+I1) is ionic. stable and more common than Pb(+IV),

 
