 

METALLIC AND NON-METALLIC CHARACTER

forming M** ions, but the ionization energy is too high for the other
elements to do so. Both SbF; and BiF; exist as ionic solids. The M** ions
are not very stable in solution. They can exist in fairly strong acid solutions,
but are rapidly hydrolysed in water to give the antimony oxide ion or
bismuth oxide ion SbO* and BiO*. This change is reversed by adding
5M HCl.

H;,0
Bist == [BiO]*
Hcl

BiCl, + H,O = BiOC! + 2HCI

Nitrogen atoms may gain three electrons and so attain a noble gas
configuration, forming ionic nitrides containing the N*~ jon. It takes
2125kJ mol~! of energy to form N?~. Thus ionic nitrides are formed only
by metals which have low ionization energies and can form nitrides with
high lattice energies (LisN, Bes;N2, Mg3N2, Cas3N2). Though compounds
such as Na3P and Na3Bi are known, these are not ionic. .

Nitrogen cannot extend its coordination number beyond 4 because there
are only four orbitals available in the second shell of electrons. Thus
nitrogen cannot form complexes by accepting electron pairs from other
ligands, but the subsequent elements can form such complexes. Thus the
other elements may have coordination numbers of 5 or 6 as, for example,
in PCls gas and [PCl.]~. The formation of complexes may be explained
by involving one or two d orbitals in bonding. Thus sp°d or sp?d?
hybridization may occur. The 3d orbitals of an isolated phosphorus atom
are much larger than the 3s and 3p orbitals. This might at first sight suggest
that the use of the 3d orbitals for bonding is improbable. However, when
electronegative ligands are placed round the phosphorus atom, the 3d
orbitals contract to nearly the same size as the 3s and 3p orbitals. (The
extent of d orbital participation in o bonding is controversial and is
discussed in Chapter 4.)

Nitrogen also differs from the other elements in that it can form strong
pn-pr multiple bonds. Because of this it forms several compounds which
have No counterparts in the other elements. These include nitrates NO3,
nitrites NO, azides Ny, dinitrogen N>, oxides of nitrogen NO, NO,
NO, N20,, cyanides CN~, and azo and diazo compounds. Because nitro-
gen can form multiple bonds, the oxides N.O3'and NOs are monomeric,
whilst the trioxides and pentoxides of the other elements are dimeric.

METALLIC AND NON-METALLIC CHARACTER

eee I shows the usual trend, that metallic character increases on de-

ioide i . group. Thus N and P are non-metals, As and Sb are metal-

ing + Which s| ow many metallic properties, and Bi is a true metal. The
Teasing metallic character is shown by the following:

 

477
