2.1 Atoms are nature’s building material.

Atoms

Any substance in the universe that has
mass (see below) and occupies space is
defined as matter. All matter is com-

posed of extremely small particles ©

called atoms. Because of their size,
atoms are difficult to study. Not until
early in this century did scientists
carry out the first experiments sug-
gesting what an atom is like.

The Structure of Atoms

Objects as small as atoms can be
“seen” only indirectly, by using very
complex technology such as tunneling
microcopy. We now know a great
deal about the complexities of atomic
structure, but the simple view put
forth in 1913 by the Danish physicist
Niels Bohr provides a good starting
point. Bohr proposed that every atom
possesses an orbiting cloud of tiny
subatomic particles called electrons
whizzing around a core like the plan-
ets of a miniature solar system. At the
center of each atom is a small, very
dense nucleus formed of two other
kinds of subatomic particles, protons
and neutrons (figure 2.2).

Within the nucleus, the cluster of
protons and neutrons is held together
by a force that works only over short
subatomic distances. Each proton car-
ries a positive (+) charge, and each
electron carries a negative (-) charge.
Typically an atom has one electron
for each proton. The number of protons (the atom’s
atomic number) determines the chemical character of the
atom, because it dictates the number of electrons orbiting
the nucleus which are available for chemical activity. Neu-
trons, as their name implies, possess no charge.

 

  

FIGURE 2.2

 

Atomic Mass

The terms mass and weight are often used interchangeably,
but they have slightly different meanings. Mass refers to the
amount of a substance, while weight refers to the force
gravity exerts on a substance. Hence, an object has the
same mass whether it is on the earth or the moon, but its

20. PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

Proton (©)

(Positive charge)

 

 

Hydrogen
1 Proton
1 Electron

 

 

  

Oxygen

8 Protons
8 Neutrons
8 Electrons

 

Electron ©

Neutron ©)

(No charge) (Negative charge)

Basic structure of atoms. All atoms have a nucleus consisting of protons and neutrons,
except hydrogen, the smallest atom, which has only one proton and no neutrons in its
nucleus. Oxygen, for example, has eight protons and eight neutrons in its nucleus. Electrons
spin around the nucleus a far distance away from the nucleus.

weight will be greater on the earth because the earth’s grav-
itational force is greater than the moon’s. The atomic
mass of an atom is equal to the sum of the masses of its
protons and neutrons. Atoms that occur naturally on earth
contain from 1 to 92 protons and up to 146 neutrons.

The mass of atoms and subatomic particles is measured
in units called daltons. To give you an idea of just how small
these units are, note that it takes 602 million million billion
(6.02 x 1023) daltons to make 1 gram! A proton weighs ap-
proximately 1 dalton (actually 1.009 daltons), as does a neu-
tron (1.007 daltons). In contrast, electrons weigh only q_by of
a dalton, so their contribution to the overall mass of an atom
is negligible.
