 

 

STRUCTURE AND ALLOTROPY OF THE ELEMENTS

 

54

 

 

 

molecular orbital theory. The structure is described (see ‘Examples of
molecular orbital treatment’ in Chapter 4).

Liquid dioxygen is pale blue in colour, and the solid is also blue. The
colour arises from electronic transitions which excite the ground state
(a triplet state) to a singlet state. This transition is ‘forbidden’ in gase-
ous dioxygen..In liquid or solid dioxygen a single photon may collide with
two molecules simultaneously and promote both to excited states, ab-
sorbing red-yellow-green light, so Oz appears blue. The origin of the
excited singlet states in O2 lies in the arrangement of electrons in the
antibonding x*2py and x*2p, molecular orbitals, and is shown below.

 

Second excited state "Py T'Ps State Energy/kJ
(electrons have tl singlet pa 15)
opposite spins)

First excited state ful] singlet 1 92
(electrons paired) 1 o 4s

Ground state _

(electrons have t jt | tplet or 0

 

 

 

 

parallel spins)

Singlet O. is excited, and is much more reactive than normal ground
state triplet dioxygen. Singlet dioxygen can be generated photochemically
by irradiating normal dioxygen in the presence of a sensitizer such as fluor-
escein, methylene blue or some polycyclic hydrocarbons. Singiet dioxygen
can also be made chemically:

_ EtOH 1 -
H,02 + OCI-——> 0, ('A,) + HO + Cl
Singlet dioxygen can add to a diene molecule in the 1,4 positions, rather
like a Diels—Alder reaction. It may add 1,2 to an alkene which can be
cleaved into two carbonyl compounds.

Singlet dioxygen may be involved in biological oxidations.

Ozone O; is the triatomic allotrope of oxygen. It is unstable, and de-
composes to O,. The structure of O; is angular, with an O—O—O bond
angle of 116°48'. Both O—O bond lengths are 1.28 A, which is intermedi-
ate between a single bond (1.48 A in HO.) and a double bond (1.21 A in
2). (The structure of O3 is described near the end of Chapter 4.) The
older valence bond representation as resonance hybrids is now seldom
used. The structure is described as the central O atom using sp* hybrid
orbitals to bond to the terminal O atoms. The central atom has one lone
pair, and the terminal O atoms have two lone pairs. This leaves four elec-
trons for 1 bonding. The Pz atomic orbitals from the three atoms form
three delocalized molecular orbitals covering all three atoms. One MO 1s
bonding, one non-bonding, and one antibonding. The four 1 electrons fill
ne bonding and non-bonding MOs and thus contribute one delocalized
bond to the molecule in addition to the two o bonds. Thus the bond order
is 1.5, and the m system is described as a four-electron three-centre bond.

Sulphur

pulpkar has more allotropic forms than any other element. These different
‘orms arise partly from the extent to which S has polymerized, and partly

CH, CH) +5i

CH—CH
