 

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF OXIDES _

similar to the size of the p orbital. Thus sulphur forms stronger m bonds
than the larger elements in the group. On crossing a period in the periodic
table, the nuclear charge is increased and more s and p electrons are
added. Since these s and p electrons shield the nuclear charge incom-
pletely, the size of the atom and the size of the d orbitals decreases from
Si to P to S to Cl. The decrease in the size of the 3d orbitals in this series
of elements leads to progressively stronger px—dn bonds. Thus in the
silicates there is hardly any pn—dn bonding. Thus SiO, units polymerize
into an enormous variety of structures linked by Si—O—Si o bonds. In
the phosphates, m bonding is stronger, but a large number of polymeric
phosphates exist. In the oxoacids of sulphur, x bonding is even stronger
and has become a dominant factor. Thus only a small amount of pol-
ymerization occurs, and only a few polymeric compounds are known
with S—O—S linkages. For chlorine, px—dn bonding is so strong that
no polymerization of oxoanions occurs.

In cases where there is more than one x bond in the molecule it may
be more appropriate to explain the m bonding in terms of delocalized
molecular orbitals covering several atoms.

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN OXYGEN AND
THE OTHER ELEMENTS

Oxygen differs from the rest of the group in that it is more electronegative
and therefore more ionic in its compounds.

Hydrogen bonding is very important for O compounds, but it is only
recently that weak hydrogen bonds involving S have been proved to exist.

The absence of higher valency states and the limitation to a coordination
number of 4 are a consequence of the limitation of the second shell to eight
electrons. The other elements can have a coordination number of 6 by
using d orbitals.

Oxygen can use pz orbitals to form strong double bonds. The other
elements can also form double bonds, but these become weaker as the
atomic number increases.

GENERAL PROPERTIES OF OXIDES

Practically all of the elements react with dioxygen to form oxides. There are
several ways in which oxides may be classified, depending on their struc-
ture or their chemical properties. First consider the classification according
to their geometric structure. In this way oxides are classified as normal
oxides, peroxides or suboxides.

Normal oxides

r these, the oxidation number of M can be deduced from the empirical
camels M.O,, taking the oxidation number of oxygen as (—II). These
xides,

for example H,0, MgO and Al,Os, contain only M—O bonds.

54

 

s

Q
O

Figure 15.4 pn—dz o
