 

( OXOACIDS OF SULPHUR

dehydrates HNO3, forming the nitronium ion NO}, which is very im-
portant in the nitration of organic compounds.

HNO; + 2H2SO4,— NOS + H;0* + 2HSOZ

H,SO, can also remove the elements of water, for example in the pre-
paration of ethers.

2C,HsOH + HSO4— C)Hs-O-C)Hs + H2SO,+H,0

It removes water so strongly from some organic compounds that they char,
and only the carbon remains. Paper and cloth are completely destroyed.

In dilute aqueous solution HSO, acts as a strong acid. The first proton
dissociates very readily, and hence hydrogen sulphates HSO; formed.
The second proton dissociates much less readily, to form sulphates soz.
Because of this, solutions of hydrogen sulphates are acidic.

The SO37 ion is tetrahedral. The bond lengths are all equal (1.49 A)
and are all rather short. The bond order of the S—O bonds is approxi-
mately 1.5. The bonding is best explained as four o bonds between S
and the O atoms, with two m bonds delocalized over the S and the four
O atoms.

Thiosulphuric acid H,S,03 cannot be formed by adding acid to a thio-
sulphate because the free acid decomposes in water into a mixture of S,
H,S, H2S,, SO2 and H,SO,. It can be made in the absence of water (e.g.
in ether) at low temperatures (—78°C).

HyS + $0,225 HyS,03-(Etz0),
In contrast, the salts which are called thiosulphates are stable and nu-
merous. Thiosulphates are made by boiling alkaline or neutral sulphite
solutions with S, and also by oxidizing polysulphides with air.

boiling water

Na;SO; + S Na,S,O3

heat in air

2Na2S3 + 30. ——>2NayS20; + 2S

Ff oopaate ion is structurally similar to the sulphate ion (Figure

Hydrated sodium thiosulphate Na2S.O3 - 5H20 is called ‘hypo’. It forms
very large colourless hexagonal crystals, m.p. 48°C. It is readily soluble
in water and solutions are used for iodine titrations in volumetric analysis.
lodine very rapidly oxidizes thiosulphate ions $,03~ to tetrathionate ions
8,06", and the I, is reduced to I7 ions.

2Na;S.03 + I; > NazS,O, + 2Nal

sodium tetrathionate

NaxS:0s is used in the bleaching industry to destroy any excess Cl, on
~ labrics after they have been through a bleach bath. Similarly Na2S2O3 is
Sometimes used to remove the taste from heavily chlorinated drinking

| (561 |

 

Figure 15.10 Structure of
sulphate and thiosulphate 10
