 

| THE PHOSPHORIC ACID SERIES

 

515

 

Many polyphosphates are known. Chains of different lengths with up to
ten [PO] units have been isolated, but the first four in the series are well
known. .

H3PO, orthophosphoric acid

 

H4P207 dipolyphosphoric acid (pyrophosphoric acid)
HsP3010 _tripolyphosphoric acid
H6P4013 tetrapolyphosphoric acid

Some very long chain polymers called Graham’s salt, Kurrol salt and
Maddrell’s salt are also known. These are named after the persori who first
reported them, and they are discussed later.

Disodium dihydrogenpyrophosphate Na2H P20; is mixed with NaHCO;
and used in bread making to leaven the bread, that is to make it rise. They
react and evolve CO, when heated together. This is an easier way of
making batches of bread than using yeast, and is used commercially.

NajH,P,0, + 2NaHCO;— Na,P,0; + 2CO, + 2H,0

Ca,P,0, is used as the abrasive/polishing agent in fluoride toothpaste, and
NasP,O; is mixed with starch and flavouring to make ‘instant pudding’
mixtures. , - 2, .

At one time sodium pyiophosphate Na,P20, was added to soap powders
and solutions as a water softener, to prevent the formation of scum in hard
water. For many purposes detergents, e.g. anionic and non-ionic surfac-
tants (surface active agents), have replaced soap. Also NagP207 has been
replaced by sodium tripolyphosphate NasP30,9. Between 20% and 45% of
NasP3Ojo is added to solid detergent powders and liquid detergents
(washing up fluids etc.) used in the home and in industry. (The lower figure
applies to the USA, where there have been bad experiences of extensive
pollution of rivers and lakes.) Sodium tripolyphosphate. is called a ‘filler’
because it increases the quantity of material inthe packet. Its main useful-
hess, however, is in serving as a water softener. It does this by forming a
stable soluble complex with Ca?* and Mg?*. This is called sequestration,
and results in-the effective removal (masking) of these ions which are
responsible for hardness in water. Thus Ca?* and Mg2* ions do not form
Precipitates with CO3~ ions or with soap in its presence. NasP3Qj9 also
makes the solution alkaline which helps dissolve grease and improves the
action of the detergent. NasP3O4o can be prepared in the following ways:

1. The most common method of preparation is to fuse the correct
quantities of NagHPO, and NaH>PO,. Recrystallization from water
gives the hexahydrate NasP30\9-6H20:

2NagHPO, + NaH;PO.-"S, NasP;Oy) + 2H;0

2 +e

2. r Germany it is largely made by fusing Na2O and P4Oj9. On cooling,
the pyrophosphate Na2P2O; crystallizes out first, but with slow cooling
this changes into NasP3O 10:

 
