l EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

Ca(OH); + SO. > CaSO, + H20
2H2S'+ SO2 — 3S + 2H20

 

 

Uses of sulphur

S is an essential though minor constituent of certain proteins. It is present
in the amino acids cystine. cysteine and methionine.

World production of § was 57 million tonnes in 1992. Almost 90% of
this is converted to SO3, then to SO; and finally to H2SO,. Sixty per cent
of the H,SO, produced is used to make fertilizers. The remainder is used
to make a variety of other chemicals. Sulphites SO}~, hydrogen sulphites
HSO¥ and SO, are important for bleaching.

The 10% of S for non-acid purposes is used as elemental S. Some is used
to make carbon disulphide CS2, which is used to make CCl, and viscose
rayon. Sulphur reacts with alkenes and forms sulphur cross-links between
molecules. This is important in the vulcanizing of rubber. Sulphur and
selenium will dehydrogenate saturated hydrocarbons. Other uses of sul-
phur are in the manufacture of fungicides, insecticides and gunpowder.
Gunpowder is an intimate: mixture of saltpetre NaNO; (75%), charcoal
(15%) and sulphur (10%). It was discovered by Roger Bacon in 1245, and
was the first explosive which could propel a bullet or cannon ball. It was
first used for this purpose at the Battle of Crécy in 1346. It was then used
in land and sea warfare for 500 years until better explosives such as gun-
cotton, nitroglycerine and cordite were discovered.

Extraction and uses of selenium and tellurium

Se and Te occur among sulphide ores: and are obtained in concentrated
form from anode sludge after the electrolytic refining of copper. This
sludge also contains the platinum metals, and Ag and Au. Se and Te are
also obtained from flue dust produced during the roasting of sulphide ores
such as PbS, CuS or FeS;. The dust is trapped by means of an electrostatic
Precipitator. Both elements also occur in the native form together with S.
. World production of Se metal was 1670 tonnes in 1992. Most is used to
decolorize glass, though Cd(S.Se) is used to make pink and red coloured

glass. Se is used in Xerox-type photocopiers to make the photoreceptor

to capture the image. The photoreceptor is a thin film of Se on an Al sup-
port. The photoreceptor is sensitized electrostatically by a high voltage,
and then an image is focussed on it as on the film in a camera. Areas ex-
posed to light lose their electrostatic charge. Toner powder sticks to the
areas still charged, and the powder is transferred to a sheet of paper and
heated to fuse the powder to the paper. Thus a copy of the original image
's obtained. The photoreceptor is then wiped clean. sens‘ d again, and
Feused. Selenium is an essential element in the body in trace amounts,
and ‘sa component in a number of important enzymes. e.g. glutathione
Peroxidase. which protects cells against attack by peroxide. However.
Se is tovic in larger quanti - ‘ ,

 

continued overleaf

 

 
