 

NITROGEN FIXATION

 

489

 

 

 

and non-bonding electrons are assumed to occupy the 2s and 2p, orbitals,
this leaves six atomic orbitals for bonding. These are three 2p, AOs and
three 2p, AOs. The three 2p, orbitals form three three-centre tT molecular
orbitals. The lowest MO in energy is bonding, the highest is antibonding,
and the remaining MO is non-bonding. In a similar way the three 2p.
atomic orbitals give bonding, non-bonding and antibonding MOs. The
eight x electrons fill both of the bonding MOs and both of the non-bonding
MOs. Thus there is a total of two o and two x bonds, giving N=N=N
and a bond order of 2. Both N—N bonds are the same length, 1.16A.
The hydrogen azide molecule has a bent structure. The addition of the
extra electron from H means that one electron must now occupy an
antibonding MO, and hence the two N—N bond lengths are different:

H

N—-N-——_N
124A 113A

The bond angle H—N—N is 112°, and the two N—N bonds are of
significantly different lengths, and the bond orders are probably 1.5 and 2
respectively.

FERTILIZERS
Plant fertilizers normally contain three main ingredients:

1. Nitrogen in a combined form (commonly as ammonium nitrate, other
ammonium salts or nitrates, or as urea). Nitrogen is essential for plant
growth, particularly of leaves, since it is a constituent of amino acids
and proteins, which must be made to make new cells.

2. Phosphorus for root growth, usually as a slightly soluble form of
phosphate such as ‘superphosphate’ or ‘triple superphosphate’. These
are made from phosphate rocks such as fluoroapatite [3Ca3(PO,)2-
CaF] which are mined. Basic slag, which is a by-product from the
steel industry, is also used as a phosphate fertilizer.

. Potassium ions for flowering, often provided as K2SO,.

NITROGEN FIXATION

There isa large amount of N; gas in the atmosphere, but plants are unable
{0 utilize this because Ny gas is so stable and unreactive. Fertile soil
contains combined nitrogen, mainly in the form of nitrates, nitrites,
thee salts or urea CO(NH2)2. These compounds are absorbed from
soll thon mt by the Toots of the plants. This reduces the fertility of the
death wn s much of the nitrogen is eventually returned to the soil due to
land to aro aay of the plants. It has long been known that using a plot of
the sa grow different crops in rotation gives a better yield than growing

me crop repeatedly. Furthermore, growing clover one year greatly

 
