Stage Four: The Electron
Transport Chain

The NADH and FADE) molecules formed during the first
three stages of aerobic respiration each contain a pair of
electrons that were gained when NAD* and FAD were re-
duced. The NADH molecules carry their electrons to the
inner mitochondrial membrane, where they transfer the
electrons to a series of membrane-associated proteins col-
lectively called the electron transport chain.

Moving Electrons through the Electron
Transport Chain

The first of the proteins to receive the electrons is a com-
plex, membrane-embedded enzyme called NADH dehy-
drogenase. A carrier called ubiquinone then passes the
electrons to a protein-cytochrome complex called the be;
complex. This complex, along with others in the chain, oper-
ates asa proton pump, driving a proton out across the mem-
brane. Cytochromes are respiratory proteins that contain
heme groups, complex carbon rings with many alternating
single and double bonds and an iron atom in the center.

       
   

Intermembrane space

NADH

NADH
dehydrogenase

FIGURE 9.16

PRAT
A
[ FADH, |

The electron is then carried by another carrier, cy-
tochrome ¢, to the cytochrome oxidase complex. This com-
plex uses four such electrons to reduce a molecule of oxy-
gen, each oxygen then combines with two hydrogen ions to
form water:

07 +4H*+4e—>2 0

This series of membrane-associated electron carriers is
collectively called the electron transport chain (figure 9.16).

NADH contributes its electrons to the first protein of
the electron transport chain, NADH dehydrogenase.
FADE), which is always attached to the inner mitochon-
drial membrane, feeds its electrons into the electron trans-
port chain later, to ubiquinone.

It is the availability of a plentiful electron acceptor
(often oxygen) that makes oxidative respiration possible. As
we'll see in chapter 10, the electron transport chain used in
aerobic respiration is similar to, and may well have evolved
from, the chain employed in aerobic photosynthesis.

 

The electron transport chain is a series of five
membrane-associated proteins. Electrons delivered by
NADH and FADH) are passed from protein to protein
along the chain, like a baton in a relay race.

 

Inner
mitochondrial
membrane

OG

Cytochrome

  

The electron transport chain. High-energy electrons harvested from catabolized molecules are transported (red arrows) by mobile
electron carriers (ubiquinone, marked Q, and cytochrome c, marked C) along a chain of membrane proteins. Three proteins use portions
of the electrons’ energy to pump protons (b/ue arrows) out of the matrix and into the intermembrane space. The electrons are finally

donated to oxygen to form water.

174 Part IMT Energetics
