 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

2H2S + 302 - 2SO2 + 2H20
SO, + 2H2S — 2H20 + 3S

These underground deposits of S are mined by the Frasch process, and
yield S in a very high state of purity. In this process, three concentric pipes
are sunk in a borehole down to the underground deposit. Superheated
steam is passed down the outer pipe, and this melts the sulphur. Com-
pressed air is blown down the inner pipe and forces molten sulphur up
the middle pipe. One bore hole can cover an area of about half an acre.
This technique was developed to overcome difficulties of mining in swamp
areas or through quicksand, and for offshore mining in Louisiana. Mining
in the USA started in the 1890s, and in Poland in the 1950s.

SO, is obtained as a by-product in the extraction of metals from sulphide
ores. The most important metal sulphide is iron pyrites (fool’s gold) FeS2.
This is mined in large amounts in the USSR, Spain, Portugal, Japan and
many other places. Non-ferrous metals such as wurtzite ZnS, galena PbS,
several forms of copper sulphide and NiS all yield SO2 in smelters. The
SQ is used to make HSOy. Because there are a large number of metal
production processes, this method of producing S currently yields more S
than the other two methods. However, it is produced as SO, rather than
S. The metals in the p-block and about half of the transition metals form
sulphide minerals: all these metals are collectively called chalcophiles.
Some of the most important sulphide minerals are listed in Table 15.3.

There are vast amounts of S in the form of sulphates dissolved in the
oceans, and as mineral deposits such as CaSO,. There are smaller deposits
of other metals such as FeSO, and Al,(SO,)3. In Poland SO, is obtained
by heating CaSO, with coke in a rotary kiln. Production is about 20000
tonnes/year. The SO, is used for the Contact process for the manufacture
of H2SO,. Production of elemental S from sulphates is not much used
since other sources of § are at present cheaper.

Table 15.3 Some important sulphide ores

 

MoS, Molybdenite
FeS, Pyrites (fool's gold)
FeS, Marcasite
FeAsS Arsenopyrites
(Fe,Ni) Sy Pentlandite
Cu,S Copper glance or chalcocite
CuFeS; Copper pyrites or chalcopyrite
CusFeS, Bomnite or peacock mineral
Ags Silver glance or argentite
ZnS Zinc blende or sphalerite
ZnS Wurtzite
Hgs Cinnabar
PbS Galena or lead glance
As,S; Orpiment

mo ASSs Realgar
Sb2S; Stibnite ,
BizS; Bismuthinite

_

continued overleaf

 
