Regulating Aerobic Respiration

When cells possess plentiful amounts of ATP, the key reac-
tions of glycolysis, the Krebs cycle, and fatty acid break-
down are inhibited, slowing ATP production. The regula~
tion of these biochemical pathways by the level of ATP is
an example of feedback inhibition. Conversely, when ATP
levels in the cell are low, ADP levels are high; and ADP ac-
tivates enzymes in the pathways of carbohydrate catabolism
to stimulate the production of more ATP.

Control of glucose catabolism occurs at two key points
of the catabolic pathway (figure 9.20). The control point
in glycolysis is the enzyme phosphofructokinase, which
catalyzes reaction 3, the conversion of fructose phosphate
to fructose bisphosphate. This is the first reaction of gly-
colysis that is not readily reversible, committing the sub-
strate to the glycolytic sequence. High levels of ADP rela-
tive to ATP (implying a need to convert more ADP to
ATP) stimulate phosphofructokinase, committing more
sugar to the catabolic pathway; so do low levels of citrate
(implying the Krebs cycle is not running at full tilt and
needs more input). The main control point in the oxida-
tion of pyruvate occurs at the committing step in the
Krebs cycle with the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase. It is
inhibited by high levels of NADH (implying no more is
needed).

Another control point in the Krebs cycle is the enzyme
citrate synthetase, which catalyzes the first reaction, the
conversion of oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA into citrate.
High levels of ATP inhibit citrate synthetase (as well as
pyruvate decarboxylase and two other Krebs cycle en-
zymes), shutting down the catabolic pathway.

 

Relative levels of ADP and ATP regulate the catabolism
of glucose at key committing reactions.

 

Glucose t v

Fructose 6- . sess

-~ monic doties $

Inhibits rusia Salisp bop aie) Activates

q

Pyruvate
Pyruvate "er

|-sne — rook CoA

Krebs
cycle

ns

   
  
   
 

Inhibits

 

 

 

 

Electron transport
chain and
chemiosmosis

FIGURE 9.20

Control of glucose catabolism. The relative levels of ADP and
ATP control the catabolic pathway at two key points: the
committing reactions of glycolysis and the Krebs cycle.

A Vocabulary of

20D eM OL aL)

 

aerobic respiration The portion of cellu-
lar respiration that requires oxygen as an
electron acceptor; it includes pyruvate oxi-
dation, the Krebs cycle, and the electron
transport chain.

anaerobic respiration Cellular respiration
in which inorganic electron acceptors other
than oxygen are used; it includes glycolysis.
cellular respiration The oxidation of
organic molecules to produce ATP in

which the final electron acceptor is or-
ganic; it includes aerobic and anaerobic
respiration.

chemiosmosis The passage of high-
energy electrons along the electron trans-
port chain, which is coupled to the pump-
ing of protons across a membrane and the
return of protons to the original side of
the membrane through ATP-generating
channels.

fermentation Alternative ATP-producing
pathway performed by some cells in the ab-
sence of oxygen, in which the final electron
acceptor is an organic molecule.

maximum efficiency The maximum
number of ATP molecules generated by

oxidizing a substance, relative to the free
energy of that substance; in organisms, the
actual efficiency is usually less than the
maximum.

oxidation The loss of an electron. In cel-
lular respiration, high-energy electrons are
stripped from food molecules, oxidizing
them.

photosynthesis The chemiosmotic gen-
eration of ATP and complex organic mole-
cules powered by the energy derived from
light.

substrate-level phosphorylation The
generation of ATP by the direct transfer of
a phosphate group to ADP from another
phosphorylated molecule.

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 177
