Building an Electrochemical Gradient

In eukaryotes, aerobic metabolism takes place within the
mitochondria present in virtually all cells. The internal
compartment, or matrix, of a mitochondrion contains the
enzymes that carry out the reactions of the Krebs cycle.
As the electrons harvested by oxidative respiration are
passed along the electron transport chain, the energy they
release transports protons out of the matrix and into the
outer compartment, sometimes called the intermembrane
space. Three transmembrane proteins in the inner mito-
chondrial membrane (see figure 9.16) actually accomplish
the transport. The flow of excited electrons induces a
change in the shape of these pump proteins, which causes
them to transport protons across the membrane. The
electrons contributed by NADH activate all three of these
proton pumps, while those contributed by FADH) acti-
vate only two.

Producing ATP: Chemiosmosis

As the proton concentration in the intermembrane space
rises above that in the matrix, the matrix becomes slightly
negative in charge. This internal negativity attracts the
positively charged protons and induces them to reenter the
matrix. The higher outer concentration tends to drive pro-
tons back in by diffusion; since membranes are relatively
impermeable to ions, most of the protons that reenter the
matrix pass through special proton
channels in the inner mitochondrial
membrane. When the protons pass
through, these channels synthesize
ATP from ADP + Pj within the ma-
trix. The ATP is then transported by
facilitated diffusion out of the mito-
chondrion and into the cell’s cyto-
plasm. Because the chemical forma-
tion of ATP is driven by a diffusion
force similar to osmosis, this process
is referred to as chemiosmosis (fig-
ure 9.17).

Thus, the electron transport chain
uses electrons harvested in aerobic
respiration to pump a large number of
protons across the inner mitochon-
drial membrane. Their subsequent
reentry into the mitochondrial matrix
drives the synthesis of ATP by
chemiosmosis. Figure 9.18 summa-
rizes the overall process.

The electrons harvested from
glucose are pumped out of the
mitochondrial matrix by the
electron transport chain. The
return of the protons into the
matrix generates ATP.

FIGURE 9.18

 

1. Electrons are harvested

Intermembrane space

Inner
mitochondrial

Proton pump

 

FIGURE 9.17

Chemiosmosis. NADH transports high-energy electrons
harvested from the catabolism of macromolecules to “proton
pumps” that use the energy to pump protons out of the
mitochondrial matrix. As a result, the concentration of protons in
the intermembrane space rises, inducing protons to diffuse back
into the matrix. Many of the protons pass through special channels
that couple the reentry of protons to the production of ATP.

Intermembrane

  

Inner
mitochondrial

2. Electrons provide
‘energy to pump
protons across the
membrane.

and carried to the
transport syster

diffuse back in,
driving the synthesis of
ATP.

ATP generation during the Krebs cycle and electron transport chain. This process
begins with pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, and ends with the synthesis of ATP.

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 175
