 

 

a2

 

 

THE GROUP 15 ELEMENTS ~

ui

 

ABCASS —» Asugy + 4FeS.

“There are few uses for As meta, but it is used to alloy with lead to make
the lead harder. Small amounts are used to dope semiconductors and make
ig diodes. Arsenic compounds are generally made from AsO,
uses, grat poson, in medicine to kill perants, and for
preventing wood ro, aise from theit posconous nature.

‘Antimony is obtained a5 Sb: in the ue dus from roasting ZnS ores
“Thisis easly reduced to the metal with carbon. The most important ore is
stibmite Sb,Sy (indescemt metaliike needles). The metal 1s obtained by
fusing with on:

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

Sb,S; + 3Fe > 28b + 3FeS . ~
‘Anumony metal 1s used in alloys with Sa and Pb, Itis also used to electo-
plate steel to prevent rusting. World production of Sb was 84000 tonnes in
1992. Antimony compounds are used as fre retardants in foam flings fr|
furniture and mattresses.

BisO is obtained from the flue dust from roasting PbS, ZnS ahd Cus, |
and can be reduced tothe metal with carbon. It also occurs as the mineral
bismuthinite Bi,S, and bismite BOs. Because of its low melting point
bismuth metal can be cast in much the same way as lead. As, Sb and Bi
‘metals ae all too brittle to work. Bi is used in low melting alloys, (One use
‘of these alloys sas a low melting plug for automate fire sprinkler systems )
Other uses are in batteries, bearings, solder and ammunition. World pro-
duction was 3600 tonnes in 1992.

     
 

 
 
 
   
           
     
  

GENERAL. PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES OF THE ELEMENTS
Nitrogen . aa
“The fist element ‘lets from the rests was the cise inthe previous
groups Thus dinitrogen is a colourless, odousless, tasteless gas whichis
‘diamagnetic and exists as diatomie molecules Nz. The other elements
are solids and exist as several allotropic forms. The Nz molecule contarns

‘Table 144 Melting and boiling pornts

 

Meine pou Badag patnt
ca, co

N 20 195 8

% ey 2

Ay tg 615 (sublimes)

ast ou 1387

br 2 136

 

“AL386 atmospheres pressure
