 

HYDRIDES

 

 

481

 

 

Phosphine PH3

Phosphine PH3 is a colourless and extremely toxic’ gas, which smells
slightly of garlic or bad fish. Itis highly reactive. It can be formed either by
hydrolysing metal phosphides such as Na3P or Ca3P2 with water, or by
hydrolysing white phosphorus with NaOH solution.

Ca;P) + 6,0 > 2PH; + 3Ca(OH),
P, + 3NaOH + 3H,O > PH; + 3NaH,PO,

PH,, unlike NH, is not very soluble in water: aqueous solutions are
neutral. It is more soluble in CS, and other organic solvents. Phosphonium
salts such as [PH,]*CI~ can be formed, but require PH3 and anhydrous
HCI (in contrast to the ready formation of NH,X in aqueous solution).
Pure PH; is stable in air, but it catches fire when heated to about 150°C.

PH; + 202 > H3POq4

PH; frequently contains traces of diphosphine PH, which cause it to catch
fire spontaneously. This is the origin of the flickering light called will-o’-
the-wisp, which is sometimes seen in marshes.

Arsine AsHs, stibine SbH3 and bismuthine BiH3

The bond energy (Table 14.6) and the stability of the hydrides both
decrease on descending the group. Consequently, arsine AsHs, stibine
SbH; and bismuthine BiH, are only obtained in small amounts. AsH3 and
SbH; are both very poisonous gases. AsH3, SbH3 and BiH3 can be
prepared by hydrolysing binary metal compounds such as Zn3As), Mg3Sb2
or Mg;Bi, with water or dilute acid. ASH; and SbH; are formed in Marsh’s
test for As and Sb compounds. Before the use of instruments for analysis,
this test was used as a forensic test. Practically all As or Sb compounds
can be reduced with Zn and acid, forming AsH3 or SbH. The gaseous
hydrides are passed through a glass tube heated with a Bunsen burner.
SbHsis less stable than AsHs: hence it decomposes before passing through
the flame, and gives a metallic mirror on the glass tube. AsH; is more

stable, and requires stronger heating to make it decompose. Thus AsH;
gives a mirror after the flame.

Structure of the hydrides

The structure of ammonia may either be described as pyramidal, or
tetrahedral with one position occupied by a lone pair (Figure 14.4). This
shape is predicted using the VSEPR theory since there are four electron
Pairs in the outer shell. These comprise three bonding pairs and one fone
pair. The repulsion between a lone pair and a bond pair of electrons always,
exceeds that between two bond pairs. Thus the bond angles are reduced

from 109°27' O4gr arn
dsonat 27’ to 107°48’, and the regular tetrahedral shape is slightly

 
