 

 

THE PHOSPHORIC ACID SERIES

 

 

{su]

 

 

i

insecticides against locusts, cotton weevils, and fruit moths. Sb4Ojo is
insoluble in water and antimonic acid is not known. Antimonates con-
taining [Sb(OH).]~, however, are known.

Bi does not form a pentoxide, showing that the stability of the highest
oxidation states decreases on descending the group. The usual trend that
higher oxidation states are more acidic is also observed.

Other oxides

The oxides P,O7, PyOg and P,Og are very uncommon. In these oxides one
molecule contains P atoms in both the oxidation states (+III) and (+V).
P,O; is best made by dissolving P,O, in tetrahydrofuran and reacting it
with the correct amount of dioxygen. Heating P,Q, under vacuum in a
sealed tube gives a mixture of red phosphorus and the oxides P,O7, P4Og
and PyOo. These oxides have structures in between those of P4O, and
P,Oy, in that they have one, two or three apical O atoms attached to P
atoms. Hydrolysis with water thus yields a mixture of oxoacids in both
oxidation states, phosphoric acid P(+V) and phosphorous acid P(+III).

P,Og] +H,0
1°, HPO, + H3PO;
P4Oo. orthophosphoric _orthophosphorous
acid acid
'

OXOACIDS OF PHOSPHORUS

Phosphorus forms two series of oxoacids:

1, The phosphoric series of acids, in which the oxidation state of P is
‘(+V), and in which the compounds have oxidizing properties.

2. The phosphorous series of acids, which contain P in the oxidation state
(+III), and which are reducing agents.

In all of these, P is four-coordinate and tetrahedrally surrounded
wherever possible. pn—pn back bonding gives rise to P=O bonds. The
hydrogen atoms in OH groups are ionizable and are acidic, but the P—H
bonds found in the phosphorous acids have reducing, not acidic, proper-
tics. Simple phosphate ions can condense (polymerize) together to give a
wide range of more complicated isopolyacids or their salts.

THE PHOSPHORIC ACID SERIES

Orthophosphoric acids

Tr nblest Phosphoric acid ,is H3PO,4 orthophosphoric acid (Figure
~/¢)-ihe acid contains three replaceable H atoms, and is tribasi
undergoes stepwise dissociation: ne is tibasies I
