Metabolic Efficiency
and the Length of

 

Tt has been estimated that a heterotroph

limited to glycolysis captures only 3.5% of

the energy in the food it consumes. Hence,
if such a heterotroph preserves 3.5% of the
energy in the autotrophs it consumes, then
any other heterotrophs that consume the
first hetertroph will capture through glycol-

ysis 3.5% of the energy in it, or 0.12% of

the energy available in the original au-
totrophs. A very large base of autotrophs
would thus be needed to support a small
number of heterotrophs.

Stage 3: Camivore

FIGURE 9.4

When organisms became able to extract
energy from organic molecules by oxidative
metabolism, this constraint became far less
severe, because the efficiency of oxidative
respiration is estimated to be about 52 to
63%. This increased efficiency results in
the transmission of much more energy
from one trophic level to another than does
glycolysis. (A trophic level is a step in the
movement of energy through an ecosys-
tem.) The efficiency of oxidative metabo-
lism has made possible the evolution of
food chains, in which autotrophs are con-
sumed by heterotrophs, which are con-
sumed by other heterotrophs, and so on.
You will read more about food chains in
chapter 28.

Stage 4: Scavengers

Even with oxidative metabolism, approx-
imately two-thirds of the available energy is
lost at each trophic level, and that puts a
limit on how long a food chain can be. Most
food chains, like the one illustrated in figure
9.A, involve only three or rarely four trophic
levels. Too much energy is lost at each
transfer to allow chains to be much longer
than that. For example, it would be impossi-
ble for a large human population to subsist
by eating lions captured from the Serengeti
Plain of Africa; the amount of grass available
there would not support enough zebras and
other herbivores to maintain the number of
lions needed to feed the human population.
Thus, the ecological complexity of our
world is fixed in a fundamental way by the
chemistry of oxidative respiration.

 

Stage 5: Refuse utilizers

A food chain in the savannas, or open grasslands, of East Africa. Stage 1: Photosynthesizer. The grass under these palm trees grows
actively during the hot, rainy season, capturing the energy of the sun and storing it in molecules of glucose, which are then converted into
starch and stored in the grass. Stage 2: Herbivore. These large antelopes, known as wildebeests, consume the grass and transfer some of its
stored energy into their own bodies. Stage 3: Carnivore. The lion feeds on wildebeests and other animals, capturing part of their stored
energy and storing it in its own body. Stage 4: Scavenger. This hyena and the vultures occupy the same stage in the food chain as the lion.
They are also consuming the body of the dead wildebeest, which has been abandoned by the lion. Stage 5: Refuse utilizer. These butterflies,
mostly Precis octavia, are feeding on the material left in the hyena’s dung after the food the hyena consumed had passed through its
digestive tract. At each of these four levels, only about a third or less of the energy present is used by the recipient.

180 Part II Energetics
