 

 

[ OXIDES OF SULPHUR, SELENIUM, TELLURIUM AND POLONIUM ‘| [553]

280, = SO?* + SO3-

SO, gas forms discrete V-shaped molecules, and this structure is re-
tained in the solid state (Figure 15.5). The bond angle is 119°30'. The
bonding in SO, is described in Chapter 4.

The dioxides SeOz, TeO and PoO, are made by burning the element in
air. SeO; is solid at room temperature. The gas has the same structure as
SO,, but the solid forms infinite chains which are not planar (Figure 15.6).
TeO, and PoO; both crystallize in two ionic forms.

0 0 oO oO
Nie LB
e MY NS
0

Figure 15.4 Structure of SeO2.

The reaction of the dioxides with water also differs. SO2 is very soluble,
but largely forms hydrated SO, with only minute amounts of sulphurous
acid H2SO3. (Dissolving SO, in alkali gives sulphites — salts of H2SO3.)
Pure H,SO3 cannot be isolated. SeO, reacts with water and forms sel-
enious acid, HjSeO3, which may be obtained in a crystalline state. TeO.
is almost insoluble in water, but dissolves in alkali to form tellurites. It
also dissolves in acids to form basic salts: this illustrates the amphoteric
character of TeO2. Thus there is the usual increase in basic character on
descending a group. SeO, is used to oxidize aldehydes and ketones.

R—CH,—CO—R + SeO, ~ R—CO—CO—R + Se + H,0
Trioxides MO

SO; is the only important trioxide. It is manufactured on a huge scale
by the Contact process in which SO, reacts with O2 in the presence of a
catalyst (Pt or V.Os). (See under SO, ) The SO; is not usually isolated,
and practically all of it is converted to H»SO,. SOs reacts vigorously with
water, evolving a large amount of heat and forming H2SO,4. Commercially
itis not possible just to react SO; with water. The SO; reacts with water
vapour and causes the formation of a dense mist of H2SO, droplets, which
are difficult to condense and pass out of the absorber into the atmosphere.
To avoid this, it has been found best to dissolve SO3 in 98-99% HSO, in
ceramic packed towers, to give oleum or fuming sulphuric acid. This is
mainly pyrosulphuric acid H,S,0,;. Water is continuously added to keep
the concentration of H,SO, constant.

H2S,0, + H,O — 2H2SO,

boy the Bas phase SO; has a plane triangular structure (Figure 15.7). The

° ing is best described as S forming three o bonds, giving rise to a plane

riangle, and three delocalized x bonds. (See Chapter 4.) .

5 ot room temperature SOs is solid and exists in three distinct forms. y-
3 18 ice-like and is a cyclic trimer (SO3)3, m.p. 16.8°C. If SO; is kept

6:
a

“\
oO:

Figure 15.5 Structure of SO).

Figure 15.7 Structure of SO3¢
