 

E OXIDES. OF PHOSPHORUS, ARSENIC AND BISMUTH

As,Qz and Sb4Og are obtained by burning the metals in air or dioxygen,
since they have less tendency to form higher oxides. Heating the sulphide
minerals As,Sq (realgar) or As2S3 (orpiment) in air also gives As,O¢. Both
As4Ox and Sb,Og are very poisonous. Bi2O; is not dimeric like the others.

‘The basicity of oxides and hydroxides usually increases on descending a
group. P4Og is acidic and hydrolyses in water, forming phosphorous acid.
(This is considered in more detail later.) Arsenious oxide AssQg is
sparingly soluble in water, and Sb,Og is insoluble. As4Og and Sb4Og are
both amphoteric since they react with alkali, forming arsenites and anti-
monites, and with concentrated HCl, forming arsenic and antimony tri-
chlorides. In the past, various copper arseriites were used as brilliant green
pigments. The best known are Scheele’s green CuzAs,Os and Paris green
[(CH3;COO)Cu,(AsOs)]. They are seldom used nowadays because’ they
are toxic, and, even worse, in damp places bacteria and moulds can
produce poisonous volatile substances such as AsH3 and As(CH3)3. BizO3
is wholly basic.

P.O, + 6H,O > 4H3PO3 /
As,Og + 12NaOH — 4Na3AsO3 + 6H,0
As4O¢ + 12HCI > 4AsCl, + 6H2O

Pentoxides

Phosphorus pentoxide is the most important oxide, and is quite common.
It is dimeric and has the formula P,O,», not P2Os. Its structure is derived
from that of PyQ,. Each P atom in P40, forms three bonds to O atoms.
There are five electrons in the outer shell of a P atom. Three electrons have
been used in bonding, and the other two comprise a lone pair, which is
situated on the outside of the tetrahedral unit. In P,Q, the lone pairs on
each of the four P atoms form a coordinate bond to an oxygen atom
(Figure 14.11a).

Measurement of the P—O bond lengths shows that the bridging bonds
on the edges are 1.60A but the coordinate bonds on the corners are
1.43A. The bridging bonds compare with those in P4O, (1.65 A) and are
normal single bonds. The bonds on the corners are much shorter than a
single bond, and are in fact double bonds.. These double bonds are dif-
ferent in origin from the ‘usual’ double bonds such as that in ethene
which arises from pa—pr Overlap with one electron coming from each C
atom. The second bond in-P=O is formed by px-dr back bonding. A full
p orbital on the O atom overlaps sideways with an empty d orbital on the P
atom. Thus it differs from the double bond in ethene in two respects:

1. A p orbital overlaps with a d orbital, rather than p with p.

2. a electrons come from one atom, and hence the bond is a ‘dative
ond’.

A similar type of back bonding is found in the carbonyls.
As,O,y has a similar structure to PsO,, in the gas phase. However, the

 

509
