 

 

 

473 |

 

| GENERAL PROPERTIES AND STRUCTURES OF THE ELEMENTS

 

a triple bond N==N with a short bond length of 1.09A. This bond
is very stable, and the dissociation energy is consequently very high
(945.4kJ mol”'). Thus Np is inert at room temperature, though it does
react with Li, forming the nitride Li;N. Other isoelectronic species such as
CO, CN~ and NO* are much more reactive than Np, and this is because
the bonds are partly polar, whilst in N they are not. At elevated tempera-
tures Np becomes increasingly reactive, and reacts directly with elements
from Groups 2, 13 and 14, with H2 and with some of the transition metals.

Active nitrogen can be made by passing an electric spark through N2 gas
at a low pressure. This forms atomic nitrogen, and the process is associated
with a yellow-pink afterglow. Active nitrogen will react with a number of
elements, and breaks many normally stable molecules.

The nitrogen cycle

There is a continual turnover of nitrogen between the atmosphere, the soil,
the sea and living organisms, which is estimated to be between 10° and 10°
tonnes/year. This is called the nitrogen cycle. Consider the combined
nitrogen in the soil: this is present as nitrates, nitrites and ammonium
compounds. Losses of combined nitrogen from the soil occur for several
reasons:

1, Plants absorb these compounds, and use them to make protoplasm, in
order to grow. Plants may be eaten by animals, and animals may eat
animals. Animals excrete nitrogenous wastes usually as urea or uric
acid, which is returned to the soil. Death and decay eventually return all
the nitrogen to the soil.

2. A group of denitrifying bacteria called Denitrificans convert nitrates
into N, or NH; gases, which escape into the atmosphere. (Horse stables
often smell of ammonia for this reason.) NH; is returned to the soil by
the first rainstorm, but Nz is not. Examples of denitrifying bacteria
include Pseudomonas and Achromobacter.

nitrates > nitrites - NO, — N2 > NH;

A net loss of nitrogen compounds in the soil occurs through the
Grainage of surface water into the sea. There it supports marine plant
ife.

. There is a small loss of NO and NO, into the atmosphere from the
burning of plants and coal, and from car exhausts. Though this may be

unpleasant and produce smog locally, the amounts are small, and the
nitrogen is returned to the soil when it rains.

There are net gains to the’ supply of combined nitrogen in the soil:

1 The largest gain is from nitrifying bacteria which fix N2 gas and turn it

into nitrates Or ammonium salts. This produces over 60% of the
nnrogen gain. It is estimated that approximately 175 million tonnes of
2 are fixed annually by bacteria. This may be compared with 110
