 

 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

535

 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

Extraction and separation of dioxygen

Dioxygen is produced industrially by the fractional distillation of liquid air.
(See Chapter 14, under ‘Occurrence, extraction and uses of Nitrogen’.)
Most of the O is used in the steel making industry. Gas produced in this
way commonly contains traces of Nz and the noble gases, particularly Ar.
Steel cylinders of compressed O2 are used for many purposes, including
oxy-acetylene welding, and in the laboratory. O2 is administered together
with an anaesthetic for surgical operations. It is sometimes prepared on a
small scale in the laboratory by thermal decomposition of KCIO3 (with
MnO, as catalyst), though the product often contains traces of Cl, or
C10,. Small amounts of O, as an emergency breathing supply in aircraft
are produced by heating NaClO3:

2KCIO; 150°C MnO: cata! oC 4 30,

O, can also be made by the catalytic decomposition of hypochlorites:

2HOCIS=s 2HCI + 0;

or by the electrolysis of water with a trace of H2SO, or barium hydroxide
solution.

Uses of dioxygen

Practically all the elements react with dioxygen either at room temperature
or on heating. (The only exceptions are a few noble metals such as Pt, Au
and W, and the noble:gases.) Even though the bond energy of O; is high
(493kJ mol~') the reactions are generally strongly exothermic, and once
started often continue spontaneously.

Dioxygen is essential for respiration (for the release of energy in the
body) by both animals and plants. It is therefore essential for life.

respiration
—-

CeH120¢ + 60 6CO, + 6H,O + energy

glucose
The complex formed between dioxygen and haemoglobin (the red pigment
in blood) is of vital importance since it is the method by which higher
animals transport dioxygen round the body to the cells which actually use it.

World production of liquid and gaseous O, is about 100 million tonnes/
year. By far the largest consumption of dioxygen (60-80%) is in the iron
and steel industry. Here pure dioxygen is used to convert pig iron into steel
in the basic oxygen process which originated as the Kaldo and LD pro-
fans Since the late 1950s these have replaced the Bessemer process
wi veh used air). Plants to produce dioxygen are frequently located
wiped fro 0, OF are part of, modern steel making plants, and the O2 is
Modem methods sing on” other. There are three advantages to the

continued overleaf

 

 
