Cellular Respiration of Fat

Fats are broken down into fatty acids plus glycerol. The
tails of fatty acids typically have 16 or more —CH) links,
and the many hydrogen atoms in these long tails provide a
rich harvest of energy. Fatty acids are oxidized in the ma-
trix of the mitochondrion. Enzymes there remove the two-
carbon acetyl groups from the end of each fatty acid tail
until the entire fatty acid is converted into acetyl groups
(figure 9.23). Each acetyl group then combines with coen-
zyme A to form acetyl-CoA. This process is known as B-
oxidation.

How much ATP does the catabolism of fatty acids pro-
duce? Let’s compare a hypothetical six-carbon fatty acid
with the six-carbon glucose molecule, which we've said
yields about 30 molecules of ATP in a eukaryotic cell. Two
rounds of B-oxidation would convert the fatty acid into
three molecules of acetyl-CoA. Each round requires one
molecule of ATP to prime the process, but it also produces
one molecule of NADH and one of FADH). These mole-
cules together yield four molecules of ATP (assuming 2.5
ATPs per NADH and 1.5 ATPs per FADH)). The oxida-
tion of each acetyl-CoA in the Krebs cycle ultimately pro-
duces an additional 10 molecules of ATP. Overall, then,
the ATP yield of a six-carbon fatty acid would be approxi-
mately 8 (from two rounds of B-oxidation) — 2 (for priming
those two rounds) + 30 (from oxidizing the three acetyl-
CoAs) = 36 molecules of ATP. Therefore, the respiration
of a six-carbon fatty acid yields 20% more ATP than the
respiration of glucose. Moreover, a fatty acid of that size
would weigh less than two-thirds as much as glucose, so a
gram of fatty acid contains more than twice as many kilo-
calories as a gram of glucose. That is why fat is a storage
molecule for excess energy in many types of animals. If ex-
cess energy were stored instead as carbohydrate, as it is in
plants, animal bodies would be much bulkier.

  

 

Proteins, fats, and other organic molecules are also
metabolized for energy. The amino acids of proteins are
first deaminated, while fats undergo a process called
B-oxidation.

 

FIGURE 9.23

B-oxidation. Through a series of reactions known as B-oxidation, the
last two carbons in a fatty acid tail combine with coenzyme A to form
acetyl-CoA, which enters the Krebs cycle. The fatty acid, now two
carbons shorter, enters the pathway again and keeps reentering until
all its carbons have been used to form acetyl-CoA molecules. Each
round of B-oxidation uses one molecule of ATP and generates one
molecule each of FADH; and NADH, not including the molecules
generated from the Krebs cycle.

 

HH
a)

Fatty acid —C—C— C7
ri OH

HH
AMP + PP,
°

an
— Fay acid—9-0-0
H

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

H
FAD.
FADH,
H HO

Fatty acid -C=C—C

HO H O
tot oll

Fatty acid—C—G—C

HH
NAD*
NADH
'
O'H

' Oo
Wet

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

\___ Fatty acid—C'-C—C Go)

\H

\

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 179
