 

 

 

OXIDES OF SULPHUR, SELENIUM, TELLURIUM AND POLONIUM

 

disposal plants or rivers). It has a typical formula of C;7H3;COO~Na*.
It has two disadvantages:

1. It forms an insoluble precipitate or ‘scum’ when hard water containing
Ca?* or Mg?" is used.

2. Itcannot be used for industrial purposes in acidic solut.ons, since the
fatty acids are precipitated.

RCOO™ + H;0* = RCOOH + H,0

Detergents are surface active agents. They consist of molecules with a
non-polar organic part, and a polar group. If a non-polar material is placed
in an ionic solvent containing a detergent, then the detergent molecules
will arrange themselves on the surface so that the non-polar part of the
molecule points towards the non-polar material, and the polar group points
towards the solvent. Thus particles of dirt become surrounded by deter-
gent molecules, forming a micelle. This effectively ‘dissolves’ the dirt.
The first new detergents, introduced in about 1950, were branched chain
alkylbenzene sulphonates (ABS). They are called ‘hard detergents’ and
a typical formula is:

CH3 CH; CH3

|
CH,;—CH—CH,—CH—CH,—CH—CH,—CH—CH3

SO; Na*

These are excellent detergents, with good surface active and cleaning
Properties. The problem is that waste water containing the detergent
passes through the drains to the sewage treatment plants. The detergents
cause problems with frothing in the sewage plants. Bacteria in the treat-
ment plant break down various waste products, both sewage and the de-
tergents, However, the detergent is only about 50-60% biodegradable.
The bacteria cannot degrade the benzene ring, and they have difficulty
and are slow at degrading branched chains. Thus much of the detergent
is discharged into rivers and foams badly, especially if protein is present
in the water.

‘Soft’ detergents also contain a non-polar and a polar part of the mol-
ecule, but they are linear alkylbenzene sulphonates (LAS) and have an
prin aliphatic chain. They are 90% biodegradable. The straight
de is completely degraded, but the aromatic ring is not. Thus soft

tT a ee considerably less pollution than do hard detergents.
silo; ate t chain alcohols such as lauryl alcohol (available from coconut
i raid iba sulphonated, the product is an excellent detergent, which

. ., an completely biodegraded. Alcohols of chain length C,4 can
Produced by the Ziegler—Natta process (see under ‘Organometallic

| [555]
