 

 

| OXOACIDS OF SELENIUM AND TELLURIUM

563

 

2.15A and the S—O bonds are 1.43 — again rather short. The bond
angles S—S—O are close tq tetrahedral (103°).

A range of polythionates have been known as salts since the early work
of Wackenrodér on the effect of H2S on aqueous solutions of SO,. Ions
such as trithionate $02, tetrathionate S,OZ~, pentathionate S,0%" and
hexathionate S,08~ are named according to the total number of S atoms
present. It is only in recent times that the parent acids have been made.

oo oO oO
, I ll

polythionic acid

Peroxoacid series

The name peroxo indicates that the‘compound contains an —O—O—
linkage. Two peroxoacids of sulphur are known: peroxomonosulphuric
acid H,SOs and peroxodisulphuric acid H2S2Og. No peroxoacids of Se and
Te are known. H2S2Og is a colourless solid, m.p. 65°C. It is obtained by
electrolysis of sulphates at high current density. It is soluble in water, and
is a powerful and useful oxidizing agent. It will convert Mn?* to perman-
ganate and Cr>* to chromate. The most important salts are (NH4)2S20g
and K2S,0g. (NH4)2S2Og is used to initiate the polymerization of vinyl
acetate in the production of synthetic rayon, and of tetrafluoroethylene in
the formation of PTFE. K,S,Oy is used as an initiating agent in the pol-
ymerization of vinyl chloride to PVC and styrene—butadiene copolymer
Tubbers.”

Hydrolysis of peroxodisulphuric acid gives peroxomonosulphuric acid,
H2SOs, which is often called Caro’s acid.

Oo Oo Oo oO
I ll
HO— 1 —0O—O— S—OH + HO— S —O—OH + HO—S—OH
I Il I
Oo Oo /O oO
H.SOs can also be made from chlorosulphuric acid:
(HO)(CI)SO, + HO. (HO)(HOO)SO, + HCI
It forms colourless crystals, m.p. 45°C, but must be handled with care
since it may explode.
OXOACIDs OF SELENIUM AND TELLURIUM

Seleni . + . : .

fea forms two oxoacids, selenious acid H2SeO3 and selenic acid

act < ss Selenious acid is formed when SeQ, dissolves in water. The solid
‘an be isolated and two series of salts (the normal and acid selenites)
