 

HYDRIDES

trivalent phosphorus compounds such as PF3, PCl3, PEt3, P(OR)3 and
PPh; also form complexes, which in.some ways resemble complexes with
CO. Thus the lone pair on P is used to form the coordinate bond to an
empty orbital on the B or metal (a o bond). In the case of metals, this

original coordinate bond may be reinforced by back bonding from x:

overlap of a filled d orbital on the metal with an empty d orbital on P.

The donor properties of the other hydrides are very weak, and they have
little or no tendency to form coordinate bonds.

In NH; the lone pair occupies an sp® hybrid orbital. In AsH3 and SbH3
the bond angles become close to 90° which suggests that the orbitals used
for M—H bonding are almost pure p orbitals. If the three p orbitals are
used for M—H bonding, the lone pair must occupy a spherical s orbital.
This is larger, and less directional, and hence less effective for forming
a coordinate bond. This means that any o bond will be very weak. In
addition the 4d and 5d orbitals are too large for effective x back bonding.
These two factors account for the difference in complexing power between
the hydrides.

Nitrogen forms several hydrides (see Table 14.7).

Table 14.7 Hydrides of nitrogen

Formula Name Oxidation state

-I

NH; , Ammonia

NoHy Hydrazine II

NH,OH Hydroxylamine I
Hydrazine NoH4

Hydrazine is a covalent liquid, which fumes in air, and smells similar to
NHs. Pure hydrazine burns readily in air with the evolution of a large
amount of heat.

NoHaqy + Ooi) > Now + 2H20 AH = ~621kJ mol7?

The methyl derivatives MeNHNH; and Me,NNH> are mixed with N2O4
and used as a rocket fuel in the space shuttle, in guided missiles, and
(earlier) in the Apollo lunar modules.

N2H4 is a weak base and reacts with acids, forming two series of salts.
The salts are white ionic crystalline solids, and are soluble in water.

N2H, + HX > NH? + X7
NoHs + 2HX — NjH2* + 2X7
When dissolved in water (in neutral or basic solutions) hydrazine or its
Salts are powerful reducing agents, They are used to produce silver and

Copper mirrors and to precipitate the platinum metals. Hydrazine also
teduces Iz and Op.

 

[483 |
