 

 

ft OXIDES OF NITROGEN
L

Table 14.8 Oxides of nitrogen

 

Formula Oxidation number Name

+1 Nitrous oxide
ND +I Nitric oxide
N03 +I Nitrogen sesquioxide ;
NO2, N20s +1V Nitrogen dioxide, dinitrogen tetroxide
N,Os5 +V Dinitrogen pentoxide .
(NO3, NzOx) +VI Nitrogen trioxide, dinitrogen hexoxide

very unstable
i

Nitrous oxide N2O

N,O is a stable, relatively unreactive colourless gas. It is prepared by
careful thermal decomposition of molten ammonium nitrate at about
280°C. If heated strongly it explodes. N2O can also be made by heating a
solution of NH4NO; acidified with HCl.

NH,NO; > N,O + 2H,0

N,O is a neutral oxide and does not form hyponitrous acid H2N2O2 with
water nor hyponitrites with alkali. It is important in the preparation of
sodium azide, and hence also of the other azides: .

N20 + 2NaNH2 — NaN; + NH; + NaOH

The largest use of N20 is as a propellant for whipped ice-cream. Because
it has no taste, and is non-toxic, it meets the strict food and health
Tegulations.

N,O is used as an anaesthetic, particularly by dentists. It is sometimes
called ‘laughing gas’, because small amounts cause euphoria. It requires a
partial pressure of 760 mm Hg of N2O to anaesthetize a patient completely.
Thus if dioxygen is also supplied, the patient may not be completely un-
Conscious. If deprived of dioxygen for long, the patient will die. Plainly
N,0 is unsuitable for long operations. Usually N2O is administered to put
the patient ‘to sleep’, and Oz to make him recover consciousness.

The molecule is linear as would be expected for a triatomic molecule
with 16 outer shell electrons (see also Ny and CO). However, CO, is
symmetrical (O—C—O), whereas in N2O the orbital energies favour the
formation of the asymmetrical molecule N—-N—O rather then the sym-
metrical molecule N—O—N. The bond lengths are short, and the bond
orders have been calculated as N—N 2.73 and N—O 1.61.

nil26A 1.1864

 

O°
Nitric oxide NO

xo isa colourless gas and is an important intermediate in the manufacture
Mitric acid by the catalytic oxidation of ammonia (Ostwald process). It

 

499 |
