 

 

 

 

( OCCURRENCE, EXTRACTION AND USES

earth’s crust, though deposits are found in a few desert regions. The
largest is a 450-mile-long belt along the coast of northern Chile, where
NaNO; (Chile saltpetre) is found together with small amounts of KNO;,
CaSO, and NalO; under a thin layer of sand or soil. This provided the
main source of nitrates prior to World War I, when synthetic Processes
were developed for the manufacture of nitrates from atmospheric dini-
trogen. A major deposit of saltpetre KNO; occurs in India.

Nitrogen is an essential constituent of proteins and amino acids. (An
average composition of a protein is C = 50%, O = 25%, N = 17%,
H = 7%, S = 0.5%, P = 0.5% by weight.) Nitrates and other nitrogen
compounds are extensively used in fertilizers and explosives. Earlier this
century NaNO; was very important as a fertilizer. Bat guano was also

Table 14,2 Abundance of the elements in the
earth's crust, by weight

 

ppm Relative abundance
N 19 33 =
Pp 1120 , ul
As 18 52
Sb 0.20 64
Bi 0.008 7h

 

important. (This is bat droppings, which were found in large amounts in
limestone caverns in Kentucky, Tennessee and Carlsbad, New Mexico.) In
the fast SO years these sources have largely been replaced by NH; and
NH,NO, from the huge synthetic ammonia and nitric acid industries.
Dinitrogen gas is used in large amounts as an inert atmosphere. This is
mainly in the iron and steel and other metallurgical industries, and in oil
refineries for purging catalytic cracking vessels, re-forming vessels and
Pipes. Liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant. Large amounts of N2 are
used in the manufacture of ammonia and ‘calcium cyanamide. N2 is
obtained commercially by condensing air to the liquid state, and then
fractionally distilling the liquid air. Nz has a lower boiling point than O2
and distils off first. Six industrial gases are obtained in this way: Nz, O2,
Ne. Ar, Kr and Xe. A typical analysis of air is shown in Table 14.3.
World production of Nz is growing rapidly and exceeds 60 million
tonnes/year. (This is largely because liquid O, is essential for modern steel
making processes, and N2 is produced at the same time.) About two thirds
of the Nz is sold as gas. This may either be compressed in steel cylinders, or
Piped to where it is used. One third is sold as liquid N2. Dinitrogen
obtained in this way always contains traces of dioxygen and the noble
gases. Commercial Nz normally contains up to 20 ppm of O., ‘oxy-free’ N2
Oppmae ta 2ppm Oz, and ultrapure Nz has no ©, but Thay have up to
A cylinder of No is the usual source of Nz in the laboratory, but samples
the gas may be obtained by making ammonium nitrite and then warming
Nz is also obtained by oxidizing ammonia, for example with calcium

of
it.

contumued overleal

 

| [469

 
