 

 

| SULPHIDES OF PHOSPHORUS

3% Used in the food industry to give the acid taste in drinks such as cola
(pH 2), sarsaparilla and root beer, and as an emulsifier in processed
cheese, dried milk, sausages etc.

24% For treating metals.

(a) Rustproofing, by dipping the hot metal into phosphoric acid, or
heating the acid to 90-95°C (sometimes with Zn?*, Mn?*
Cu?* or other ions present) in processes such as Parkerizing
and Bonderizing. Small metal parts such as nuts, bolts and
screws are treated in this way, and also motor car bodies, refri-
gerators etc. before they are painted.

(b) Pickling metals, that is removing scale and oxide from the
surface of iron and steel by dipping in an acid bath.

(c) ‘Bright dipping’ of aluminium parts. The parts are connected to
the anode and electrolysed in a bath of H;PO, with a small
amount of HNO, and a trace of Cu(NOs)s. This gives a highly
polished Al surface protected by a clear layer of Al,O3.

1% For industrial uses such as water softening (particularly calgon, and
trisodium phosphate Na3PQ,), buffers (NaH,PO, and Na2HPO,),
paint strippers (Na3PO,), and removing H2S from gases particularly
in the petroleum industry (K3PO,).

1% For making phosphorus sulphides (for matches).

1% For making organophosphorus compounds: plasticizers (triaryl
phosphates), insecticides (triethyl phosphate) and petrol additives
(tritoly] phosphate).

1% For pharmaceutical products such as toothpaste (CaHPO,:2H20,
“or Ca:P,0, in fluoride toothpaste), and combined baking powder
(Ca(H2PO,)2 which is slightly acidic, mixed with NaHCOs).

4% Flameproofing fabrics (ammonium phosphates and urea phosphate
NH,CONH2- H3PO,).

The excessive use of phosphates as water softeners is criticized by
cnvironmentalists, since it contributes to water pollution. The phosphates
in domestic waste water pass through sewage disposal systems into rivers
and lakes. There they nourish bacteria, which grow excessively and deplete
the water of dissolved dioxygen, thus killing the fish. The phosphates may
also produce a massive overgrowth of water plants. When this crop of
plants dies, there will be excessive decay and putrefaction which may also
kill the fish. The tendency of the acidic ions of P to condense and give
isopolyacids is quite strong. The phosphates and phosphites are similar to
the arsenates and arsenites. Condensed As anions are much less stable
than the corresponding P polyanions and they are rapidly hydrolysed in
water. Antimonates and antimonites are known, but Sb has a coordination
number of 6, and these salts contain the octahedral [Sb(OH),]~ ion.

SULPHIDES OF PHOSPHORUS

phen P and S are heated together to a temperature over 100°C, P,S3,
Ss. PaSy and P.Siq may be formed depending on the relative amounts of

| (521)
