 

FURTHER READING

| [527

 

are similar to that of PCls; that is a trigonal bipyramidal structure. It is rare
to have five organic groups bonded to P. Hoot

PCI, + CoHsLi > P(CcHs)Cl, + LiCl ‘
PCls + 2CgHsLi > P(CeHs)2Cls + 2LiCI
PCis + 3CcHsLi > P(CsH)sCh, + 3LiCI ete.

Several ions NRZ, PR?, AsRi and SbR7 exist which are ‘tetrahedral
like the ammonium ion.

Treatment of POCI, with lithium or Grignard reagents yields trialkyl and
triaryl phosphine oxides.

POCI; + 3LiR > POR; + 3LiCl
Phosphate esters play a vital role in many life processes:

1. The release of energy in living matter by adenosine triphosphate
(ATP + ADP + energy) has been described earlier. Nicotinomide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is important in the degradation of citric
acid in the Krebs’ cycle for the release of energy. Another ester,
phosphocreatine, is important in the regeneration of ATP, and others
control the synthesis and storage of carbohydrates such as glycogen in
animals. ‘

2. Phosphate esters are also important in the synthesis of proteins and
nucleic acids. Deoxyribonucleic acids, DNA, are responsible for the
storage and transfer of genetic information. The sequence of organic
bases is specific for each nucleic acid. The DNA molecules comprise
two strands which are hydrogen bonded together and form a double
helix. Ribonucleic acids, RNA, are similar, but are usually single
strands, and form a single helix. Their function is to act as a template to
produce identical nucleic acids, with the same sequence of bases, and
the same orientation in space. :

3. Phosphate esters also play a part in photosynthesis, and the conversion
of surplus sugar into starch in plants. ,

4. Phosphate esters are also involved in dinitrogen fixation.

FURTHER READING

Addison, Cc. (1980) Dinitrogen tetroxide, nitric acid, and their mixtures as media
for inorganic reactions, Chem. Rev., 80, 21-39. -
Addison, C.C., Logan, N., Wallwork, $.C. and Garner, C.D. (1971) Structural

aspects of coordinated nitrate groups, Q. Rev. Chem. Soc., 25, 289-322.
ances H.R. (1972) Phosphorus Nitrogen Compounds, Academic Press, London.
ee wk (1985) Inorganic macromolecules, Chem. Eng. News, Match 18

Arena, B.J. (1986 ia: : -
TO. 10830 ) Ammonia: confronting a primal trend, J. Chem. Ed., 63,

Avett B.J. (1979) Arsenic, antimony and bismuth, Organometallic Compounds,
Baad ed., Vol. I, Part 2, Chapman and Hall, London.
iC ler, M. (1987) Polyphosphorus compounds — new results and new perspec-
tives, Angewandte Chemie, International Edition, 26, 419-441. '

 
