Summarizing Aerobic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

one ATP molecule is generated for

 

NADH

2

Respiration
How much metabolic energy does a cell glucose
actually gain from the electrons har-
Cr f : —- > 2
vested from a molecule of glucose, using
the electron transport chain to produce 2 4 Glycolysis
ATP by chemiosmosis? ~“y
fo 2 [NADH] > 4
Theoretical Yield Byrnes
The chemiosmotic model suggests that

each proton pump activated by the

 

 

 

|

 

 

electron transport chain. Since the elec-

Acetyl-CoA,

 

 

trons from NADH activate three

¥

 

pumps and those from FADH) activate
two, we would expect each molecule of
NADH and FADH) to generate three
and two ATP molecules, respectively.
However, because eukaryotic cells carry
out glycolysis in their cytoplasm and
the Krebs cycle within their mitochon-
dria, they must transport the two mole-
cules of NADH produced during gly-
colysis across the mitochondrial

 

f Krebs

 

6 |NADH

oe

 

cycle

 

| |
1 |

 

 

s

2 [FADH,

 

 

 

membranes, which requires one ATP

 

per molecule of NADH. Thus, the net
ATP production is decreased by two.
Therefore, the overall ATP production
resulting from aerobic respiration theo-
retically should be 4 (from substrate-
level phosphorylation during glycolysis)
+ 30 G from each of 10 molecules of
NADH) + 4 (2 from each of 2 mole-
cules of FADH)) — 2 (for transport of
glycolytic NADH) = 36 molecules of ATP (figure 9.19).

FIGURE 9.19

Actual Yield

The amount of ATP actually produced in a eukaryotic cell
during aerobic respiration is somewhat lower than 36, for
two reasons. First, the inner mitochondrial membrane is
somewhat “leaky” to protons, allowing some of them to
reenter the matrix without passing through ATP-generating
channels. Second, mitochondria often use the proton gra-
dient generated by chemiosmosis for purposes other than
ATP synthesis (such as transporting pyruvate into the ma-
trix). Consequently, the actual measured values of ATP
generated by NADH and FADH) are closer to 2.5 for
each NADH and 1.5 for each FADH). With these correc-
tions, the overall harvest of ATP from a molecule of glu-
cose in a eukaryotic cell is closer to 4 (from substrate-level
phosphorylation) + 25 (2.5 from each of 10 molecules of
NADH) + 3 (1.5 from each of 2 molecules of FADH)) - 2
(transport of glycolytic NADH) = 30 molecules of ATP.

176 Part IM Energetics

Total net ATP yield = 36

| kK RE

Theoretical ATP yield. The theoretical yield of ATP harvested from glucose by aerobic
respiration totals 36 molecules.

The catabolism of glucose by aerobic respiration, in
contrast to glycolysis, is quite efficient. Aerobic respiration
in a eukaryotic cell harvests about 7.3 x 30 + 686 = 32% of
the energy available in glucose. (By comparison, a typical
car converts only about 25% of the energy in gasoline into
useful energy.) The efficiency of oxidative respiration at
harvesting energy establishes a natural limit on the maxi-
mum length of food chains.

The high efficiency of aerobic respiration was one of the
key factors that fostered the evolution of heterotrophs. With
this mechanism for producing ATP, it became feasible for
nonphotosynthetic organisms to derive metabolic energy ex-
clusively from the oxidative breakdown of other organisms.
As long as some organisms captured energy by photosynthe-
sis, others could exist solely by feeding on them.

 

Oxidative respiration produces approximately 30
molecules of ATP from each molecule of glucose in
eukaryotic cells. This represents more than half of the
energy in the chemical bonds of glucose.

 
