 

 

LL OCCURRENCE, EXTRACTION AND USES

NHe
. |
° ° 9° pror’sn
1 ht oa HG Ue. CH
HO —-P—O—P—O —P—O-CH, NO™N\NF
I I 1-ONL
2 2 2 On HA
Ii FZ
H C——C H
It
OK OH

Figure 14.1 Structure of adenosine triphosphate ATP.

World production of elemental P is about one million tonnes/year, but is
declining. It is obtained by the reduction of calcium phosphate with C in an
electric furnace at 1400—1500°C. Sand (silica SiO.) is added to remove the
calcium as a fluid slag (calcium silicate) and to drive off the phusphorus as
P,Oj. The PsO,y is reduced to phosphorus by C. At this temperature
gaseous phosphorus distils off, mainly as Py but with some P3. This is
condensed to white phosphorus P, by passing the gas through water.

2Cax(POs)2 + 6SiO2 —> 6CaSiO3 + PO
PyOw + 10C > Py + 10CO

About 85% of the elemental P produced is used to make very pure
phosphoric acid H;PO,. About 10% is used to make P,S,) (used making
organo P—S compounds) and P,S3 (which is used to make matches).

Py + 502 —> PyOyo + 6H2O — 4H3PO4
Py + 10S > PySyo

Other uses are for making POCI; and phosphor bronze.

Arsenic, antimony and bismuth

The elements As, Sb and Bi are not very abundant. Their most important
source is as sulphides occurring as traces in other ores. They are well
known because they are obtained as metallurgical by-products from roast-
ing sulphide ores in a smelter. Care should be taken since As and Sb
compounds are poisonous. The colours of the sulphide ores are distinctive.

Arsenic is obtained as As,O3 in the flue dust from roasting CuS, PbS,
Fes, CoS and NiS in air. World production of As,03 was 47000 tonnes
in 1992. The oxide may be converted to As by reduction with C. The
only common ores are arsenopyrites FeAsS (white-grey colour with
Metallic lustre), :algar As,S; (red-orange colour) and orpiment As2S3
(yellow colour). The last two are found in volcanic areas. The element AS
is obtained commercially by heating arsenides such as NiAs. NiAs2 or
FeAs», or arsenopyrites FeAsS, to about 700°C in the absence of air, when
‘the As sublimes out. ,

continued overleaf

 

 

[471]
