9.4 Cells can metabolize food without oxygen.

Fermentation

In the absence of oxygen, aerobic metabolism cannot
occur, and cells must rely exclusively on glycolysis to pro-
duce ATP. Under these conditions, the hydrogen atoms
generated by glycolysis are donated to organic molecules in
a process called fermentation.

Bacteria carry out more than a dozen kinds of fermen-
tations, all using some form of organic molecule to ac-
cept the hydrogen atom from NADH and thus recycle
NAD*:

Organic molecule
+NADH >

Reduced organic molecule
+NAD*

Often the reduced organic compound is an organic acid—
such as acetic acid, butyric acid, propionic acid, or lactic
acid—or an alcohol.

Ethanol Fermentation

Eukaryotic cells are capable of only a few types of fermen-
tation. In one type, which occurs in single-celled fungi
called yeast, the molecule that accepts hydrogen from
NADH is pyruvate, the end product of glycolysis itself.
Yeast enzymes remove a terminal CO) group from pyru-
vate through decarboxylation, producing a two-carbon
molecule called acetaldehyde. The CO? released causes
bread made with yeast to rise, while bread made without
yeast (unleavened bread) does not. The acetaldehyde ac-
cepts a hydrogen atom from NADH, producing NAD* and
ethanol (ethyl alcohol). This particular type of fermenta-
tion is of great interest to humans, since it is the source of
the ethanol in wine and beer (figure 9.24). Ethanol is a by-
product of fermentation that is actually toxic to yeast; as it
approaches a concentration of about 12%, it begins to kill
the yeast. That explains why naturally fermented wine con-
tains only about 12% ethanol.

Lactic Acid Fermentation

Most animal cells regenerate NAD* without decarboxyla-
tion. Muscle cells, for example, use an enzyme called lactate
dehydrogenase to transfer a hydrogen atom from NADH
back to the pyruvate that is produced by glycolysis. This
reaction converts pyruvate into lactic acid and regenerates
NAD* from NADH. It therefore closes the metabolic cir-
cle, allowing glycolysis to continue as long as glucose is
available. Circulating blood removes excess lactate (the ion-
ized form of lactic acid) from muscles, but when removal
cannot keep pace with production, the accumulating lactic
acid interferes with muscle function and contributes to
muscle fatigue.

 

Glucose H
H—G—oH
2 ADP by,
NAD 2 Ethanol
2 NADH
H
Gr ¢=o0

b= ° oH,
_——_

|
ae O 2Pynuvate 2 Acetaldehyde

CH;

Alcohol fermentation in yeast

 

 

 

 

Glucose o
é=0
2 ADP or
CH,
any 2 Lactate
[2 NADH
os
é=0

a O 2Pynuvate
CH

Lactic acid fermentation in muscle cells

FIGURE 9.24

How wine is made. Yeasts carry out the conversion of pyruvate to
ethanol. This takes place naturally in grapes left to ferment on
vines, as well as in fermentation vats containing crushed grapes.
When the ethanol concentration reaches about 12%, its toxic
effects kill the yeast; what remains is wine. Muscle cells convert
pyruvate into lactate, which is less toxic than ethanol. However,
lactate is still toxic enough to produce a painful sensation in
muscles during heavy exercise, when oxygen in the muscles is
depleted.

 

In fermentation, which occurs in the absence of oxygen,
the electrons that result from the glycolytic breakdown
of glucose are donated to an organic molecule,
regenerating NAD* from NADH.

 

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 181
