 

| ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND OXIDATION S” ATES

with almost all the other elements. Most of its compounds are covered
under the other elements.

5, Se and Te are moderately reactive and burn in air to form dioxides.
They combine directly with most elements, both metals and non-metals,
though less readily than with O. As expected for non-metals, S, Se and
Te are not attacked by acids except those which are oxidizing agents. Po
shows metallic properties since it dissolves in H2SO,4, HF, HCI and HNOs,
forming pink solutions of Po", However, Po is strongly radioactive, and
the a-emission decomposes the water, and the Po! solution is quickly
oxidized to yellow solutions of PolY.

Oxygen shows several differences from the rest of the group. These are
associated with its smaller size, higher electronegativity, and the lack of
suitable d orbitals. Oxygen can use pr orbitals to form strong double
bonds. The other elements can also form double bonds, but these become
weaker as the atomic number increases. Thus CO2 (O=C==0) is stable,
CS, less stable, CSe. polymerizes rather than form double bc nds and
CTe, is unknown. Oxygen also forms strong hydrogen bonds which greatly
affect the properties of water and other compounds.

Sulphur shows a much greater tendency to form chains and rings than
the other elements (see Allotropic Forms). Sulphur forms an extensive
and unusual range of compounds with nitrogen which are not matched by
the other elements.

Whereas O and S have only s and p electrons, Se follows after the first
transition series and has d electrons too. The filling of the 3d shell affects
the properties of Ge, As, Se and Br. The atoms are smaller, and the elec-
trons are held more tightly. This is the reason why Se is reluctant to attain
the highest oxidation state of (+VI) shown by S. Thus HNO; oxidizes S to
H,SO, (S +VI1) but only oxidizes Se to H2SeO, (Se +IV).

All compounds of Se, Te and Po are potentially toxic, and should be
handled with care. Organo derivatives, and volatile compounds such as
H,Se and HaTe, are 100 times more toxic than HCN.

ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE AND OXIDATION STATES

The elements all have the electronic structure s?p4. They may attain a
Noble gas configuration either by gaining two electrons, forming M2~ ions,
or by sharing two electrons, thus forriiing two covalent bonds. The electro-
negativity of O is very high — second only to F. The electronegativity dif-
ference between-M and O is large. Thus most metal oxides are ionic and
contain O*> ions, and the oxidation state of O is (I). Sulphides, sel-
enides and tellurides are formed with the more electronegative metals in
Groups 1 and 2 and the lanthanides, and these compounds are some of
the most stable formed. Compounds are often written as containing S?-,
Se*” and Te“. The electronegativity differences suggest that these com-
Pounds are close to the 50% ionic, 50% covalent borderline. In the same

way as for PCls, these compounds may be covalent in the solid but ionic
in aqueous solution.

 

533
