Sy
1
“O—P—O-CH, _O.
H
HO OH
° NH,

FIGURE 9.15

NAD* and NADH.

This dinucleotide

serves as an “electron 1
shuttle” during “O—P—O—CH, _O.
cellular respiration.
NAD¢* accepts
electrons from
catabolized HO OH
macromolecules and
is reduced to NADH.

more of the energy can be used to push the pistons and
move the car.

The same principle applies to the oxidation of glucose
inside a cell. If all of the hydrogens were transferred to oxy-
gen in one explosive step, releasing all of the free energy at
once, the cell would recover very little of that energy in a
useful form. Instead, cells burn their fuel much as a car
does, a little at a time. The six hydrogens in the C—H
bonds of glucose are stripped off in stages in the series of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions collectively referred to as gly-
colysis and the Krebs cycle. We have had a great deal to say
about these reactions already in this chapter. Recall that the
hydrogens are removed by transferring them to a coenzyme
carrier, NAD* (figure 9.15). Discussed in chapter 8, NAD* is
a very versatile electron acceptor, shuttling energy-bearing
electrons throughout the cell. In harvesting the energy of
glucose, NAD* acts as the primary electron acceptor.

Following the Electrons

As you examine these reactions, try not to become confused
by the changes in electrical charge. Always follow the elec-
trons. Enzymes extract two hydrogens—that is, two elec-
trons and two protons—from glucose and transfer both
electrons and one of the protons to NAD+. The other pro-
ton is released as a hydrogen ion, H*, into the surrounding
solution. This transfer converts NAD* into NADH; that is,

ai.
H ~< | pre 4
N NZ H

NAD*: oxidized form of nicotinamide

 

 

HH oO
Reduction tl .
— C—NH, +H
Oxidation | |
N
1
“O—P—O-—CH, LO.
H
HO OH
° NH,

pS"
H < | pre
N NZ H

|
‘O—P—0—CHy ro}

HO OH

NADH: reduced form of nicotinamide

two negative electrons and one positive proton are added to
one positively charged NAD* to form NADH, which is
electrically neutral.

Energy captured by NADH is zot harvested all at once.
Instead of being transferred directly to oxygen, the two
electrons carried by NADH are passed along the electron
transport chain if oxygen is present. This chain consists of
a series of molecules, mostly proteins, embedded within the
inner membranes of mitochondria. NADH delivers elec-
trons to the top of the electron transport chain and oxygen
captures them at the bottom. The oxygen then joins with
hydrogen ions to form water. At each step in the chain, the
electrons move to a slightly more electronegative carrier,
and their positions shift slightly. Thus, the electrons move
down an energy gradient. The entire process releases a total
of 53 kcal/mole (222 kJ/mole) under standard conditions.
The transfer of electrons along this chain allows the energy
to be extracted gradually. In the next section, we will dis-
cuss how this energy is put to work to drive the production
of ATP.

 

The catabolism of glucose involves a series of
oxidation-reduction reactions that release energy by
repositioning electrons closer to oxygen atoms. Energy
is thus harvested from glucose molecules in gradual
steps, using NAD* as an electron carrier.

 

Chapter 9 How Cells Harvest Energy 173
