sis takes place in three stages: (1) capturing energy from
sunlight; (2) using the energy to make ATP and reducing
power in the form of a compound called NADPH; and
(3) using the ATP and NADPH to power the synthesis of
organic molecules from CO) in the air (carbon fixation).

The first two stages take place in the presence of light
and are commonly called the light reactions. The third
stage, the formation of organic molecules from atmos-
pheric CO), is called the Calvin cycle. As long as ATP and
NADPH are available, the Calvin cycle may occur in the
absence of light.

The following simple equation summarizes the overall
process of photosynthesis:

6CO, + 12H:O + light —s CsH,,.0,¢ + 6H20 + 6 O,

carbon water glucose water oxygen
dioxide
Inside the Chloroplast

The internal membranes of chloroplasts are organized into
sacs called thylakoids, and often numerous thylakoids are
stacked on one another in columns called grana. The thy-
lakoid membranes house the photosynthetic pigments for
capturing light energy and the machinery to make ATP.
Surrounding the thylakoid membrane system is a semiliq-
uid substance called stroma. The stroma houses the en-
zymes needed to assemble carbon molecules. In the mem-

Thylakoid Stroma

   

 

 

 

Granum

FIGURE 10.2 (continued)

branes of thylakoids, photosynthetic pigments are clustered
together to form a photosystem.

Each pigment molecule within the photosystem is capa-
ble of capturing photons, which are packets of energy. A lat-
tice of proteins holds the pigments in close contact with
one another. When light of a proper wavelength strikes a
pigment molecule in the photosystem, the resulting excita-
tion passes from one chlorophyll molecule to another. The
excited electron is not transferred physically—it is the en-
ergy that passes from one molecule to another. A crude
analogy to this form of energy transfer is the initial “break”
in a game of pool. If the cue ball squarely hits the point of
the triangular array of 15 pool balls, the two balls at the far
corners of the triangle fly off, but none of the central balls
move. The energy passes through the central balls to the
most distant ones.

Eventually the energy arrives at a key chlorophyll mole-
cule that is touching a membrane-bound protein. The en-
ergy is transferred as an excited electron to that protein,
which passes it on to a series of other membrane proteins
that put the energy to work making ATP and NADPH and
building organic molecules. The photosystem thus acts as a
large antenna, gathering the light harvested by many indi-
vidual pigment molecules.

 

The reactions of photosynthesis take place within
thylakoid membranes within chloroplasts in leaf cells.

 

Sunlight
Photosystem

  
   

 

  

)
Pd

   

 

 

a
A=

Organic
molecules

 

 

 

cox

 

 

Stroma

 

membrane and generate the ATP and NADPH that fuel the Calvin cycle. The fluid interior matrix of a chloroplast, the stroma, contains the

enzymes that carry out the Calvin cycle.

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 185
