 

 

VARIABLE OXIDATION STATE

 

655

 

 

numbers of d electrons oxidation states of (+I), (+111), (+IV), (+V) and
(+VI) are possible. Mn has oxidation states (+II), (+I), (+IV), (+V),
(+VI) and (+VII). Among these first five elements, the correlation
between electronic structure and minimum and maximum oxidation states
in simple compounds is complete. In the highest oxidation states of these
first five elements, all of the s and d electrons are being used for bonding.
Thus the properties depend only on the size and valency, and consequently
show some similarities with elements of the main groups in similar
oxidation states. For example, SO}~ (Group 16) and CrO3” (Group 6) are
isostructural, as are SiCl, (Group 14) and TiCl, (Group 4).

Once the d>-configuration is exceeded, i.e. in the last five elements, the
tendency for all the d electrons to participate in bonding decreases. Thus
Fe has a maximum oxidation state of (+ VI). However, the second and
third elements in this group attain a maximum oxidation state of (+ VIII),
in RuO, and OsOg. This difference between Fe and the other. two elements
Ru and Os is attributed to the increased size.

These facts may be conveniently memorized, because the oxidation
states form a regular ‘pyramid’ as shown in Table 18.2. Only Sc(+II) and
Co(+V) are in doubt. The oxidation number of all elements in the
elemental state is zero. In addition, several of the elements have zero-
valent and other low-valent states in complexes. Low oxidation states
occur particularly with x bonding ligands such as carbon monoxide and
dipyridyl.

Similar but not identical pyramids of oxidation states are found in the

second and third rows of transition elements. The main differences are as
follows:

1. In Group 8 (the iron group) the second and third row elements show a
maximum oxidation state of (+VIII) compared with (+VI) for Fe.

2. The electronic structures of the atoms in the second and third rows do
not always follow the pattern of the first row. The structiires of Group
10 elements (the nickel group) are:

Ni 3d® 4s?
Pd 4d'° 55°
Pt Sd? 6s!

Since a full shell of electrons is a stable arrangement, the place where
this occurs is of importance.

The d levels are complete at copper, palladium and gold in their
respective series.

Ni Cu 3d 4st Zn 3d! 4s?
Pd 4d! 55° Ag Cd 3d'!9 4s?
PL Au Sd 6s' Hg 3d! 4s?

pen though the ground state of the atom has a d!° configuration, Pd and
This ie tee metals Cu, Ag and Au behave as typical transition elements.
1S because in their most common oxidation states Cu(II) has a d®

 
