 

 

HYDRIDES

 

 

 

569

 

 

interaction with water, and so are insoluble. Ionic materials become hy-
drated, and polar materials take part in the hydrogen bonding, so they
are soluble.

A unique property of water is that the solid is less dense than the liquid.
This is why lakes and the sea freeze from the top downwards. The ice at the
top makes it difficult to cool the water underneath, so even at the North
Pole there is water underneath the ice. But for this the sea would freeze
solid and the polar ice-caps would cover much more of the earth’s surface.
The maximum density of water occurs at 4°C. On melting, the hydrogen
bonded network in the solid partly breaks down. Ice has a rather open
structure, with quite large cavities. On partial melting some ‘free’ water
molecules occupy some of these cavities, and hence the density increases.
This effect outweighs the effect of thermal expansion up to 4°C, but above
this temperature expansion is the larger effect so the density decreases.

An unusual form of water called ‘polywater’ was reported and exten-
sively studied between 1966 and 1973. Polywater was reported to have a
freezing point of —40°C and a very high density of 1.4gcm7>. It was ob-
tained when water was formed in glass or quartz capillary tubes. This
caused excitement at first because polywater was thought to comprise a
larger number of water molecules polymerized together. It is now known
to be a colloidal mixture of silicates, and a variety of ions Na*, K*, Ca?*,
BO}, NOz, SO3}~ and Cl- which had been leached from the glass!

Other hydrides

The hydrides dissociate to a varying degree, forming H* ions. They are all
very weak acids and there is an increase in acidic strength from H,O to
HyTe. The large difference in electronegativity taken in conjunction with
Fajans’ rules (the larger the negative ion the greater the tendency to co-
valency) suggest that H,Te gas should be the most covalent. Acidic be-
haviour in solution is discussed for the halogen acids (see Chapter 16)
and depends on the enthalpy of formation of the molecule, the ionization
energy, electron affinity and enthalpies of hydration. In the compounds
H,0, H2S, H,Se and H;Te the most important factor is the enthalpy of
formation, the values being ~120, —10, +43 and +77kJ mol™!. The stab-
ility decreases (the last two are in fact thermodynamically unstable), thus
accounting for the greater dissociation of HTe.

HaTe(nyuratesy + H2O0 = H30* + HTe (hyarated)
re More acidic the hydrogen atom in the hydrides, the more stable will be
the salts formed from them, i.e. oxides, sulphides, selenides and tellurides.
Peroxides and polysulphides

ciygen. and to a greater extent sulphur, differ from the remainder in their
ty to catenate and form polyoxides and polysulphides, which are less

 
