 

 

583

 

 

i OCCURRENCE AND ABUNDANCE

of CI is 38% larger than that of F~, but the radius of Br~ is only 6.5%
larger than that of Cl-. The relatively small change in size occurs because
Br~ contains ten 3d electrons, which shield the nuclear charge ineffec-
tively. This also results in the electronegativity values being particularly
close for these two elements. Thus there is little difference in polarity of
the bonds formed by Cl and Br with other elements,

The oxidation states (+1) are by far the most common. Wace her i: is
(-1) or (+1) depends on whether the halogen is the most electronegative
element. Higher oxidation states exist for all of the elements except F.
The lack of low-lying empty d orbitals in the second shell prevents F from
forming more than one normal covalent bond.

Fluorine is a very strong oxidizing agent, and this together with its
small size allows it to form compounds that bring out the highest‘oxida-
tion state of ather elements. Examples include IF;, PtF,, SF, and many
hexafluorides, BiF;, SFs, TbF;, AgF2. and K[Ag'"'F,].

The elements all exist as diatomic molecules, and they are all coloured.
Gaseous F; is light yellow, Cl2 gas is yellow-green. Br2 gas and liquid
are dark red-brown, and I> gas is violet. The colours arise from the
absorption of light on promoting an electron from the ground state to a
higher state. On descending the group the energy levels become closer,
so the promotion energy becomes less and the wavelength of the band
becomes longer. - :

1, solid crystallizes as black flakes. and has a slightly metallic lustre.
Though the X-ray structure shows discrete I; molecules, the ¢olour is
reminiscent of charge transfer compounds, and the properties are different
from those of other molecular solids. The solid conducts electricity to a
small extent, and the conductivity increases when the temperature is
raised. This behaviour is like that of an intrinsic semiconductor, and
different from metals. However. liquid 1, conducts very slightly. This is
ascribed to self-ionization:

3 Sif + IF

__ The stable isotopes of the halogens all have a nuctear spin. This is used
in nmr spectroscopy. Chemical shifts are conveniéntly measured using the
isotope 'F,

Several chemicals are of commercial importance and are produced on a
vast scale. These include Cl, (35.3 million tonnes in 1994). anhydrous HCl
and hydrochloric acid (12.3 million tonnes in 1991), anhydrous HF and
hydrofluoric acid (1.5 million tonnes in 1994). Br: (370000 tonnes in
1993) and ClO, (200000 tonnes/year). . ,

OCCURRENCE AND ABUNDANCE ‘

Hotoeens are all very reactive, and do not occur in the free state.
cnt (Asta except astatine are found in combined form in the earth’s
thine ‘ ine is radioactive and has a short half life.) Fluorine is the
enth most abundant element by weight in the earth's crust, and
continued overleaf

 
