Ultraviolet Light

The sunlight that reaches the earth’s surface
contains a significant amount of ultraviolet
(UV) light, which, because of its shorter
wavelength, possesses considerably more en-
ergy than visible light. UV light is thought to
have been an important source of energy on
the primitive earth when life originated. To-
day’s atmosphere contains ozone (derived
from oxygen gas), which absorbs most of the
UV photons in sunlight, but a considerable
amount of UV light still manages to pene-
trate the atmosphere. This UV light is a po-
tent force in disrupting the bonds of DNA,
causing mutations that can lead to skin can-
cer. As we will describe in a later chapter,
loss of atmospheric ozone due to human ac-
tivities threatens to cause an enormous jump
in the incidence of human skin cancers

throughout the world.

Relative light absorption —————>

Absorption Spectra and Pigments

How does a molecule “capture” the energy
of light? A photon can be envisioned as a
very fast-moving packet of energy. When it
strikes a molecule, its energy is either lost as

400

FIGURE 10.5
The absorption spectrum of chlorophyll. The peaks represent wavelengths of

Carotenoids Chlorophyllb Chlorophyll a

 

450 500 550 600 650 700

Wavelength (nm)

heat or absorbed by the electrons of the mol-
ecule, boosting those electrons into higher
energy levels. Whether or not the photon’s
energy is absorbed depends on how much
energy it carries (defined by its wavelength)

sunlight that the two common forms of photosynthetic pigment, chlorophyll a (solid
line) and chlorophyll b (dashed line), strongly absorb. These pigments absorb
predominately violet-blue and red light in two narrow bands of the spectrum and
reflect the green light in the middle of the spectrum. Carotenoids (not shown here)
absorb mostly blue and green light and reflect orange and yellow light.

and on the chemical nature of the molecule it

hits. As we saw in chapter 2, electrons occupy

discrete energy levels in their orbits around

atomic nuclei. To boost an electron into a different energy
level requires just the right amount of energy, just as reach-
ing the next rung on a ladder requires you to raise your
foot just the right distance. A specific atom can, therefore,
absorb only certain photons of light—namely, those that
correspond to the atom’s available electron energy levels.
As a result, each molecule has a characteristic absorption
spectrum, the range and efficiency of photons it is capable
of absorbing.

Molecules that are good absorbers of light in the visible
range are called pigments. Organisms have evolved a vari-
ety of different pigments, but there are only two general
types used in green plant photosynthesis: carotenoids and
chlorophylls. Chlorophylls absorb photons within narrow
energy ranges. Two kinds of chlorophyll in plants, chloro-
phylls a and 4, preferentially absorb violet-blue and red
light (figure 10.5). Neither of these pigments absorbs pho-
tons with wavelengths between about 500 and 600
nanometers, and light of these wavelengths is, therefore,
reflected by plants. When these photons are subsequently

absorbed by the pigment in our eyes, we perceive them as
reen.

Chlorophyll a is the main photosynthetic pigment and is
the only pigment that can act directly to convert light en-
ergy to chemical energy. However, chlorophyll 4, acting as
an accessory or secondary light-absorbing pigment, com-
plements and adds to the light absorption of chlorophyll a.
Chlorophyll 4 has an absorption spectrum shifted toward
the green wavelengths. Therefore, chlorophyll b can absorb
photons chlorophyll 4 cannot. Chlorophyll 4 therefore
greatly increases the proportion of the photons in sunlight
that plants can harvest. An important group of accessory
pigments, the carotenoids, assist in photosynthesis by cap-
turing energy from light of wavelengths that are not effi-
ciently absorbed by either chlorophyll.

 

In photosynthesis, photons of light are absorbed by
pigments; the wavelength of light absorbed depends
upon the specific pigment.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 189
