 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS 585
was by Moissan in 1886. He was subsequently awarded the Nobel Prize for HE OF
Chemistry in 1906 for this work. Fluorine is obtained by treating CaF, with]
concentrated H2SO, to give an aqueous mixture of HF. This is distilled,
yielding anhydrous liquid HF. Then a cooled solution of KHF; in anhy-
drous HF is electrolysed, giving F, and H2 (Figure 16.1).
CaF, + H2SO,— CaSO, + 2HF | cootna
KF + HF > K[HF)] Catton
Steotea
HF + K{HF)] “25, Hy + Fy ea

There are many difficulties in obtaining fluorine.

. HF is corrosive, and etches glass and also causes very painful skin
wounds. These arise partly by dehydrating the tissue, and partly from
the acidic nature of HF. The wounds are slow to heal because F~ ions
remove Ca?* ions from the tissues.

. Gaseous HF is also very toxic (3 ppm) compared with HCN (10 ppm).

. Anhydrous HF is only slightly ionized and is therefore a poor conductor
of electricity, Thus a mixture of KF and HF is electrolysed to increase
the conductivity. Moissan used a solution of KF in HF with a mole ratio
of 1:13. This has the disadvantage that the vapour pressure of HF is
high, and this gives problems with toxicity and corrosion, even when the
reaction mixture is cooled to —24°C. Modern methods use medium
temperature fluorine generators. These use a mole ratio of 1:2 of
KF: HF so that the vapour pressure of HF is much lower. This mixture
melts at about 72°C which is a much easier temperature to maintain.
Note that KF and HF react to form the acid salt K*[F—H—F]~.

4, Water must be rigorously excluded or the fluorine produced will oxidize
it to dioxygen.

. The hydrogen liberated at.the cathode must be separated from the
fluorine liberated at the anode by a diaphragm, otherwise they will react
explosively,

. Fluorine is extremely reactive. It catches fire, for example with traces of
grease or with crystalline silicon. Glass and most metals are attacked. It
is difficult to find suitable materials from which to make the reaction
vessels, Moissan used a platinum U-tube, since platinum is very un-
reactive (but it is very expensive). Copper or Monel metal (Cu/Ni alloy)
are now used instead, because they cost less. A protective fluoride film
forms on the surface of the metal and slows down further attack.

- The cathodes are made of steel, the anodes are carbon, and teflon is
used for electrical insulation. Graphite anodes must not be used, since
graphite Teacts with fluorine, forming graphite compounds CF. In these,
fluorine atoms progressively invade the space between the sheets of
graphite, forcing them apart, and buckling them. This gradually stops
the graphite from conducting, the current needed increases, more heat
's produced. and eventually an explosion may occur, Ungraphitized
carbon is used to avoid this. It is made from powdered coke compacted
and impregnated with copper.

wn

w

a

~

continued overleaf

 

Figure 16.1 Fluorine cell.
