 

[ HYDRIDES

Very pure water is required for laboratory and industrial use. The only
way to remove all solid solutes is distillation. This is expensive since water
has a high boiling point and high latent heat of evaporation. During dis-
tillation the water tends to dissolve appreciable amounts of CO, from
the atmosphere, which make it acidic. A cheaper method is to produce
deionized water. This is done by passing the water down two different ion-
exchange columns one after the other. (Alternatively a ‘mixed bed’ may
be used, i.e. a single column made up of two different ion-exchange ma-
terials.) Ion-exchange resins are insolubie polymeric solids, containing a
reactive group, They are manufactured in bead form, and are permeable
to water. The first column contains a sulphonic acid resin, that is an or-
ganic resin with acidic groups —SO3H. This removes all metal ions from
solution and replaces them with H*:

resin-SO3H + Na* — resin-SO;Na + H*
2 resin-SO,H + Ca** — (resin-SO3)2Ca + 2H*

The second column contains a resin with basic groups -NR{OH™, which
Temoves negative ions.

resin-N(CH,)3 OH™ + Cl” — resin-N(CH3)7 CIV + OH™

Water produced in this way usually contains soluble-silicates and CO2.
When all the reactive sites on the resin have been used, the resins can be
regenerated by treating the first one with dilute H2SO,. and the second
one with a Na,CO, solution.

Drinking water is usually much less pure, and water with no dissolved
salts does not taste very nice. The World Health Organization recom-
mends a maximum desirable content of not more than 0.5 grams of dis-
solved solids per litre, though the maximum permissible level is three
times this. If the fresh water source contains silt, this is allowed to settle
out. Light suspended particles and colloidal particles which discolour the
water are removed by treating with Al(OH), or Fe(OH);. These coagulate
suspended particles. thus clarifying the water. (Alum is the most widely
used coagulating agent.) If necessary some water softening may be per-
formed by ion-exchange, or by mixing water from different sources. The
water is then chlorinated, or treated with ozone to kill bacteria. These are
Present because of drainage from fields into rivers and lakes, and also
from the disposal of partly treated and untreated sewage. Failure to treat
drinking water is the major cause of enteritis. In some underdeveloped
Parts of the world up to half the children under the age of five die from this
cause or other waterborne diseases.

Sea water has a high salt content. The production of drinking water and
water for crops from sea water is called desalination. It requires a large
amount of energy, and is therefore expensive. It is only carried out when
the shortage of fresh water is severe, but it has become increasingly im-
portant in arid regions like the Persian Gulf. Distillation, ion-exchange,

slectrodialysis, reverse osmosis and the freezing out of ice have all been

 

567]
