 

OXOACIDS

 

 

619

 

 

chlorates used. NH,CIO, will absorb sufficient ammonia to liquefy
itself.

2. Nearly 500 tonnes of HCIO, are used annually, mostly to make other
perchlorates. HCIO, is a colourless liquid and can be made from
NH,CIO, and dilute nitric acid, or from NaClO, and concentrated
hydrochloric acid.

NH,ClO, + HNO; — HClO4 + NHsNO3

In principle perchlorates could be made from the disproportionation of
chlorates, but the reaction is slow and of little use.

4ClO; — 3ClOz + Cl~

HCIO, is commercially available as 70% HCIO,, which has almost
the composition of the dihydrate HClO, -2H,0. It is the only oxoacid
of chlorine that can be isolated in the anhydrous state. It is made by
dehydrating HCIO,-2H2O with fuming sulphuric acid, then removing
HClO, by vacuum distillation.

HCIO,4:2H2O + 2H2S:07 > HCIO, + 2H2SO,4

HCIO, is one of the strongest acids known. The anhydrous compound is
a powerful oxidizing agent which explodes on contact with organic
material (wood, paper, cloth, grease, rubber or chemicals), and some-
times on its own. The cold concentrated (70% aqueous) solution is a
much weaker oxidizing agent. Hot concentrated solutions have been
used for ‘wet ashing’, where all organic materials in the sample are
oxidized to CO2, leaving only the inorganic constituents for analysis.
Alcohols must not be present since perchlorate esters are explosive.
Often a mixture of HCIO, and HNO3; is used for wet ashing, since the
HNO; oxidizes alcohols and removes this risk.

3. Magnesium perchlorate MgClO, is used as the electrolyte in so-called
‘dry batteries’. It is very hygroscopic, and is a very effective desiccant
called ‘anhydrone’.

4. KCIO, is used in fireworks and flares. Those with a bang and flash
usually use KCIO,, Al and S, and those that are flares have KCIO, and
Mg. A red colour is obtained by adding some SrCO; or Li,CO3, and
CuCO; gives blue. Making fireworks is dangerous — do not attempt it!

_ Virtually all metal perchlorates, except those with the larger Group 1
ions K*. Rb* and Cs*, are soluble in water. The sparing solubility of
KCIO, is used to detect potassium in qualitative analysis. (A solution of
NaClO, is added to the solution containing K*, and KCIO, is precipi-
tated.) The Clor ion has only a very slight tendency to form complexes
ah metal ions. Thus perchlorates are often used as an inert ion in the
ligand a tons in aqueous solution. However, in the absence of other
ig » <i tons may act as unidentate or bidentate ligands. The per-
chlorate ion is tetrahedral.

F .
‘or # long time efforts to make perbromates were unsuccessful, and it

 
