Organizing Pigments into
Photosystems

The light reactions of photosynthesis occur in membranes.
In bacteria like those studied by van Niel, the plasma mem-
brane itself is the photosynthetic membrane. In plants and
algae, by contrast, photosynthesis is carried out by or-
ganelles that are the evolutionary descendants of photosyn-
thetic bacteria, chloroplasts—the photosynthetic mem-
branes exist within the chloroplasts. The light reactions
take place in four stages:

1. Primary photoevent. A photon of light is captured
by a pigment. The result of this primary photoevent
is the excitation of an electron within the pigment.

2. Charge separation. This excitation energy is trans-
ferred to a specialized chlorophyll pigment termed a
reaction center, which reacts by transferring an ener-
getic electron to an acceptor molecule, thus initiating
electron transport.

3. Electron transport. The excited electron is shut-
tled along a series of electron-carrier molecules em-
bedded within the photosynthetic membrane. Several
of them react by transporting protons across the
membrane, generating a gradient of proton concen-
tration. Its arrival at the pump induces the transport
of a proton across the membrane. The electron is
then passed to an acceptor.

4. Chemiosmosis. The protons that accumulate on
one side of the membrane now flow back across the
membrane through specific protein complexes where
chemiosmotic synthesis of ATP takes place, just as it
does in aerobic respiration.

Discovery of Photosystems

One way to study how pigments absorb light is to measure
the dependence of the output of photosynthesis on the in-
tensity of illumination—that is, how much photosynthesis
is produced by how much light. When experiments of this
sort are done on plants, they show that the output of pho-
tosynthesis increases linearly at low intensities but lessens
at higher intensities, finally saturating at high-intensity
light (figure 10.9). Saturation occurs because all of the
light-absorbing capacity of the plant is in use; additional
light doesn’t increase the output because there is nothing
to absorb the added photons.

It is tempting to think that at saturation, all of a plant’s
pigment molecules are in use. In 1932 plant physiologists
Robert Emerson and William Arnold set out to test this
hypothesis in an organism where they could measure both
the number of chlorophyll molecules and the output of
photosynthesis. In their experiment, they measured the
oxygen yield of photosynthesis when Chlorella (unicellular
green algae) were exposed to very brief light flashes lasting

192 Part II Energetics

 

 

Saturation when all

 

 

 

 

 

chlorophyll molecules. | ® see
are in use .

a e

=

g a

S ° Saturation when all

z e photosystems are

gz . a in use

a °

° e

3 ° © © © Expected

Sie ——_

ele Observed

Intensity of light flashes. ———>
FIGURE 10.9

Emerson and Amold’s experiment. When photosynthetic
saturation is achieved, further increases in intensity cause no
increase in output.

only a few microseconds. Assuming the hypothesis of pig-
ment saturation to be correct, they expected to find that as
they increased the intensity of the flashes, the yield per
flash would increase, until each chlorophyll molecule ab-
sorbed a photon, which would then be used in the light re-
actions, producing a molecule of Op.

Unexpectedly, this is not what happened. Instead, satu-
ration was achieved much earlier, with only one molecule
of O) per 2500 chlorophyll molecules! This led Emerson
and Arnold to conclude that light is absorbed not by inde-
pendent pigment molecules, but rather by clusters of
chlorophyll and accessory pigment molecules which have
come to be called photosystems. Light is absorbed by any one
of the hundreds of pigment molecules in a photosystem,
which transfer their excitation energy to one with a lower
energy level than the others. This reaction center of the
photosystem acts as an energy sink, trapping the excitation
energy. It was the saturation of these reaction centers, not
individual molecules, that was observed by Emerson and

Arnold.

Architecture of a Photosystem

In chloroplasts and all but the most primitive bacteria, light
is captured by such photosystems. Each photosystem is a
network of chlorophyll @ molecules, accessory pigments,
and associated proteins held within a protein matrix on the
surface of the photosynthetic membrane. Like a magnify-
ing glass focusing light on a precise point, a photosystem
channels the excitation energy gathered by any one of its
pigment molecules to a specific molecule, the reaction cen-
ter chlorophyll. This molecule then passes the energy out
