LO

Photosynthesis

Concept Outline

10.1 What is photosynthesis?

‘The Chloroplast as a Photosynthetic Machine. The
highly organized system of membranes in chloroplasts is
essential to the functioning of photosynthesis.

10.2 Learning about photosynthesis: An experimental
journey.
The Role of Soil and Water. The added mass of a
growing plant comes mostly from photosynthesis. In plants,
water supplies the electrons used to reduce carbon dioxide.
Discovery of the Light-Independent Reactions.
Photosynthesis is a two-stage process. Only the first stage
directly requires light.
The Role of Light. The oxygen released during green
plant photosynthesis comes from water, and carbon atoms
from carbon dioxide are incorporated into organic molecules.
The Role of Reducing Power. Electrons released from
the splitting of water reduce NADP*; ATP and NADPH.
are then used to reduce CO; and form simple sugars.

10.3 Pigments capture energy from sunlight.

‘The Biophysics of Light. The energy in sunlight occurs
in “packets” called photons, which are absorbed by pigments.
Chlorophylls and Carotenoids. Photosynthetic
pigments absorb light and harvest its energy.

Organizing Pigments into Photosystems. A
photosystem uses light energy to eject an energized electron.
How Photosystems Convert Light to Chemical Energy.
Some bacteria rely on a single photosystem to produce
ATP. Plants use two photosystems in series to generate
enough energy to reduce NADP* and generate ATP.

How the Two Photosystems of Plants Work Together.
Photosystems II and I drive the synthesis of the ATP and
NADPH needed to form organic molecules.

10.4 Cells use the energy and reducing power captured
by the light reactions to make organic molecules.
The Calvin Cycle. ATP and NADPH are used to build
organic molecules, a process reversed in mitochondria.
Reactions of the Calvin Cycle. Ribulose bisphosphate
binds CO; in the process of carbon fixation.
Photorespiration. The enzyme that catalyzes carbon
fixation also affects CO) release.

 

FIGURE 10.1

Capturing energy. These sunflower plants, growing vigorously
in the August sun, are capturing light energy for conversion into
chemical energy through photosynthesis.

L* on earth would be impossible without photosyn-
thesis. Every oxygen atom in the air we breathe was
once part of a water molecule, liberated by photosynthesis.
The energy released by the burning of coal, firewood,
gasoline, and natural gas, and by our bodies’ burning of all
the food we eat—all, directly or indirectly, has been cap-
tured from sunlight by photosynthesis. It is vitally impor-
tant that we understand photosynthesis. Research may en-
able us to improve crop yields and land use, important
goals in an increasingly crowded world. In the previous
chapter we described how cells extract chemical energy
from food molecules and use that energy to power their
activities. In this chapter, we will examine photosynthesis,
the process by which organisms capture energy from sun-
light and use it to build food molecules rich in chemical
energy (figure 10.1).

183
