10.2 Learning about photosynthesis: An experimental journey.

The Role of Soil and Water

The story of how we learned about photosynthesis is one of
the most interesting in science and serves as a good intro-
duction to this complex process. The story starts over 300
years ago, with a simple but carefully designed experiment
by a Belgian doctor, Jan Baptista van Helmont
(1577-1644). From the time of the Greeks, plants were
thought to obtain their food from the soil, literally sucking
it up with their roots; van Helmont thought of a simple
way to test the idea. He planted a small willow tree in a pot
of soil after weighing the tree and the soil. The tree grew in
the pot for several years, during which time van Helmont
added only water. At the end of five years, the tree was
much larger: its weight had increased by 74.4 kilograms.
However, all of this added mass could not have come from the
soil, because the soil in the pot weighed only 57 grams less
than it had five years earlier! With this experiment, van
Helmont demonstrated that the substance of the plant was
not produced only from the soil. He incorrectly concluded
that mainly the water he had been adding accounted for the
plant’s increased mass.

A hundred years passed before the story became clearer.
The key clue was provided by the English scientist Joseph
Priestly, in his pioneering studies of the properties of air.
On the 17th of August, 1771, Priestly “accidentally hit
upon a method of restoring air that had been injured by the
burning of candles.” He “put a [living] sprig of mint into
air in which a wax candle had burnt out and found that, on
the 27th of the same month, another candle could be
burned in this same air.” Somehow, the vegetation seemed
to have restored the air! Priestly found that while a mouse
could not breathe candle-exhausted air, air “restored” by
vegetation was not “at all inconvenient to a mouse.” The
key clue was that living vegetation adds something to the air.

How does vegetation “restore” air? Twenty-five years
later, Dutch physician Jan Ingenhousz solved the puzzle.
Working over several years, Ingenhousz reproduced and
significantly extended Priestly’s results, demonstrating that
air was restored only in the presence of sunlight, and only
by a plant’s green leaves, not by its roots. He proposed that
the green parts of the plant carry out a process (which we
now call photosynthesis) that uses sunlight to split carbon
dioxide (CO;) into carbon and oxygen. He suggested that
the oxygen was released as O) gas into the air, while the
carbon atom combined with water to form carbohydrates.
His proposal was a good guess, even though the later step
was subsequently modified. Chemists later found that the
proportions of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms in car-
bohydrates are indeed about one atom of carbon per mole-
cule of water (as the term carbohydrate indicates). A Swiss
botanist found in 1804 that water was a necessary reactant.
By the end of that century the overall reaction for photo-
synthesis could be written as:

186 Part II Energetics

CO; + FLO + light energy —> (CH,0) + O;

It turns out, however, that there’s more to it than that.
When researchers began to examine the process in more
detail in the last century, the role of light proved to be un-
expectedly complex.

 

Van Helmont showed that soil did not add mass to a
growing plant. Priestly and Ingenhousz and others then
worked out the basic chemical reaction.

 

Discovery of the Light-Independent
Reactions

Ingenhousz’s early equation for photosynthesis includes
one factor we have not discussed: light energy. What role
does light play in photosynthesis? At the beginning of the
previous century, the English plant physiologist F. F.
Blackman began to address the question of the role of light
in photosynthesis. In 1905, he came to the startling conclu-
sion that photosynthesis is in fact a two-stage process, only
one of which uses light directly.

Blackman measured the effects of different light inten-
sities, CO) concentrations, and temperatures on photo-
synthesis. As long as light intensity was relatively low, he
found photosynthesis could be accelerated by increasing
the amount of light, but not by increasing the tempera-
ture or CO) concentration (figure 10.3). At high light in-
tensities, however, an increase in temperature or CO?
concentration greatly accelerated photosynthesis. Black-
man concluded that photosynthesis consists of an initial
set of what he called “light” reactions, that are largely in-
dependent of temperature, and a second set of “dark” re-
actions, that seemed to be independent of light but lim-
ited by CO. Do not be confused by Blackman’s
labels—the so-called “dark” reactions occur in the light
(in fact, they require the products of the light reactions);
their name simply indicates that light is not directly in-
volved in those reactions.

Blackman found that increased temperature increases
the rate of the dark carbon-reducing reactions, but only up
to about 35°C. Higher temperatures caused the rate to fall
off rapidly. Because 35°C is the temperature at which many
plant enzymes begin to be denatured (the hydrogen bonds
that hold an enzyme in its particular catalytic shape begin
to be disrupted), Blackman concluded that enzymes must
carry out the dark reactions.

 

Blackman showed that capturing photosynthetic energy
requires sunlight, while building organic molecules
does not.

 
