 

 

MAGNETIC PROPERTIES

 

| a

 

obtained. This is readily converted into the molar susceptibility of the
compound ¥y1 as follows:

= 2M M[2ang,|
xm = D OD a. fy. H?

where M is the molar mass of the compound, and D is its density.

Diamagnetic materials have no unpaired electrons, and have a magnetic
moment = 0. The external magnetic field induces a small magnetic
moment which is in opposition to the external field. Thus diamagnetic
materials repel lines of force, and show a slight decrease in weight. In
contrast paramagnetism arises where there is one or more unpaired
electron in a compound. Paramagnetic materials attract lines of force and
increase in weight, because the sample is pulled down into the gap between
the pole-pieces of the magnetic balance (see Figure 18.1). For a transition
metal complex the weight change measured with the Gouy balance is the
sum of the effects from the paramagnetic metal ion and the diamagnetic
ligands and ions present. Thus the value of yy derived from this weight
change is the net magnetism, which is the sum Of Xparamaguene + Xdtamagnety:
Since we wish to measure the paramagnetism of the metal ion, we must
make a diamagnetic correction. The easiest way to make the correction for
Yeamanenn 1S to add up the diamagnetic corrections (sometimes called
Pascal's constants) for the atoms and ions in the molecule and contribu-
tions from multiple bonds. These data are known (Table 18.7).

Aduamagneue = UX(atom corrccuonsy + LX(mulupte bonds)

THUS Xparamagnene CAN be Obtained:

Xparamagnetic = Xmeasured — Xdhamagnene

Finally Zpuramagneuc iS converted into magnetic moment of the metal ion in
Bohr magnetons using equation 18.1:

i" = 797.5: Vat
UB

The unpaired electron gives rise to a magnetic field because of its spin.
and also because of the orbital angular momentum. The general equation
for the magnetic moments of the first row of transition metal ions is:

n(S +L) = y4S(S 41) + LL + 1) - wp

here Sis the total of the spin quantum numbers, and L is the resultant of
the orbital angular momentum quantum numbers of all the electrons in the
in Chapt se coupling of orbital angular momenta and coupling of spins
+h hens 7 ) ‘oran electron the spin quantum number mi, has a value of
Th a co; m,+n where x is the number of unpaired clectrons.

contribution eapeats of the first Tow transition elements, the orbital
a slight appr quencl ed by the electric fields of the surrounding atoms. As

Proximation the orbital contributions can be ignored and the

wl
