 

 

{ INTERHALOGEN COMPOUNDS

 

621

 

 

L

Strength of the oxoacids
HCO, is an extremely strong acid, whilst HOCI is a very weak acid. The
dissociation of an oxoacid involves two energy terms:

1. Breaking an O—H bond to produce a hydrogen ion and an anion.
2. Hydrating both ions.

Plainly the ClO; ion is larger than the OCI~ ion, so the ‘hydration
energy of ClO; is less than that for OCI~. This would suggest that HOCI
should ionize more readily than HCIO,. Since we know the reverse to be
true, the reason must be the energy required to break the O—H bond.

Oxygen is more electronegative than chlorine. In the series of oxoacids
HOCI, HCIO2, HCIO3, HCIO,, an increasing number of oxygen atoms are
bonded to the chlorine atom. The more oxygen atoms that dre bonded, the
more the electrons will be pulled away from the O—H bond, and the more
this bond will be weakened. Thus HClO, requires the least energy to
break the O—H bond and form H*. Hence HCIO, is the strongest acid.

In general, for any series of oxoacids, the acid with the most oxygen
(that is the one with the highest oxidation number) is the most dissociated.
Thus the acid strengths decrease HCIO, > HCIO3 > HCIO2 > HOCI. In
exactly the same way, H.SO, is a stronger acid than H2SO3, and HNO; is
a stronger acid than HNO).

INTERHALOGEN COMPOUNDS

The halogens react with each other to form interhalogen compounds.
These are divided into four types AX, AX3, AXs and AX.

They can all be prepared by direct reactior! between the halogens, or by
the action of a halogen on a lower interhalogen. The product formed
depends on the conditions.

Table 16.16 Interhalogen compounds, and their physical state at 25°C

 

AX AX, AXs AX,
CIF(g)
colourless
BrF(g) CIF;
pale brown cole ess
BrCi(g) BrFX(I)
4 CIF.(g)
on pale yellow colon tess
s (ICI) 2(s) BrF5(I) IF,(
$ C ' 8)
/ fe red bright yellow colourless colourless
me (IF3)(s) (unstable) IF5(1)
yellow colourless

(IF)* (unstable)

Disproportionates rapidly into IF. and In.

 
