Absorbance

 

Filament of
green alga

T.W. Englemann revealed the action spectrum of photosynthesis in the filamentous alga Spirogyra in 1882. Englemann used the rate of
‘oxygen production to measure the rate of photosynthesis. As his oxygen indicator, he chose bacteria that are attracted by oxygen. In place
of the mirror and diaphragm usually used to illuminate objects under view in his microscope, he substituted a "microspectral apparatus,"
which, as its name implies, produced a tiny spectrum of colors that it projected upon the slide under the microscope. Then he arranged a
filament of algal cells parallel to the spread of the spectrum. The oxygen-seeking bacteria congregated mostly in the areas where the violet

and red wavelengths fell upon the algal filament.

FIGURE 10.7

Constructing an action spectrum for photosynthesis. As you can see, the action spectrum for photosynthesis that Englemann revealed
in his experiment parallels the absorption spectrum of chlorophyll (see figure 10.5).

Oak leaf in summer

 

FIGURE 10.8
Fall colors are produced by carotenoids and other accessory pigments. During the spring and summer, chlorophyll in leaves masks the
presence of carotenoids and other accessory pigments. When cool fall temperatures cause leaves to cease manufacturing chlorophyll, the
chlorophyll is no longer present to reflect green light, and the leaves reflect the orange and yellow light that carotenoids and other
pigments do not absorb.

Carotenoids consist of carbon rings linked to chains
with alternating single and double bonds. They can absorb
photons with a wide range of energies, although they are
not always highly efficient in transferring this energy.
Carotenoids assist in photosynthesis by capturing energy
from light of wavelengths that are not efficiently absorbed
by chlorophylls (figure 10.8; see figure 10.5).

A typical carotenoid is B-carotene, whose two carbon
rings are connected by a chain of 18 carbon atoms with al-
ternating single and double bonds. Splitting a molecule of

 

Oak leaf in autumn

 

B-carotene into equal halves produces two molecules of vit-
amin A. Oxidation of vitamin A produces retinal, the pig-
ment used in vertebrate vision. This explains why carrots,
which are rich in B-carotene, enhance vision.

 

A pigment is a molecule that absorbs light. The
wavelengths absorbed by a particular pigment depend
on the available energy levels to which light-excited
electrons can be boosted in the pigment.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis. 191
