 

 

 

t EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

 

 

589

 

 

to use more concentrated brine sources such as the Dead Sea, or brine
from wells in Arkansas and Michigan (USA) and Japan, which contain
2000-5000 ppm of Br~. First H2SOx is added to adjust the pH to about
3,5. Then Cl, gas is passed through the solution to oxidize the Br~ to
Br. This is an example of displacement of one element by another higher
in the electrochemical series.

Cl, + 2Br~ — 2CI7 + Br2

The Br, is removed by a stream of air, because Bry is quite volatile. The
gas is passed through a solution of NasCO3, when the Br. is absorbed,
forming a mixture of NaBr and NaBrOs. Finally the solution is acidified
and distilled to give pure bromine.

3Br, + 3Na,CO3; — SNaBr + NaBrO; + 3CO2
5NaBr + NaBrO, + 3H2SO,; — SHBr + HBrO; + 3Na,SO,
SHBr + HBrO;—> 3Br, + 3H,0

World production of bromine was 370000 million tonnes in 1993 (the

USA 45%, Israel 36%, the UK 8% and Japan 4%). In 1955 about 90%
was used to make 1,2-dibromoethane, CH,Br-CH2Br, but the figure is
now under 50%. 1,2-dibromoethane is added to petrol to act as a lead
scavenger. Tetraethyl lead is added to petrol to improve its octane rating,
but when it burns it forms lead deposits. 1,2-dibromoethane is added to
prevent the build-up of lead deposits on the sparking plug and in the
engine. The lead passes out with the exhaust gases, mainly as PbCIBr. The
use of PbEt, as an anti-knock additive to petrol has already declined, and
will decline further because of legislation against its use, and environ-
mental concern over the toxic effects of lead. Therefore the use of 1,2-
dibromocthane has also declined.
_ Almost 20% of the bromine produced is used to make organic deriva-
tives such as methyl bromide, ethyl bromide and dibromochloropropane.
These are used in agriculture: MeBr acts as a nematocide (kills earth-
worms) and as a pesticide against insects and fungi. The other compounds
are used as pesticides.

Nearly 10% is used to make flame retardants. Bromo compounds may
be included in the polymerization when making acrylic and polyester
fibres. It is more common to ‘fireproof’ fabrics and carpets by treating
them with tris(dibromopropyl)phosphate, (BrzC3HsO);PO. This may be
done either when spinning the thread, or after manufacture.

Other uses include the manufacture of photographic emulsions and
pharmaceuticals. AgBr is light sensitive and is used for photographic films,
and also for water sanitation and dyestuffs. KBr is used as a sedative, and
4s an anticoavulsant in treating epilepsy.

lodine

There are tw

© different i ining iodi:
method used commercial methods of obtaining iodine. The

 

depends on whether the source is Chile saltpetre or natural
continued overleaf

 
