B

FIGURE 2.3

The three most abundant

isotopes of carbon. Isotopes Carbon-12
of a particular atom have 6 Protons
different numbers of 6 Neutrons
neutrons. 6 Electrons
Isotopes

Atoms with the same atomic number (that is, the same num-
ber of protons) have the same chemical properties and are
said to belong to the same element. Formally speaking, an
element is any substance that cannot be broken down to any
other substance by ordinary chemical means. However, while
all atoms of an element have the same number of protons,
they may not all have the same number of neutrons. Atoms of
an element that possess different numbers of neutrons are
called isotopes of that element. Most elements in nature exist
as mixtures of different isotopes. Carbon (C), for example,
has three isotopes, all containing six protons (figure 2.3).
Over 99% of the carbon found in nature exists as an isotope
with six neutrons. Because its total mass is 12 daltons (6 from
protons plus 6 from neutrons), this isotope is referred to as
carbon-12, and symbolized °C. Most of the rest of the natu-
rally occurring carbon is carbon-13, an isotope with seven
neutrons. The rarest carbon isotope is carbon-14, with eight
neutrons. Unlike the other two isotopes, carbon-14 is unsta-
ble: its nucleus tends to break up into elements with lower
atomic numbers. This nuclear breakup, which emits a signifi-
cant amount of energy, is called radioactive decay, and iso-
topes that decay in this fashion are radioactive isotopes.
Some radioactive isotopes are more unstable than others
and therefore decay more readily. For any given isotope,
however, the rate of decay is constant. This rate is usually
expressed as the half-life, the time it takes for one half of the
atoms in a sample to decay. Carbon-14, for example, has a
half-life of about 5600 years. A sample of carbon containing
1 gram of carbon-14 today would contain 0.5 gram of car-
bon-14 after 5600 years, 0.25 gram 11,200 years from now,
0.125 gram 16,800 years from now, and so on. By determin-
ing the ratios of the different isotopes of carbon and other
elements in biological samples and in rocks, scientists are
able to accurately determine when these materials formed.
While there are many useful applications of radioactivity,
there are also harmful side effects that must be considered in
any planned use of radioactive substances. Radioactive sub-
stances emit energetic subatomic particles that have the po-

e el

Carbon-13 Carbon-14
6 Protons 6 Protons

7 Neutrons 8 Neutrons
6 Electrons 6 Electrons

tential to severely damage living cells, producing mutations in
their genes, and, at high doses, cell death. Consequently, ex-
posure to radiation is now very carefully controlled and regu-
lated. Scientists who work with radioactivity (basic re-
searchers as well as applied scientists such as X-ray
technologists) wear radiation-sensitive badges to monitor the
total amount of radioactivity to which they are exposed. Each
month the badges are collected and scrutinized. Thus, em-
ployees whose work places them in danger of excessive radio-
active exposure are equipped with an “early warning system.”

Electrons

The positive charges in the nucleus of an atom are counter-
balanced by negatively charged electrons orbiting at vary-
ing distances around the nucleus. Thus, atoms with the
same number of protons and electrons are electrically neu-
tral, having no net charge.

Electrons are maintained in their orbits by their attrac-
tion to the positively charged nucleus. Sometimes other
forces overcome this attraction and an atom loses one or
more electrons. In other cases, atoms may gain additional
electrons. Atoms in which the number of electrons does
not equal the number of protons are known as ions, and
they carry a net electrical charge. An atom that has more
protons than electrons has a net positive charge and is
called a cation. For example, an atom of sodium (Na) that
has lost one electron becomes a sodium ion (Na*), with a
charge of +1. An atom that has fewer protons than elec-
trons carries a net negative charge and is called an anion. A
chlorine atom (Cl) that has gained one electron becomes a
chloride ion (Cl), with a charge of -1.

 

An atom consists of a nucleus of protons and neutrons
surrounded by a cloud of electrons. The number of its
electrons largely determines the chemical properties of
an atom. Atoms that have the same number of protons
but different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes.
Isotopes of an atom differ in atomic mass but have
similar chemical properties.

 

Chapter 2 The Nature of Molecules 21
