 

 

L REACTIVITY OF THE ELEMENTS

| [597]

 

A similar disproportionation reaction occurs to a very limited extent with
Br, and I,. Thus a saturated aqueous solution of Cl, at 25°C contains
about two thirds hydrated X, and one third OCI~. Solutions of Br2 and I,
contain only a very small amount of OBr~, and a negligible amount of
OI”, respectively.

lodine is an even weaker oxidizing agent. The free energy change is
positive, which shows that energy must be supplied to make it oxidize
water.

Ip + H,0 > 2H* + 217 + 40. AG? = +105kJ mol!

It follows that for the reverse reaction AG° would be —105kJ mol~!,
so the reverse reaction should occur spontaneously. This is the .case.
Atmospheric dioxygen oxidizes iodide ions to iodine. At the end point of an
iodine titration with sodium thiosulphate, the iodine originally present is all
converted to iodide ions. Thus the bluish colour produced by the starch
indicator with iodine disappears, and the solution becomes Colourless.

Ip + 28,03- —» 217 + S,037

If the titration flask is allowed to stand for two or three minutes, the
indicator turns blue again. This is because some atmospheric oxidation has
taken place, forming I>, which reacts with the starch to give the blue colour
again.

21> + 40, + 2H* > I, + H,O

The end point of the titration is usually taken as being when the colou:
disappears and the solution remains colourless for half a minute.

REACTIVITY OF THE ELEMENTS

Fluorine is the most reactive of all the elements in the periodic table. It
reacts with all the other elements except the lighter noble gases He,
Ne and Ar. It reacts with xenon under mild conditions to form xenon
fluorides. (See Chapter 17.) Reactions with many elements are vigorous,
and often explosive. In the massive form a few metals such as Cu, Ni, Fe
and Al acquire a protective fluoride coating. However, if these metals are
in powdered form (with a large surface area), or if the reaction mixture is
heated, then the reaction is vigcrous. The reactivity of the other halogens
decreases in the order Cl > Br > I. Chlorine and bromine react with most
of the elements, though less vigorously than does fluorine. Iodine is less
Teactive and does not combine with some elements such as S and Se.
Fluorine and chlorine often oxidize elements further than do bromine and
iodine. by this means bringing out higher valencies, for example in PBr;
and PCl., and in $:Br2, SClz and SF,.
The great reactivity of fluorine is attributable to two factors:

1. The low dissociation energy of the F—F bond (which results in a low
activation energy for the reaction).

2. The very: strong bonds which are formed.
