10.3

The Biophysics of Light |

Where is the energy in light? What is
there in sunlight that a plant can use to
reduce carbon dioxide? This is the

 

WWW PDD NT NS NT,

Pigments capture energy from sunlight.

 

Increasing energy

Increasing wavelength ———__________>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

mystery of photosynthesis, the one fac- 0-001 nm Thm 10nm 1000nm 0.01.em 1m 1m 100 m

tor fundamentally different from uv

processes such as respiration. To an- Gamma rays |X rays| jight | | Infrared Radio waves

swer these questions, we will need to ———

consider the physical nature of light it- Visible light

self. James Clerk Maxwell had theo-

rized that light was an electromagnetic

wave—that is, that light moved

through the air as oscillating electric 400m — 480.nm 500nm 560nm 600nm 650 nm 740 nm
and magnetic fields. Proof of this came CupE 10.4

in a curious experiment carried out in a
laboratory in Germany in 1887. A
young physicist, Heinrich Hertz, was
attempting to verify a highly mathe-
matical theory that predicted the exis-
tence of electromagnetic waves. To see
whether such waves existed, Hertz de-
signed a clever experiment. On one
side of a room he constructed a powerful spark generator
that consisted of two large, shiny metal spheres standing
near each other on tall, slender rods. When a very high sta-
tic electrical charge was built up on one sphere, sparks
would jump across to the other sphere.

After constructing this device, Hertz set out to investigate
whether the sparking would create invisible electromagnetic
waves, so-called radio waves, as predicted by the mathemati-
cal theory. On the other side of the room, he placed the
world’s first radio receiver, a thin metal hoop on an insulat-
ing stand. There was a small gap at the bottom of the hoop,
so that the hoop did not quite form a complete circle. When
Hertz turned on the spark generator across the room, he saw
tiny sparks passing across the gap in the hoop! This was the
first demonstration of radio waves. But Hertz noted another
curious phenomenon. When UV light was shining across
the gap on the hoop, the sparks were produced more readily.
This unexpected facilitation, called the photoelectric effect,
puzzled investigators for many years.

The photoelectric effect was finally explained using a
concept proposed by Max Planck in 1901. Planck devel-
oped an equation that predicted the blackbody radiation
curve based upon the assumption that light and other forms
of radiation behaved as units of energy called photons. In
1905 Albert Einstein explained the photoelectric effect uti-
lizing the photon concept. Ultraviolet light has photons of
sufficient energy that when they fell on the loop, electrons
were ejected from the metal surface. The photons had
transferred their energy to the electrons, literally blasting
them from the ends of the hoop and thus facilitating the

nanometers.

188 Part III Energetics

The electromagnetic spectrum. Light is a form of electromagnetic energy conveniently
thought of as a wave. The shorter the wavelength of light, the greater its energy. Visible
light represents only a small part of the electromagnetic spectrum between 400 and 740

passage of the electric spark induced by the radio waves.
Visible wavelengths of light were unable to remove the
electrons because their photons did not have enough en-
ergy to free the electrons from the metal surface at the ends

of the hoop.

The Energy in Photons

Photons do not all possess the same amount of energy (fig-
ure 10.4). Instead, the energy content of a photon is in-
versely proportional to the wavelength of the light: short-
wavelength light contains photons of higher energy than
long-wavelength light. X rays, which contain a great deal of
energy, have very short wavelengths—much shorter than visi-
ble light, making them ideal for high-resolution microscopes.

Hertz had noted that the strength of the photoelectric
effect depends on the wavelength of light; short wave-
lengths are much more effective than long ones in produc-
ing the photoelectric effect. Einstein’s theory of the photo-
electric effect provides an explanation: sunlight contains
photons of many different energy levels, only some of
which our eyes perceive as visible light. The highest energy
photons, at the short-wavelength end of the electromag-
netic spectrum (see figure 10.4), are gamma rays, with
wavelengths of less than 1 nanometer; the lowest energy
photons, with wavelengths of up to thousands of meters,
are radio waves. Within the visible portion of the spectrum,
violet light has the shortest wavelength and the most ener-
getic photons, and red light has the longest wavelength and
the least energetic photons.
