The Role of Light =

The role of light in the so-called light and
dark reactions was worked out in the 1930s
by C. B. van Niel, then a graduate student at
Stanford University studying photosynthesis
in bacteria. One of the types of bacteria he
was studying, the purple sulfur bacteria, does
not release oxygen during photosynthesis;
instead, they convert hydrogen sulfide (HS)
into globules of pure elemental sulfur that
accumulate inside themselves. The process
that van Niel observed was

CO; +2 HpS + light energy > (CHO) + HO +2S

The striking parallel between this equation
and Ingenhousz’s equation led van Niel to
propose that the generalized process of
photosynthesis is in fact

CO? +2 HpA + light energy > (CH20) + HO +2 A

In this equation, the substance HA serves
as an electron donor. In photosynthesis
performed by green plants, HA is water,
while among purple sulfur bacteria, HyA is FIGURE 10.3
hydrogen sulfide. The product, A, comes
from the splitting of HA. Therefore, the
QO) produced during green plant photosyn-
thesis results from splitting water, not car-
bon dioxide.

When isotopes came into common use in biology in the
early 1950s, it became possible to test van Niel’s revolu-
tionary proposal. Investigators examined photosynthesis in
green plants supplied with '8O water; they found that the
180 label ended up in oxygen gas rather than in carbohy-
drate, just as van Niel had predicted:

CO, + 2 Hy!8O + light energy —> (CHO) + H,O +80;

In algae and green plants, the carbohydrate typically pro-
duced by photosynthesis is the sugar glucose, which has six
carbons. The complete balanced equation for photosynthe-
sis in these organisms thus becomes

6 CO, + 12 Hj,O + light energy —> CgH;20, + 6 O2 + 6 H20.

We now know that the first stage of photosynthesis, the
light reactions, uses the energy of light to reduce NADP
(an electron carrier molecule) to NADPH and to manufac-
ture ATP. The NADPH and ATP from the first stage of
photosynthesis are then used in the second stage, the
Calvin cycle, to reduce the carbon in carbon dioxide and
form a simple sugar whose carbon skeleton can be used to
synthesize other organic molecules.

     
  
   
 
     
 
       

Maximum rate
Excess CO,; 35°C

Temperature limited
Excess CO,; 20°C

CO, limited
Insufficient CO» (0.01%); 20°C

Rate of photosynthesis

 

500. 1000 1500 2000

Light intensity (foot-candles)

2500

=

Discovery of the dark reactions. (a) Blackman measured photosynthesis rates under
differing light intensities, CO) concentrations, and temperatures. (}) As this graph
shows, light is the limiting factor at low light intensities, while temperature and CO2
concentration are the limiting factors at higher light intensities.

The Role of Reducing Power

In his pioneering work on the light reactions, van Niel had
further proposed that the reducing power (H*) generated by
the splitting of water was used to convert CO) into organic
matter ina process he called carbon fixation. Was he right?

In the 1950s Robin Hill demonstrated that van Niel was
indeed right, and that light energy could be used to generate
reducing power. Chloroplasts isolated from leaf cells were
able to reduce a dye and release oxygen in response to light.
Later experiments showed that the electrons released from
water were transferred to NADP*. Arnon and coworkers
showed that illuminated chloroplasts deprived of CO} accu-
mulate ATP. If CO) is then introduced, neither ATP nor
NADPH accumulate, and the CO) is assimilated into organic
molecules. These experiments are important for three rea-
sons. First, they firmly demonstrate that photosynthesis oc-
curs only within chloroplasts. Second, they show that the
light-dependent reactions use light energy to reduce NADP*
and to manufacture ATP. Thirdly, they confirm that the
ATP and NADPH from this early stage of photosynthesis are
then used in the later light-independent reactions to reduce
carbon dioxide, forming simple sugars.

 

Van Niel discovered that photosynthesis splits water
molecules, incorporating the carbon atoms of carbon
dioxide gas and the hydrogen atoms of water into
organic molecules and leaving oxygen gas.

Hill showed that plants can use light energy to generate
reducing power. The incorporation of carbon dioxide
into organic molecules in the light-independent
reactions is called carbon fixation.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 187
