 

 

[_ STRUCTURE AND BONDING IN XENON COMPOUNDS

XeF,

The structure of XeF, is a distorted octahedron. The bonding in XeF, has
caused considerable controversy which is not completely resolved. The
structure may be explained in valence bond terms by promoting three
electrons in Xe:

Electronic structure of
xenon — excited state

 

 

The six unpaired electrons form bonds with fluorine atoms. The distri-
bution of seven orbitals gives either a capped octahedron or a pentagonal
bipyramid (as in IF;). (A capped octahedron has a lone pair pointing
through one of the faces of the octahedron.) Since there are six bonds and
one lone pair, a capped octahedron would give a distorted octahedral
molecule. The molecular orbital approach fails with XeF,, since three
three-centre molecular orbital systems mutually at right angles would give
a regular octahedral shape.

The vibrational spectrum of gaseous XeF, indicates C3, symmetry, i.e.
an octahedron distorted by the lone pair at the centre of one triangular
face. The structure of the molecule rapidly fluctuates between structures
where the lone pair occupies each of the eight triangular faces. In various
non-aqueous solvents, xenon hexafluoride forms a tetramer Xe4F24. Solid
xenon hexafluoride is polymorphic. Except at very low temperatures it
contains tetramers, where four square pyramidal XeF? ions are joined to
two similar ions by means of two bridging F~ ions. The XeF distances are
1.84 A on the square pyramidal units and 2.23 A and 2.60A in the bridging
groups.

The shapes of oxygen containing compounds of Xe are correctly pre-
dicted by the valence bond method. (Electrons in x bonds (double bonds)
must be subtracted before counting the number of electron pairs which
determine the primary shape of the molecule.)

VALEDICTION

For many years the noble gases were thought to be completely unreactive.
This was associated with the concept that an octet of electrons is the only
Stable arrangement. The octet rule has done much to help the understand-
ing of why atoms react, how many bonds they will form, and the shape of
the periodic table. The discovery of the noble gas compounds has shown
that though the ‘octet* arrangement is very stable, it can be broken, and
that there are other stable arrangements of electrons.
Two important points emerge:

1 Only the heavier noble gases (Kr, Xe and Rn) form these compounds.
5 This is related to their lower ionization energies.
2. Compounds are only formed with electronegative hgands.

| [5]

 

Figure 17.6 Capped
octahedron.
