 

 

 

— EXTRACTION AND USES OF THE ELEMENTS

 

587

 

u

aerosol propellants. They too are very inert, and are discussed later.
CF,CHBrCl is used as an anaesthetic called Fluothane.

Another use of F, is to make SF,, which is a very inert gas used as a
dielectric (insulating) medium for high voltage equipment. F, is also used
to make other fluorinating agents CIF;, BrF; and IF; and SbFs. The earlier
use of liquid F, as an oxidizing agent in rocket motors has now been
discontinued. Anhydrous HF has many uses.

Traces of fluoride ions F~ in drinking water (about 1 ppm) greatly
reduce the incidence of dental caries (tooth decay). The F~ ions make the
enamel on teeth much harder, by converting hydroxyapatite (3(Ca3(PO4)2-
Ca(OH)2] (the enamel on the surface of teeth) into the much harder
fluoroapatite [3(Ca3(PO,)2-CaF2]. However, F~ concentrations above 2
ppm cause discoloration, the brown mottling of teeth, and higher concen-
trations are harmful. In some places NaF and H,[SiFs] are added to
drinking water, where the natural water is very soft and contains insuf-
ficient naturally occurring F~ ions. NaF is now used in fluoride toothpaste.
(The original fluoride toothpaste contained SnF2 and Sn2P,07.)

Chlorine

Chlorine was first prepared by Scheele by oxidizing HCI with MnO. This
method was used as a laboratory preparation, but chlorine is now readily
available in cylinders.

H,SO,; + NaCl > HCl + NaHSO,
.4HCl + MnO, —> MnCl, + 2H,0 + Cl,

Gas prepared from MnO, in this way must be purified. First it is passed
through water to remove HCl, and then through concentrated HzSO, to
Femove water. It may be further dried by passing it over CaO and PyOjg.

Chlorine is produced commercially ori a vast scale by two main methods.
(About 35.3 million tonnes were produced in 1994.)

1, a electrolysis of aqueous NaCl solutions in the manufacture of
aOH.
2. By electrolysis of fused NaCl in the manufacture of sodium. (See
Chapter 10.)
Before 1960 chlorine was a’by-produci from these processes. Since then
phere has been a great increase in the use of chlorine, mainly in the manu-
acture of plastics such as polyvinyl chloride (14.9 million tonnes of PVC
Were made in 1991). Thus chlorine is now the major product.

2NaCl +,2H,0 “YS, aNaOH + Cl + 2Hp
2NaC] SO", 2Na + Cl

Atone time chlorine was produced by oxidizing HCI with air, using the
‘On process. This process became obsolete. (See Chapter 10.) How-
continued overleaf

 

 
