 

 

f IONIZATION ENERGIES

| [661

 

L

DENSITY

The atomic volumes of the transition elements are low compared with
elements in neighbouring Groups 1 and 2. This is because the increased
nuclear charge is poorly screened and so attracts all the electrons more
strongly. In addition, the extra electrons added occupy inner orbitals.
Consequently the densities of the transition metals are high. Practically
all have a density greater than 5gem7*. (The only exceptions are Sc 3.0g
cm7* and Y and Ti 4.5gcm™*.) The densities of the second row are high
and third row values are even higher. (See Appendix D.) ‘The two
elements with the highest densities are osmium 22.57 gcm7? and iridium
22.61 gcm7>. To get some feel for how high this figure really is, a football
made of osmium or iridium measuring 30cm in diameter would weigh
320kg or almost one third of a tonne!

MELTING AND BOILING POINTS

The melting and boiling points of the transition elements are generally very
high (see Appendices B and C). Transition elements typically melt above
1000°C, Ten elements melt above 2000°C and three melt above 3000°C
(Ta 3000°C, W 3410°C and Re 3180°C). There are a few exceptions. The
melting points of La and Ag are just under 1000°C (920°C and 961°C
respectively). Other notable exceptions are Zn (420°C), Cd (321°C) and
Hg which is liquid at room temperature and melts at —38°C. The last three
behave atypically because the d shell is complete, and d clectrons do not
participate in metallic bonding. The high melting points are in marked

contrast to the low melting points for the s-block metals Li (181 °C) and Cs
(29°C),

REACTIVITY OF METALS

Many of the metals are sufficiently electropositive to react with mineral
acids, liberating H,. A few have low standard electrode potentials and
remain unreactive or noble. Noble character is favoured by high enthalpies
of sublimation. high ionization energies and low enthalpies of solvation.
(See ‘Born-Haber cycle’, Chapter 6.) The high melting points indicate high
heats of sublimation. The smaller atoms have higher ionization energies,
but this is offset by small ions having high solvation energies. This tendency

to noble character is most pronounced for the platinum metals (Ru, Rh,
Pd. Os, Ir, Pt) and gold.

IONIZATION ENERGIES

nom ant which an electron may be removed from a transition metal
aa p block Nenization cnergy) is intermediate between those of the
range “S S. ‘ ‘al ues for the first ionization energies vary over a wide

Se trom S41 kJ mol! for lanthanum to 1007kJ mol~! for mercury.
