 

MAGNETIC PROPERTIES

 

orbitals of different energy. Thus in transition element ions with a partly
filled d shell it is possible to promote electrons from one d level to another
d level of higher energy. This corresponds to a fairly small energy
difference, and so light is absorbed in the visible region. The colour of a
transition metal complex is dependent on how big the energy difference is
between the two d levels. This in turn depends on the nature of the ligand,
and on the type of complex formed. Thus the octahedral complex
[Ni(NH3))?*_ is blue, [Ni(H2O),]?* is green and [Ni(NO2).]*~ is
brown-red. The colour changes with the ligand used. The colour also
depends on the number of ligands and the shape of the complex formed.

The source of colour in the lanthanides and the actinides is very similar,
arising from f — f transitions. With the lanthanides the 4f orbitals are
deeply embedded inside the atom, and are well shielded by the Ss and Sp
electrons. The f electrons are practically unaffected by complex formation:
hence the colour remains almost constant for a particular ion regardless of
the ligand. The absorption bands are also very narrow.

Some compounds of the transition metals are white, for example ZnSO,
and TiO. In these compounds it is not possible to promote electrons
within the d level. Zn?* has a d'” configuration and the d level is full. Ti**
has a d” configuration and the d level is empty. In the series Sc(+II]),
Ti(+IV), V(+V), Cr(+VI) and Mn(+VII), these ions may all be con-
sidered to have an empty d shell: hence d—d spectra are impossible and
they should be colourless. However, as the oxidation number increases
these states become increasingly covalent. Rather than form highly
charged simple ions, oxoions are formed TiO?*, VOF, VO37, CrO3” and
MnO;. VO? is pale yellow, but CrO}~ is strongly yellow coloured,
and MnO; has an intense purple colour in solution though the solid is
almost black. The colour arises by charge transfer. In MnO; an electron is
momentarily transferred from O to the metal, thus momentarily changing
O* to O and reducing the oxidation state of the metal from Mn(VID)
to Mn(VI). Charge transfer requires that the energy levels on the two
different atoms are fairly close. Charge transfer always produces intense
colours since the restrictions of the Laporte and spin selection rules do
hot apply to transitions between atoms. (See Chapter 32.)

The s- and p-block elements do not have a partially filled d shell so there
cannot be any d—d transitions. The energy to promote an s or p electron to
a higher energy level is much greater and corresponds to ultraviolet light

being absorbed. Thus compounds of s- and p-block elements typically are
not coloured.

MAGNETIC PROPERTIES
.
ce a substance is placed in a magnetic field of strength H, the intensity
i agree field in the substance may be greater than or less than H.
wae e field in the substance is greater than H. the substance is para-

agnctic. It is easier for magnetic lines of force to travel through a
Paramagnetic material than through a vacuum. Thus paramagnetic

materi; i wp ce .
rials attract lines of force, and, if it is free to move, a paramagnetic

| (663)
