 

 

(4IV) STATE

 

 

691

 

 

200
aAoo

 

Figure 20.2 Perovskite structure.

quarter of the octahedral holes. The holes occupied are those bounded
completely by O atoms, thus keeping Ca and Ti as far apart as possible.

BaTiO; has a perovskite structure. The Ba’* ion is too large to fit into
the close-packed oxide lattice without expanding it. This increases the size
of the octahedral holes, so that Ti can ‘rattle’ in its octahedral hole. In an
electric field the Ti atoms are drawn to one side of the hole, thus causing
some polarization and making the crystal strongly ferroelectric. It is also
piezoelectric (pressure produces an electric current, and vice versa). This
makes it useful as a transducer for crystals in gramophone pickups and
microphones, and for ceramic capacitors and other electronic uses.

Other titanates have the formula M3'TiO,, where M may be Mg, Mn,
Fe, Co or Zn. Mg2TiO, has a spinel structure (like MgAl,O4). The oxide
ions form a cubic close-packed array and the Mg ions occupy one half of
the octahedral holes and Ti occupies one eighth of the tetrahedral holes.
Thus these compounds contain discrete [TiO,]*~ ions.

Peroxides

A characteristic property of Ti(IV) solutions is that they form an intense

yellow-orange colour on addition of H2O>. This reaction'can be used for

the colorimetric determination of either Ti(IV) or H,0,. The colour is

thought to be due to the formation of a peroxo complex. Below pH 1 the

a species is [Ti(O2)-OH-(H20),]*, in which the peroxo group is
dentate,

Halides

TiCl, is the best known halide and is made commercially by passing Cl,
over heated TiO, and C. The other halides MX, can be made in a similar

way. To avoid handling F2, the fluorides can be prepared from TiCl, by
Teaction with anhydrous HF.

TiCl; + 4HF > TiF, + 4HCI

ime iodides can also be made by heating the halogens and metal. They are
penne in the van Arkel—-de Boer process for purifying the metals.
Wig 18 a colourless, diamagnetic, covalent fuming liquid. ZrCl, is a

 
