Stroma of chloroplast

3 molecules of

Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) (5C)

 

 

 

 

 

Carbon
dioxide (CO,)

Carbon fixation

3 molecules of

   
   
    
 
 
   

  

6 molecules of

3-phosphoglycerate (3C) (PGA)

 

 

 

 

PGA
kinase

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 ADP 6 ADP
6 molecules of
Reforming -
RuBP 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (3C))
6 NADPH
2
® G3P dehydrogenase
Reverse of

cones 6 NADP*

 

5 molecules of

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (3C)

 

 

 

 

6 molecules of
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (3C) (G3P)

 

 

 

 

1 molecule of

 

 

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (3C) (G3P)

 

 

 

 

Glucose and
other sugars

 

 

FIGURE 10.20

The Calvin cycle. For every three molecules of CO; that enter the cycle, one molecule of the three-carbon compound, glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate (G3P), is produced. Notice that the process requires energy stored in ATP and NADPH, which are generated by the light

reactions. This process occurs in the stroma of the chloroplast.

Output of the Calvin Cycle

The glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate that is the product of the
Calvin cycle is a three-carbon sugar that is a key intermedi-
ate in glycolysis. Much of it is exported from the chloro-
plast to the cytoplasm of the cell, where the reversal of sev-
eral reactions in glycolysis allows it to be converted to
fructose 6-phosphate and glucose 1-phosphate, and from
that to sucrose, a major transport sugar in plants (sucrose,
common table sugar, is a disaccharide made of fructose and
glucose).

In times of intensive photosynthesis, glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate levels in the stroma of the chloroplast rise. As a

consequence, some glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in the
chloroplast is converted to glucose 1-phosphate, in an anal-
ogous set of reactions to those done in the cytoplasm, by
reversing several reactions similar to those of glycolysis.
The glucose 1-phosphate is then combined into an insolu-
ble polymer, forming long chains of starch stored as bulky
starch grains in chloroplasts.

 

Plants incorporate carbon dioxide into sugars by means of
a cycle of reactions called the Calvin cycle, which is driven
by the ATP and NADPH produced in the light reactions
which are consumed as CO) is reduced to G3P.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis. 201
