10.4 Cells use the energy and reducing power captured by the light
reactions to make organic molecules.

The Calvin Cycle

Photosynthesis is a way of making organic molecules from
carbon dioxide (CO2). These organic molecules contain
many C—H bonds and are highly reduced compared with
CO). To build organic molecules, cells use raw materials
provided by the light reactions:

1. Energy. ATP (provided by cyclic and noncyclic pho-
tophosphorylation) drives the endergonic reactions.

2. Reducing power. NADPH (provided by photosys-
tem I) provides a source of hydrogens and the energetic
electrons needed to bind them to carbon atoms. Much
of the light energy captured in photosynthesis ends up
invested in the energy-rich C—H bonds of sugars.

Carbon Fixation

The key step in the Calvin cycle—the event that makes the
reduction of CO) possible—is the attachment of CO) to a
very special organic molecule. Photosynthetic cells produce
this molecule by reassembling the bonds of two intermedi-
ates in glycolysis, fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate, to form the energy-rich five-carbon sugar,
ribulose1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP), and a four-carbon sugar.

 

H,c—Oo-®
|
Be —0-® HC—OH
co a= °
|
oo (Go, +H,0 is
|
HC—OH
| Rubisco
H,c—O—©® H,c—O-®
Ribulose ber
1,5-bisphosphate I
(RuBP) =o
o

198 Part III Energetics

CO), binds to RuBP in the key process called carbon
fixation, forming two three-carbon molecules of phospho-
glycerate (PGA) (figure 10.17). The enzyme that carries
out this reaction, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
(usually abbreviated rubisco) is a very large four-subunit
enzyme present in the chloroplast stroma. This enzyme
works very sluggishly, processing only about three mole-
cules of RuBP per second (a typical enzyme processes
about 1000 substrate molecules per second). Because it
works so slowly, many molecules of rubisco are needed.
In a typical leaf, over 50% of all the protein is rubisco. It
is thought to be the most abundant protein on earth.

Discovering the Calvin Cycle

Nearly 100 years ago, Blackman concluded that, because of
its temperature dependence, photosynthesis might involve
enzyme-catalyzed reactions. These reactions form a cycle
of enzyme-catalyzed steps similar to the Krebs cycle. This
cycle of reactions is called the Calvin cycle, after its dis-
coverer, Melvin Calvin of the University of California,
Berkeley. Because the cycle begins when CO) binds RuBP
to form PGA, and PGA contains three carbon atoms, this
process is also called C3 photosynthesis.

FIGURE 10.17
The key step in the Calvin cycle.
Melvin Calvin and his coworkers at the
University of California worked out the
first step of what later became known as
the Calvin cycle. They exposed
photosynthesizing algae to radioactive

2 molecules of carbon dioxide (*CO)). By following the

phosphoglycerate fate of a radioactive carbon atom, they

(PGA) found that it first binds to a molecule of
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP), then
immediately splits, forming two
molecules of phosphoglycerate (PGA).
One of these PGAs contains the
radioactive carbon atom. In 1948,
workers isolated the enzyme responsible
for this remarkable carbon-fixing
reaction: rubisco.
