 

 

 

OXIDATION STATES

obtained as a by-product from CuS ores. MoS; is roasted in air, converting
it to MoO3. This may be added to steel directly, or MoO; may be heated
with Fe and Al to give ferromolybdenum, which is then added to steel.
Almost 90% of Mo is used to make cutting steel or stainless steel. Pure
Mo is obtained by dissolving MoO; in dilute NH,OH and precipitating
ammonium molybdate, dimolybdate or paramolybdate. This is reduced
with hydrogen to give the metal. Mo metal is used as a catalyst in the
petrochemical industry.

Tungsten occurs as tungstates, the most common being wolframite
FeWO;-MnWO, and scheelite CaWO,. World production in 1992 had
39000 tonnes metal content. The largest sources are China 65% and the
Soviet Union 17%. Different processes are used to extract W from
wolframite and scheelite. Wolframite is fused with Na,CO3, forming
sodium tungstate, which is leached out and acidified to give ‘tungstic acid’
(the hydrated oxide). Scheelite is acidified with HC] when ‘tungstic acid’
is precipitated and other materials dissolve. ‘Tungstic acid’ is then heated
to give the anhydrous oxide, which is reduced to give the metal by heating
with hydrogen at 850°C.

Mo and W are obtained by this method in the form of powders. Their
melting points are high, so melting to give the massive metal would be
expensive. Instead metal objects are obtained by fabricating the powder
into the required shape and sintering (heating but not melting) under an
atmosphere of Hz. Both Mo and W are alloyed with steel, giving very hard
alloys, which are used to make ‘cutting steel’. This is used to make machine
tools. Cutting steel retains its cutting edge even when the metal becomes
ted hot. About half the W produced is used to make tungsten carbide WC,
which is extremely hard (10 on Moh’s scale) and will cut glass. WC is used
to make the tips for drills. W metal is used to make the filaments in electric
light bulbs. Molybdenum disulphide MoS, has a layer lattice and is an
excellent lubricant, either on its own or when added to hydrocarbon oil.

OXIDATION STATES

The ground state electronic configuration of ‘Cr and Mo is d°s', with a
stable half-filled d5 configuration, whilst W has a ds? arrangement.

From the electronic structures, Cr and Mo might be expected to form
compounds with oxidation states from (+1) to (+VI), and W from (+II) to
(+V1) inclusive. They form these states, and in addition some lower states
occur as dipyridyl complexes, carbonyl complexes and carbonyl ions.

a the (+11), (+III) and (+VI) states are well known. Cr(+II) is
re sing, Cr(+11) is the’ most stable and important and Cr(+VI) is
thous, ariidizing, The most stable states for Mo and W are (+VI),
water Wie and W(+V) are well represented and are stable in
stable. Si ‘Ie Cova is strongly oxidizing, Mo(+VI) and W(+VI) are
reducin milarly Cr(+H1I) is stable but Mo(+III) and W(+ III) ate strongly

8. This fits the usual trend that on descending a group the higher

 

1 P75!
