 

i SIZE

 

 

687]

 

The same problem is encountered in separating the lanthanide elements
(see Chapter 29). Zr and Hf are separated by solvent extraction of their
nitrates into tri-n-butyl phosphate or thiocyanates into methylisobutyl
ketone. Alternatively the elements can be separated by ion exchange of an
alcoholic solution of the tetrachlorides on silica gel columns. On eluting the
column with an alcohol/HCI mixture, the Zr comes off first.

Zr is also used to make’ alloys with steel, and a Zr/Nb alloy is an
important superconductor. The very high absorption of thermal neutrons
by Hf is turned to good use. Hf is used to make control rods for regulating
the free neutron levels in the nuclear reactors used in submarines.

 

OXIDATION STATES

The most common and most stable oxidation state for all the elements
is (+IV). Anhydrous compounds such as TiCl, are covalent and the
molecules are tetrahedral in the gaseous state. Most of the halides retain
their tetrahedral structure in the solid. TiF, has the largest electro-
negativity difference and is the most likely compound to be ionic. It is a
volatile white powder. which sublimes at 284°C — not behaviour typical of
an ionic salt. Its crystal structure is a polymeric F bridged structure in
which each Ti is octahedrally surrounded by six F atoms.

In the oxidation state (+IV) the elements have a d”, configuration with
no unpaired electrons: hence their compounds are typically white or
colourless and diamagnetic.

Ti** ions do not exist in solution.but oxoions are formed instead. The
titanyl ion TiO?* is found in solution but it usually polymerizes in
crystalline salts.

The oxidation state (+III) is reducing, and Ti** ions are more strongly
reducing than Sn?*. They are reasonably stable, and exist as solids and in
solution. Since the M** ions fave a d' configuration they have, one
unpaired electron and are paramagnetic. The magnetic moments of their
compounds are close to the spin only value of 1.73 Bohr magnetons. With
only one d electron, there is only one possible d—d electronic transition:
hence there is only one band in the visible spectrum, and nearly all the
compounds are a pale purple—red colour.

The (+11) state is very unstable and is so strongly reducing that it reduces
water. Thus few compounds are known and these exist only in the solid
state. The (0), (=I) and (—II) states are found in the dipyridyl complexes
(Ti (dipy)3].Li[Ti"'(dipy)3]3.5 tetrahydrofuran and Li,[Ti7"(dipy)s]5
tetrahydrofuran. The lower oxidation states tend to disproportionate.

aT, THC, + THC
ITi'Cly > THY, + Ti?

SIZE

me <pvalent and ionic radii increase normally from Ti-to Zr, but Zr and Hf
almost identical in size. The reason why Hf does not show the expected
