 

 

GENERAL PROPERTIES

 

 

 

699

 

OXIDATION STATES

The maximum oxidation state for this group is (+V). All three elements
show the full range of oxidation states from (—I) to (+¥V). For vanadium
the (+11) and (+II]) states are reducing, (+IV) is stable, and (+V) slightly
oxidizing. For Nb and Ta the (+V) state is by far the most stable and the
best known, although lower oxidation states are known.

V(+V) is reduced by zinc and acid to V>*, Nb(+V) is reduced to Nb**
but Ta(+V) is not reduced. This illustrates the increasing stability of the
(+V) state on descending the group. At the same time the lower oxidation
states become less stable. This is the opposite trend to that in the main
groups.

SIZE

The atoms are smaller than those of Group 4 due to the poor shielding
of the nucleus by d electrons. The covalent and ionic radii of Nb and Ta are
identical because of the lanthanide contraction (Table 21.3). Consequently
these two elements have very similar properties. occur together, and are
very difficult to separate.

GENERAL PROPERTIES

V, Nb and Ta are silvery coloured metals with high melting points. V has
the highest ‘melting point in the first row transition elements. This is
associated with the maximum participation of d electrons in metallic
bonding. The melting points of Nb and Ta are high, but the maximum
melting point in the second and third row transition elements occurs in the
next group (Group 6) with Mo and W.

The pure metals V, Nb and Ta are moderately soft and ductile, but
traces of impurities make them harder and brittle. They are extremely
Tesistant to corrosion due to the formation of a surface film of oxide. At
room temperature they are not affected by air, water or acids, other than
HF with which they form complexes. V also dissolves in oxidizing acids
such as hot concentrated H2SO,. HNO; and aqua regia. V is unaffected by

‘kali showing that it is completely basic, but Nb and Ta dissolve in fused
alkalt.

Table 21.3 Some physical properties
Covalent Ionic radius (A) Melting Boiling Density —_Pauling’s

radius i i
y point point electro-
(A) Mz mM‘ (°C) @C)— (gem™*)_ negativity

 

 

Nb i 0.79 0.640 1915 3350 6.11 1
m te - 0.72 2468 «4758 8.57 1.6
. - 0.72 2980 5534.16.65 lL.

 
