the thylakoid through the ATP syn-
thase channel, ADP is phosphorylated
to ATP and released into the stroma,
the fluid matrix inside the chloroplast
(figure 10.16). The stroma contains
the enzymes that catalyze the reac-
tions of carbon fixation.

Photosystem I

The reaction center of photosystem I,
called P79, is a transmembrane complex
consisting of at least 13 protein sub-
units. Energy is fed to it by an antenna
complex consisting of 130 chlorophyll a
and accessory pigment molecules. Pho-
tosystem I accepts an electron from
plastocyanin into the hole created by
the exit of a light-energized electron.
This arriving electron has by no means
lost all of its light-excited energy; al-
most half remains. Thus, the absorp-
tion of a photon of light energy by
photosystem I boosts the electron leav-
ing the reaction center to a very high
energy level. Unlike photosystem II
and the bacterial photosystem, photo-
system I does not rely on quinones as
electron acceptors. Instead, it passes
electrons to an iron-sulfur protein

called ferredoxin (Fd).

Plant cell

FIGURE 10.16

Photosystem Il

 

ANA | ON
Med I }

@
®

bg-f complex ATP synthase

Chloroplast

Chemiosmosis in a chloroplast. The /,-f complex embedded in the thylakoid membrane
pumps protons into the interior of the thylakoid. ATP is produced on the outside surface of

Making NADPH

Photosystem I passes electrons to
ferredoxin on the stromal side of the
membrane (outside the thylakoid). The
reduced ferredoxin carries a very-high-
potential electron. Two of them, from
two molecules of reduced ferredoxin, are then donated to a
molecule of NADP* to form NADPH. The reaction is cat-
alyzed by the membrane-bound enzyme NADP reductase.
Because the reaction occurs on the stromal side of the
membrane and involves the uptake of a proton in forming
NADPH, it contributes further to the proton gradient es-
tablished during photosynthetic electron transport.

synthase channels.

Making More ATP

The passage of an electron from water to NADPH in the
noncyclic photophosphorylation described previously gen-
erates one molecule of NADPH and slightly more than one
molecule of ATP. However, as you will learn later in this
chapter, building organic molecules takes more energy than
that—it takes one-and-a-half ATP molecules per NADPH
molecule to fix carbon. To produce the extra ATP, many

the membrane (stroma side), as protons diffuse back out of the thylakoid through ATP.

plant species are capable of short-circuiting photosystem I,
switching photosynthesis into a cyclic photophosphorylation
mode, so that the light-excited electron leaving photosystem
Tis used to make ATP instead of NADPH. The energetic
electron is simply passed back to the Jg-f complex rather
than passing on to NADP*. The b¢-f complex pumps out a
proton, adding to the proton gradient driving the chemios-
motic synthesis of ATP. The relative proportions of cyclic
and noncyclic photophosphorylation in these plants deter-
mines the relative amounts of ATP and NADPH available
for building organic molecules.

 

The electrons that photosynthesis strips from water
molecules provide the energy to form ATP and
NADPH. The residual oxygen atoms of the water
molecules combine to form oxygen gas.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis. 197
