How the Two
Photosystems of Plants
Work Together

Plants use the two photosystems dis-
cussed earlier in series, first one and
then the other, to produce both ATP
and NADPH. This two-stage process
is called noncyclic photophosphory-
lation, because the path of the elec-
trons is not a circle—the electrons
ejected from the photosystems do not
return to it, but rather end up in
NADPH. The photosystems are re-
plenished instead with electrons ob-
tained by splitting water. Photosystem
TU acts first. High-energy electrons
generated by photosystem II are used
to synthesize ATP and then passed to
photosystem I to drive the production
of NADPH. For every pair of elec-
trons obtained from water, one mole-
cule of NADPH and slightly more
than one molecule of ATP are pro-

duced.

Stroma

Thylakoid
membrane

Photosystem II

The reaction center of photosystem II,
called Pogo, closely resembles the reac-
tion center of purple bacteria. It con-
sists of more than 10 transmembrane
protein subunits. The light-harvesting
antenna complex consists of some 250
molecules of chlorophyll @ and acces-
sory pigments bound to several protein
chains. In photosystem II, the oxygen
atoms of two water molecules bind to a
cluster of manganese atoms which are
embedded within an enzyme and
bound to the reaction center. In a way that is poorly under-
stood, this enzyme splits water, removing electrons one at a
time to fill the holes left in the reaction center by departure
of light-energized electrons. As soon as four electrons have
been removed from the two water molecules, O; is released.

FIGURE 10.15

The Path to Photosystem I

The primary electron acceptor for the light-energized elec-
trons leaving photosystem II is a quinone molecule, as it
was in the bacterial photosystem described earlier. The re-
duced quinone which results (plastoquinone, symbolized Q)
is a strong electron donor; it passes the excited electron to a
proton pump called the b¢-f complex embedded within the
thylakoid membrane (figure 10.15). This complex closely
resembles the bc; complex in the respiratory electron trans-

196 Part II Energetics

 

H* + NADP*

 

 

 

 

1]

The photosynthetic electron transport system. When a photon of light strikes a pigment
molecule in photosystem II, it excites an electron. This electron is coupled to a proton
stripped from water by an enzyme and is passed along a chain of membrane-bound
cytochrome electron carriers (red arrow). When water is split, oxygen is released from the
cell, and the hydrogen ions remain in the thylakoid space. At the proton pump

(¥6-f complex), the energy supplied by the photon is used to transport a proton across the
membrane into the thylakoid. The concentration of hydrogen ions within the thylakoid

thus increases further. When photosystem I absorbs another photon of light, its pigment
passes a second high-energy electron to a reduction complex, which generates NADPH.

port chain of mitochondria discussed in chapter 9. Arrival
of the energetic electron causes the bs-f complex to pump a
proton into the thylakoid space. A small copper-containing
protein called plastocyanin (symbolized pC) then carries the
electron to photosystem I.

Making ATP: Chemiosmosis

Each thylakoid is a closed compartment into which pro-
tons are pumped from the stroma by the b¢-f complex.
The splitting of water also produces added protons that
contribute to the gradient. The thylakoid membrane is
impermeable to protons, so protons cross back out almost
exclusively via the channels provided by ATP synthases.
These channels protrude like knobs on the external sur-
face of the thylakoid membrane. As protons pass out of
