 

[AN INTRODUCTION TO THE TRANSITION ELEMENTS:

“Thowgh the agreement for first row transition metal complexes gwen in
“Table 1891s generally very good. in some cases, for example Co! the
observed value for jis higher than calculated by the spin-only formula
“Ths suggests that there also an orbital contribution To have an orbiah
angular moment at must be possible to transform an orbital inte. an
‘equivalent (degenerate) orbtal by rotation It1s possible to transform the
tu orbitals (diy, dye and d,.) sto each other by rotating 90° It 1s not
possible to transform the e, orbitals an this way (€ g the dy -y> into the
4), siace they have difetent shapes IF the fag orbitals are all ingly
occupied, then it not possible to transform the yy ito dy, OF a since
they already contain an electron with the same spin. Similarly 115 not
possible to transform the fa, orbitals af they ae all doubly occupied Thos
configurations.vath (()" OF (f)° have no orbital eantabution, but the
others all have an orbital contribution ‘Thus 1n octahedral complexes the
following arrangements have an orbital contribution

NEN POS! Cd Code?
‘Co¥ has the (f.)*(ég* configuration hence the high value of ys due to
the orbital contribution In a similar way an orbital contnbunion anses m
tetrahedral cases with the following configurations
(ED! OM CY (e* )*

Inthe second and third row transition elements, and particularly 1m the
lanthanide elements (where unpaired electrons decupy sf orbitals) the
orbital motion snot prevented or quenched Thus the orbital cont
L must be included in the calculations Ta some cases there 1s coup
between the spin contribution $ and the orbital cantebution L (spun orbit
coupling, or Russell~Saundess coupling) to give a new quantum number
Jn this case a more complicated formula is used This 1s deseribed 10
Chapter 29° The equations are

n= sVFFF no

 

 

  

where
ope AVAL ED IED
gets 2+ ty

Rearranging_ this becomes
S+0-LE+Y

Be
sou 2+ iy

Using this equation the agreement between the observed and the
calculated magnetie moments of the trvatent lanthanide elements is very
close For further details see Chapter 29. Spin orbit couphng gives nse 10
fine structure tn absorption spectea It splits the degenerate lower levels
into a set of different levels These levels may be populated by using
thermal energy. ging nse to 4 temperature dependent magnetic moment

Pierre Curie found that the measured magnetic susceptibibty x94 for

 

  
