 

 

GAD) STATE

 

 

 

 

 

structure is (t2,)* (@,)", the eg level is symmetrically filled, and the complex
ion is a regular octahedron as expected.

Manganese forms an unusual basic acetate when Mn2* is oxidized
with KMnQ, in glacial acetic acid. The compound has the formula
{Mn3O(CH3COO)«]* [CH;-COO]~ and is a deep red-brown coloured
solid. It is used industrially for the oxidation of toluene CgHs-CH; to
phenol CsH;0H. It will also oxidize alkenes to lactones, and it is used
as the starting material for making many Mn(+III) compounds. The
structure is unusual and consists of a triangle of three Mn atoms with an
O atom at the centre. The six acetate groups act as bridges between the
Mn atoms — two groups across each edge of the triangle. Thus each Mn
atom is linked to four acetate groups and the central O, and the sixth
position of the octahedron is occupied by water or another ligand giving
[Mn30(CH;COO).L3]*. This type of carboxylate complex is formed by
the trivalent ions of Cr, Mn, Fe, Ru, Rh and Ir. A similar preparation in
sulphuric acid gives an intensely red coloured solution. This is thought to
contain a very similar sulphate complex with SO37 groups acting as
bridging groups. The solution is as strongly oxidizing as KMnO, and at one
time it was used as an alternative oxidizing agent for use in sulphate
solutions.

Mn(+III) and Mn(+IV) complexes are involved in the release of O2
during photosynthesis.

Te(+III) is unstable but RezO3-(H2O), and the heavier halides are
known. The halides are trimeric and (ReCls)3 and (ReBr3); are dark red
solids and (Rel); is black. Their structure consists of a metal atom cluster
in which three Re atoms form an equilateral triangle (with formal double
bonds between the metal atoms). Three halogen atoms act as bridging
groups along the edges of the triangle, and the remaining six halogen atoms
are coordinated two to each Re. An isolated Re3sXq unit is shown in Figure
23.3a. There is one unfilled coordination position on each Re atom,
marked L. In the solid this is filled by further halogen bridging with other
Re3X, units, giving a polymer (Figure 23.3b). The trimeric structure is very
stable, with Re~Re distances of 2.48 A, and this structure remains even in
the gas phase at 600°C. This structure also forms the basis of the structure
of many Re(+II1) complexes, where three additional groups L are added
to the isolated ResXy unit (Figure 23.3c).

The simplest explanation of the double bonds betweén Re atoms is that
cach Re has nine atomic orbitals available for bonding (five d, one s, and
three P). The metal is surrounded by five ligands, leaving four unused
orbitals, Assuming the unused orbitals are pure d or mainly d in character,
there are 12 atomic orbitals for Re-Re bonding. If these are delocalized
Over the three atoms there will be six bonding MOs and six antibonding
MOs. Each Re(+III) has a d* configuration: hence the 12 electrons can
on the six bonding MOs, corresponding to double bonds between each
should three Re atoms. Since all the electrons are paired, the clusters

It Re clamagnetic, and this has been found experimentally.

iCly or ResBrg is dissolved in concentrated HC! or HBr, one, two

 

Figure 23.2 Structure of
{Mn30(CH3COO),(H,0);]*.
