 

 

 

 

721

 

[ (+V) STATE

Oxohalides

Oxohalides of the type MO2Clz may be formed by dissolving the trioxide in
strong acid, or in some cases by the action of strong acids on salts Such as
dichromates, or by direct addition of the halogens to the dioxide.

cone. H;SO.
eS

CrO, + 2HCI CrO,Cl, + H,O

K,Cr0, + 6HCI SEES, 2cr0,Cl, + 2KCI + 320

Chromyl chloride CrO2Cl, is a deep red coloured liquid. It is formed in
qualitative analysis to confirm the presence of chloride ions. The suspected
chloride is mixed with solid KzCr207 and gently warmed with concentrated
H,SO,. Deep red vapours of CrO2Cl, are formed, and if these are passed
into aqueous NaOH the solution turns yellow due to the formation of
Na,CrO4.

Chromyl and molybdeny! chlorides are covalent acid chlorides and are
readily decomposed by water. Tungstenyl chloride hydrolyses less readily.

Halides

CrF, is a yellow solid made by heating the elements under pressure in a
bomb, and cooling rapidly. The product is unstable and decomposes into
CrF; and F>. In contrast MoF, and WF, are very stable. They are both low
melting (MoF, 17.4°C, WF, 1.9°C), volatile, and easily hydrolysed. They
are diamagnetic and colourless as expected for a d° configuration.
However, MoCl, and WC, are black and WBrg is dark blue. WCl, is made
by heating the metal in Cl. It reacts with water, forming tungstic acid.
WC, is soluble in EtOH, ether and CCl,, and is used as the starting point
for making other compounds.

(+V) STATE

There are few Cr(+V) compounds, and they are unstable and decompose
to Cr(+IIl) and Cr(+VI). One example is K3CrOg, a .red—brown
compound formed from NaCrO, and HQ; in alkaline solution (see
above). KxCrOg contains the tetraperoxo speci¢s [Cr(O2),]°". Another
cxample is CrF; which is made by heating the elements at 500°C or heating
CrO, With Fp. It is a red solid, based on CrF, octahedra linked to give a cis-
bridged polymer.

wees has a tetrameric structure of four octahedra joined into a ring, like
NDF and TaFs (see Figure 21.1). Heating Mo and Cl, gives Mo2Chyy: This
weettle in benzene and other organic solvents. It exists as monomeric
thes sm solution, but dimerizes to Mo2Chyp in the solid. Mo2Cljq is used as
by a ing point for making other Mo compounds. It is rapidly hydrolysed
Mo aan removes o from oxygenated solvents, forming oxochlorides.
u z~w JS paramagnetic (4 = 1.6 BM), indicating that there is .one

npaired electron and thus no metal-metal bonding.

 
