Electrons Determine the Chemical
Behavior of Atoms

The key to the chemical behavior of an atom lies in the ar-
rangement of its electrons in their orbits. It is convenient to
visualize individual electrons as following discrete circular
orbits around a central nucleus, as in the Bohr model of the
atom. However, such a simple picture is not realistic. It is
not possible to precisely locate the position of any individual
electron precisely at any given time. In fact, a particular
electron can be anywhere at a given instant, from close to
the nucleus to infinitely far away from it.

However, a particular electron is more likely to be locat-
ed in some positions than in others. The area around a nu-
cleus where an electron is most likely to be found is called
the orbital of that electron (figure 2.4). Some electron or-
bitals near the nucleus are spherical (5 orbitals), while oth-
ers are dumbbell-shaped (p orbitals). Still other orbitals,
more distant from the nucleus, may have different shapes.
Regardless of its shape, no orbital may contain more than
two electrons.

Almost all of the volume of an atom is empty space, be-
cause the electrons are quite far from the nucleus relative
to its size. If the nucleus of an atom were the size of an ap-
ple, the orbit of the nearest electron would be more than
1600 meters away. Consequently, the nuclei of two atoms
never come close enough in nature to interact with each
other. It is for this reason that an atom’s electrons, not its
protons or neutrons, determine its chemical behavior. This

also explains why the isotopes of an element, all of which
have the same arrangement of electrons, behave the same
way chemically.

Energy within the Atom

All atoms possess energy, defined as the ability to do work.
Because electrons are attracted to the positively charged
nucleus, it takes work to keep them in orbit, just as it takes
work to hold a grapefruit in your hand against the pull of
gravity. The grapefruit is said to possess potential energy,
the ability to do work, because of its position; if you were
to release it, the grapefruit would fall and its energy would
be reduced. Conversely, if you were to move the grapefruit
to the top of a building, you would increase its potential
energy. Similarly, electrons have potential energy of posi-
tion. To oppose the attraction of the nucleus and move the
electron to a more distant orbital requires an input of en-
ergy and results in an electron with greater potential ener-
gy. This is how chlorophyll captures energy from light
during photosynthesis (chapter 10)—the light excites elec-
trons in the chlorophyll. Moving an electron closer to the
nucleus has the opposite effect: energy is released, usually
as heat, and the electron ends up with less potential energy
(figure 2.5).

A given atom can possess only certain discrete amounts
of energy. Like the potential energy of a grapefruit on a step
of a staircase, the potential energy contributed by the posi-
tion of an electron in an atom can have only certain values.

 

2s Orbital
y
7
x
x

1s Orbital 2p Orbitals
Orbital for energy level K: Orbitals for energy level L: Composite of
‘one spherical orbital (15) cone spherical orbital (2s) and all p orbitals

three dumbbell-shaped orbitals (2p)

FIGURE 2.4

Electron orbitals. The lowest energy level or electron shell, which is nearest the nucleus, is level K. It is occupied by a single s orbital,
referred to as 1s. The next highest energy level, L, is occupied by four orbitals: one s orbital (referred to as the 2s orbital) and three p
orbitals (each referred to as a 2p orbital). The four L-level orbitals compactly fill the space around the nucleus, like two pyramids set base-

to-base.

22 PartI The Origin of Living Things
