Photorespiration

Evolution does not necessarily result in optimum solutions.
Rather, it favors workable solutions that can be derived
from others that already exist. Photosynthesis is no excep-
tion. Rubisco, the enzyme that catalyzes the key carbon-
fixing reaction of photosynthesis, provides a decidedly sub-
optimal solution. This enzyme has a second enzyme activity
that interferes with the Calvin cycle, ovidizing ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate. In this process, called photorespiration, O7
is incorporated into ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, which un-
dergoes additional reactions that actually release CO).
Hence, photorespiration releases CO)—essentially undoing
the Calvin cycle which reduces CO; to carbohydrate.

The carboxylation and oxidation of ribulose 1,5-bispho-
sphate are catalyzed at the same active site on rubisco, and
compete with each other. Under normal conditions at
25°C, the rate of the carboxylation reaction is four times
that of the oxidation reaction, meaning that 20% of photo-
synthetically fixed carbon is lost to photorespiration. This
loss rises substantially as temperature increases, because the
rate of the oxidation reaction increases with temperature
far faster than the carboxylation reaction rate.

Plants that fix carbon using only C; photosynthesis (the
Calvin cycle) are called C3 plants. In C3; photosynthesis,
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate is carboxylated to form a three-
carbon compound via the activity of rubisco. Other plants
use C4 photosynthesis, in which phosphoenolpyruvate, or
PEP, is carboxylated to form a four-carbon compound
using the enzyme PEP carboxylase. This enzyme has no
oxidation activity, and thus no photorespiration. Further-
more, PEP carboxylase has a much greater affinity for CO?
than does rubisco. In the Cy pathway, the four-carbon
compound undergoes further modification, only to be de-
carboxylated. The CO? which is released is then captured
by rubisco and drawn into the Calvin cycle. Because an or-
ganic compound is donating the CO), the effective concen-
tration of CO) relative to O) is increased, and photorespi-
ration is minimized.

The loss of fixed carbon as a result of photorespiration is
not trivial. C3 plants lose between 25 and 50% of their
photosynthetically fixed carbon in this way. The rate de-
pends largely upon the temperature. In tropical climates,
especially those in which the temperature is often above
28°C, the problem is severe, and it has a major impact on
tropical agriculture.

The Cy Pathway

Plants that adapted to these warmer environments have
evolved two principal ways that use the C4 pathway to
deal with this problem. In one approach, plants conduct
C4 photosynthesis in the mesophyll cells and the Calvin
cycle in the bundle sheath cells. This creates high local
levels of CO) to favor the carboxylation reaction of ru-
bisco. These plants are called Cy plants and include corn,

202 Part IIT Energetics

 

 

   
     

O00
Phosphoenol-
L pyruvate (PEP)

 

 

 

 

Oxaloacetate

 

Mesophyll
cell

   
 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pyruvate

 

  

cO,Q _Bundle-
sheath /
\\\ Calvin cell
\\ ( cycle |
‘h }
Ix Se he
FIGURE 10.21

Carbon fixation in C, plants. This process is called the Cy
pathway because the starting material, oxaloacetate, is a molecule
containing four carbons.

sugarcane, sorghum, and a number of other grasses. In the
C4 pathway, the three-carbon metabolite phospho-
enolpyruvate is carboxylated to form the four-carbon
molecule oxaloacetate, which is the first product of CO)
fixation (figure 10.21). In Cy plants, oxaloacetate is in turn
converted into the intermediate malate, which is trans-
ported to an adjacent bundle-sheath cell. Inside the bundle-
sheath cell, malate is decarboxylated to produce pyruvate,
releasing CO2. Because bundle-sheath cells are imperme-
able to CO, the CO; is retained within them in high con-
centrations. Pyruvate returns to the mesophyll cell, where
two of the high-energy bonds in an ATP molecule are
split to convert the pyruvate back into phosphoenolpyru-
vate, thus completing the cycle.

The enzymes that carry out the Calvin cycle in a Cy
plant are located within the bundle-sheath cells, where the
increased CO) concentration decreases photorespiration.
Because each CO? molecule is transported into the bundle-
sheath cells at a cost of two high-energy ATP bonds, and
because six carbons must be fixed to form a molecule of
glucose, 12 additional molecules of ATP are required to
form a molecule of glucose. In C photosynthesis, the ener-
getic cost of forming glucose is almost twice that of C3
photosynthesis: 30 molecules of ATP versus 18. Neverthe-
less, Cy photosynthesis is advantageous in a hot climate:
photorespiration would otherwise remove more than half
of the carbon fixed.
