 

 

 

 

 

 

 

other far-red), the rate was greater than the sum of the
rates using individual beams of red and far-red light (fig-
ure 10.13). This surprising result, called the enhancement
effect, can be explained by a mechanism involving two re
photosystems acting in series (that is, one after the other), 23
one of which absorbs preferentially in the red, the other ge
in the far-red. 28

The use of two photosystems solves the problem of ob- ae
taining reducing power in a simple and direct way, by har-
nessing the energy of two photosystems. The scheme
shown in figure 10.14, called a Z diagram, illustrates the
two electron-energizing steps, one catalyzed by each pho-
tosystem. The electrons originate from water, which holds t + + + + t
onto its electrons very tightly (redox potential = +820 mV), Farred Off Redlight Off Both Off
and end up in NADPH, which holds its electrons much (ecm ea fgnisen
more loosely (redox potential = -320 mV). Un

FIGURE 10.13

In sulfur bacteria, excited electrons ejected from the
reaction center travel a circular path, driving a proton
pump and then returning to their original photosystem.
Plants employ two photosystems in series, which
generates power to reduce NADP* to NADPH with

The “enhancement effect.” The rate of photosynthesis when
red and far-red light are provided together is greater than the sum
of the rates when each wavelength is provided individually. This
result baffled researchers in the 1950s. Today it provides the key
evidence that photosynthesis is carried out by two photochemical

 

    
 

 

 

   
        
  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

enough left over fo make ATP, systems with slightly different wavelength optima.
Excited Ferredoxin
reaction
i
NADP
C reductase
e NADP* + Ht ei
pa Plastocyani
lastocyanin
5 complex ry Reaction
3 center Photon
oO
3 He
8 P _
2 | Photon roton gradient
i Water-splitting formed for ATP
enzyme synthesis
=
HO
2H*+ 50>
Photosystem I b,-fcomplex| Photosystem! NADP reductase
FIGURE 10.14

AZ diagram of photosystems I and II. Two photosystems work sequentially. First, a photon of light ejects a high-energy electron from
photosystem II; that electron is used to pump a proton across the membrane, contributing chemiosmotically to the production of a
molecule of ATP. The ejected electron then passes along a chain of cytochromes to photosystem I. When photosystem I absorbs a photon
of light, it ejects a high-energy electron used to drive the formation of NADPH.

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 195
