 

 

 

{ ABUNDANCE, EXTRACTION AND USES

 

 

735

 

 

Pure Mn is now obtained by electrolysis of aqueous MnSO, solutions.
(Formerly it was made by reducing MnO, or Mn3Q, with Al in a thermite
reaction, but the reaction with MnO, was particularly violent.) There is
fittle use for the pure metal. Ninety-five per cent of the Mn ores mined are
used in the steel industry to produce alloys. Ferromanganese is the most
important, and contains 80% Mn. World production of ferromanganese
was 3.4 million tonnes in 1991. It is made by reducing the appropriate
mixture of Fe,O3 and MnO, with carbon in a blast furnace, or an electric-
are furnace, with some limestone added to remove silicate impurities
as calcium silicate slag. Alloys with a lower Mn content include sili-
comanganese (approximately 65% Mn, 20% Si, 15% Fe) and spiegeleisen
which is similar to cast iron and contains 5~25% Mn. Mn is an important
additive in making steel. It acts as a scavenger (removing both oxygen and
sulphur and thus preventing bubbles and brittleness) and in addition it
forms a very hard steel alloy. (Hadfield steel contains about 13% Mn and
1.25% C. It is very hard wearing and resistant to shock, and is used for
rock crushing machinery and excavators.) Smaller amounts of Mn are also
used in non-ferrous alloys. For example, manganin is an alloy containing
84% Cu, 12% Mn and 4% Ni. It is widely used in eiectrical instruments
because its electrical resistance is almost unaffected by temperature.
Table 23.2 Abundance of the elements in the
earth’s crust, by weight

 

ppm Relative abundance
Mn 1060 12
Te 0
Re 0.0007 76

 

Technetium does not occur in nature, and was the first man-made
element. All its isotopes are radioactive, and its chemistry has only
recently been studied. “Tc is one of the fission products of uranium. It is a
B emitter with a half life of 2.1 x 10° years. It is obtained in kilogram
quantities from spent fuel rods from reactors at nuclear power stations.
The rods may contain 6% Tc. These rods must be stored for several years
to allow the short-lived radioactive species to decay. Tc can be extracted
by oxidation to Te,O, which is volatile. Alternatively solutions can be
separated by ion exchange and solvent extraction. The Tc,O7 can be
dissolved in water, forming the pertechnate ion TcO;, and crystallized as
ammonium or potassium pertechnate. Ammonium pertechnate NH4TcO,
can be reduced with H2 to give the metal. Tc metal has no commercial
oe Te and **Tc can be made by neutron bombardment of Mo. Small
a unts of Te compounds are sometimes injected into patients to allow

Rene scanning of the liver and other organs.
den maine very rare element, and occurs in small amounts in molyb-
roastin the ide ores. Re is recovered as Re.0, from the flue dust from
perthes Se ores, This is dissolved in NaOH, giving a solution containing

Rate ions ReOZ. The solution is concentrated and then KCI added ,
continued overleaf

 

 
