 

 

[ (+IV) STATE

(+1V) STATE

Oxides . :
World production of TiO; was 4.1 million tonnes in 1992. More than half
is used as a white pigment in paint. and as an opacifier to make coloured
paint opaque. It has replaced the earlier pigments white lead (2PbCO3-
Pb(OH),), BaSO, and CaSO, for this purpose. It has three advantages
over Pb: it covers better. it is non-toxic, and it does not blacken if exposed
to HS. The other major uses of TiQ2 are for whitening paper, and as a
filler in plastics and rubber. Some is used for delustering and whitening
nylon.

Naturally occurring TiO; is invariably coloured by impurities. There are
two commercial processes for obtaining pure TiO2, the older sulphate
process and the more recent chloride process. In the chloride process rutile
(TiO) is heated with chlorine and coke at 900°C, forming TiCly. This is
volatile and can thus be separated from any impurities. The TiCl, is heated
with OQ) at about 1200°C, forming pure TiO, and Cl2. The chlorine is
reused,

TiO; + 2C + 2Cl, > TiCl, + 2CO
TiCl, + 202 > TiO, + 2Ch

In the sulphate process. ilmenite FeTiO; is digested with concentrated
H)SO,: Fe!'SOy, Fe!!"(SO,); and titanyl sulphate TiO - SO, are formed as
a sulphate cake. This latter is leached with water and any insoluble
material is removed. Fe" in the solution is reduced to Fe'! using scrap
iron, and then FeSOs is crystallized out by vacuum evaporation and
cooling. The TiOSO, solution is hydrolysed by boiling, and then the
solution is seeded with rutile or anatase crystals as required.

The crystal structures of the oxides suggest that they are ionic. However,
the sum of the first four ionization energies is so high (8800 kJ mol™' for
Ti"*) that this seems improbable. TiO. occurs in three different crystalline
forms: rutile, anatase and brookite. Rutile is the most common: here each
Ti is surrounded octahedrally by six O atoms (see Chapter 3, under ‘Ionic
compounds of the type AX;'). The structures of the other two forms are
distorted octahedral arrangements. The oxides are insoluble in water. M**
ions do Not exist in solution, but MO?* ions are formed, giving basic salts
such as titanyl sulphate TiO - SO,. Either TiO?* ions or [Ti(OH),]** are
Now solution, but in the solid they polymerize into oxygen bridged
7 0);* chains. The X-ray Structure of TiO. SO, shows that each Ti is

rounded octahedrally by six O atoms: two chain O atoms, O atoms from
three SOz groups and O from one H20. ;

Picea way zirconyl ions ZrO** exist in solution, and they form
bridged ‘, Species in crystals. Zirconyl nitrate ZrO(NO3). forms an oxygen
and din a Tucture similar to TiO - SOs. ZrO(NO3)3 is soluble in water

¢ HNOs, and is used to remove phosphate in qualitative analysis.

Otherwise it would inte i
\ tfere with the systematic analysis for metals. The
Phosphates of Ti, Zr and Hf are all insoluble. *

| [689]
