How Photosystems Convert Light
to Chemical Energy

Bacteria Use a Single Photosystem

Photosynthetic pigment arrays are thought to have evolved
more than 3 billion years ago in bacteria similar to the sul-
fur bacteria studied by van Niel.

1. Electron is joined with a proton to make hydrogen.
In these bacteria, the absorption of a photon of light at a
peak absorption of 870 nanometers (near infrared, not visi-
ble to the human eye) by the photosystem results in the
transmission of an energetic electron along an electron
transport chain, eventually combining with a proton to
form a hydrogen atom. In the sulfur bacteria, the proton is
extracted from hydrogen sulfide, leaving elemental sulfur as
a by-product. In bacteria that evolved later, as well as in
plants and algae, the proton comes from water, producing
oxygen as a by-product.

2. Electron is recycled to chlorophyll. The ejection of
an electron from the bacterial reaction center leaves it
short one electron. Before the photosystem of the sulfur
bacteria can function again, an electron must be re-
turned. These bacteria channel the electron back to the
pigment through an electron transport system similar to
the one described in chapter 9; the electron’s passage drives
a proton pump that promotes the chemiosmotic synthesis
of ATP. One molecule of ATP is produced for every
three electrons that follow this path. Viewed overall (fig-
ure 10.12), the path of the electron is thus a circle.
Chemists therefore call the electron transfer process
leading to ATP formation cyclic photophosphorylation.
Note, however, that the electron that left the Pg7 reac-
tion center was a high-energy electron, boosted by the
absorption of a photon of light, while the electron that
returns has only as much energy as it had before the pho-
ton was absorbed. The difference in the energy of that
electron is the photosynthetic payoff, the energy that drives
the proton pump.

For more than a billion years, cyclic photophosphory-
lation was the only form of photosynthetic light reaction
that organisms used. However, its major limitation is
that it is geared only toward energy production, not to-
ward biosynthesis. Most photosynthetic organisms incor-
porate atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrates.
Because the carbohydrate molecules are more reduced
(have more hydrogen atoms) than carbon dioxide, a
source of reducing power (that is, hydrogens) must be
provided. Cyclic photophosphorylation does not do this.
The hydrogen atoms extracted from H)S are used as a
source of protons, and are not available to join to carbon.
Thus bacteria that are restricted to this process must
scavenge hydrogens from other sources, an inefficient
undertaking.

194 Part III Energetics

Why Plants Use Two Photosystems

After the sulfur bacteria appeared, other kinds of bacteria
evolved an improved version of the photosystem that over-
came the limitation of cyclic photophosphorylation in a
neat and simple way: a second, more powerful photosystem
using another arrangement of chlorophyll @ was combined
with the original.

In this second photosystem, called photosystem II,
molecules of chlorophyll @ are arranged with a different
geometry, so that more shorter wavelength, higher energy
photons are absorbed than in the ancestral photosystem,
which is called photosystem I. As in the ancestral photo-
system, energy is transmitted from one pigment molecule
to another within the antenna complex of these photosys-
tems until it reaches the reaction center, a particular pig-
ment molecule positioned near a strong membrane-bound
electron acceptor. In photosystem II, the absorption peak
(that is, the wavelength of light most strongly absorbed) of
the pigments is approximately 680 nanometers; therefore,
the reaction center pigment is called P¢go. The absorption
peak of photosystem I pigments in plants is 700 nanome-
ters, so its reaction center pigment is called P79. Working
together, the two photosystems carry out a noncyclic elec-
tron transfer.

When the rate of photosynthesis is measured using two
light beams of different wavelengths (one red and the

   
     
 
 

Excited Electron
reaction ‘acceptor
center

Ferredoxin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2
s
3 complex
o
6
B e€
3
1 |Photon Reaction
Plastocyanin
Photosystem bg-f complex
FIGURE 10.12

The path of an electron in purple sulfur bacteria. When a
light-energized electron is ejected from the photosystem reaction
center (Pg7o), it passes in a circle, eventually returning to the
photosystem from which it was ejected.
