 

 

HALIDES

 

 

705

 

 

)' (dz)!

This state has the symbol Arg. Thus there are three possible transitions
from the ground state to excited states with the same multiplicity:

5T,,(F) ad Tg
3Tyy(F) > 77 g(P)
and 3 Tig (F) > *Arg

Thus three bands are possible. (See Chapter 32, particularly Figure 32.16).
In the spectrum of (V(H20),P* only two bands are actually observed, at
about 17000cm~! and 24000cm~*. The third band arising from the
transition to Az, is not observed experimentally. Since this transition is a
two electron transition it is less probable than the others and so will have a
low intensity. Furthermore this band overlaps, and is hidden by, the very
intense charge transfer band in the UV region. All three bands are
observed when V** is incorporated into an Al,Q; lattice.

The discussion above indicates that in addition to the crystal field
splitting A, the interelectronic repulsion must also be taken into account
when explaining the spectra. The repulsion terms are described by the
Racah parameters B and C (see Chapter 32).

 

Nb and Ta halides

The trihalides of Nb and Ta are typically nonstoichiometric. In NbCl; the
Nb ions occupy octahedral holes in a distorted hexagonal close-packed
array of CI” ions in such a way that niobium atoms in three adjacent
octahedra are close enough to be bonded together into a metal cluster.
Compounds where three or more metal atoms are held together by multi-
centre bonding are called cluster compounds.

(+11) halides

All the vanadium dihalides are known. The VX2 compounds are prepared
by Feducing the trihalides with Zn/acid in aqueous solution. VF, has a
Tutile TiO, structure, and the others have a CdlI,-type layer structure. They
are soluble in water, giving violet solutions containing [V(H2O)«]**
Addition of NaQH precipitates V(OH)>:, and addition of H,SO, and
ethanol Precipitates violet crystals of VSO,-6H,O. The compounds are
mide y feducing. and are hygroscopic. Their solutions are readily
of ©. fro y ar to [V(H,O),]**. and they are often used to remove traces
Ti ah mt ne noble gases. They also reduce H2O with the liberation of
the pentalhda behave very differently. High temperature reduction of
ot a nes NbXs and TaXg with sodium or aluminium yields a series
TesB lldes such as MyChs. Melis. NDgFis. TayChis, TagBris and
Ne cl » these are all based on the [M,Xj2]"* unit. For example, if

wha is dissolved in water and alcohol, and treated with AgNO;

 
