of the photosystem so it can be put to work driving the syn-
thesis of ATP and organic molecules.

A photosystem thus consists of two closely linked
components: (1) an antenna complex of hundreds of pig-
ment molecules that gather photons and feed the cap-
tured light energy to the reaction center; and (2) a_ reac-
tion center, consisting of one or more chlorophyll a
molecules in a matrix of protein, that passes the energy
out of the photosystem.

The Antenna Complex. The antenna complex captures
photons from sunlight (figure 10.10). In chloroplasts, the
antenna complex is a web of chlorophyll molecules linked
together and held tightly on the thylakoid membrane by a
matrix of proteins. Varying amounts of carotenoid acces-
sory pigments may also be present. The protein matrix
serves as a sort of scaffold, holding individual pigment mol-
ecules in orientations that are optimal for energy transfer.
The excitation energy resulting from the absorption of a
photon passes from one pigment molecule to an adjacent
molecule on its way to the reaction center. After the trans-
fer, the excited electron in each molecule returns to the
low-energy level it had before the photon was absorbed.
Consequently, it is energy, not the excited electrons them-
selves, that passes from one pigment molecule to the next.
The antenna complex funnels the energy from many elec-
trons to the reaction center.

The Reaction Center. The reaction center is a trans-
membrane protein-pigment complex. In the reaction cen-
ter of purple photosynthetic bacteria, which is simpler than
in chloroplasts but better understood, a pair of chlorophyll
a molecules acts as a trap for photon energy, passing an ex-
cited electron to an acceptor precisely positioned as its
neighbor. Note that here the excited electron itself is trans-
ferred, not just the energy as we saw in pigment-pigment
transfers. This allows the photon excitation to move away
from the chlorophylls and is the key conversion of light to
chemical energy.

Figure 10.11 shows the transfer of energy from the reac-
tion center to the primary electron acceptor. By energizing
an electron of the reaction center chlorophyll, light creates
a strong electron donor where none existed before. The
chlorophyll transfers the energized electron to the primary
acceptor, a molecule of quinone, reducing the quinone and
converting it to a strong electron donor. A weak electron
donor then donates a low-energy electron to the chloro-
phyll, restoring it to its original condition. In plant chloro-
plasts, water serves as the electron donor.

 

Photosystems contain pigments that capture photon
energy from light. The pigments transfer the energy to
reaction centers. There, the energy excites electrons,
which are channeled away to do chemical work.

 

 
     
 
 

Reaction
center
chlorophyll

Photon

Electron
donor

Chlorophyll
molecules

Photosystem

FIGURE 10.10

How the antenna complex works. When light of the proper
wavelength strikes any pigment molecule within a photosystem,
the light is absorbed by that pigment molecule. The excitation
energy is then transferred from one molecule to another within
the cluster of pigment molecules until it encounters the reaction
center chlorophyll a. When excitation energy reaches the reaction
center chlorophyll, electron transfer is initiated.

Excited
chlorophyll

onlorophy Chlorophyll

oxidized

    

Electron Electron
donor acceptor

oxidized reduced
an @ Q
i 7 B ~

FIGURE 10.11

Converting light to chemical energy. The reaction center
chlorophyll donates a light-energized electron to the primary
electron acceptor, reducing it. The oxidized chlorophyll then fills
its electron “hole” by oxidizing a donor molecule.

Acceptor Donor
reduced

Acceptor

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 193
