 

 

 

ABUNDANCE

| [673

 

Table 18.10 Metalloenzymes and metalloproteins (metalloproteins in brackets)
ee

 

Metal Enzyme/metalloprotein Biological function

Mo Xanthine oxidase Metabolism of purines
Nitrate reductase Utilization of nitrates

Mn! Arginase Urea formation
Phosphotransferases Adding or removing PO}~

Fe"! or Fell! Aldehyde oxidase Oxidation of aldehydes
Catalase Decomposes H202
Peroxidase Decomposes H202
Cytochromes Electron transfer
Ferredoxin Photosynthesis
(Haemoglobin) O) transport in higher animals

Succinic dehydrogenase
FeandMo Nitrogenase

Co Glutamic mutase
Ribonucleotide reductase

Cu'orCul! ~— Amine oxidases
Ascorbate oxidase
Cytochrome oxidase
Galactose oxidase
Lysine oxidase
Dopamine hydroxylase

Tyrosinase
Ceruloplasmin
(Haemocyanin)

Aerobic oxidation of carbohydrates
Fixation of dinitrogen

Metabolism of amino acids
Biosynthesis of DNA

Oxidation of amines

Oxidation of ascorbic acid

Principal terminal oxidase

Oxidation of galactose

Elasticity of aortic walls

Producing noradrenaline to generate
nerve impulses in the brain

Skin pigmentation _ :

Utilization of Fe _

CO) transport in invertebrates

Plastocyanin Photosynthesis
Zn!' Alcohol dehydrogenase Metabolism of alcohol
Alkaline phosphatase Releasing PO”
Carbonic anhydrase Regulation of pH and CO, formation
Carboxypeptidase Digestion of proteins

ec

analysing for Cu because the precipitate is a mixture of CuS and Cu,S.
Sometimes nonstoichiometry is caused by defects in the solid structures.

ABUNDANCE

Three of the transition metals are very abundant in the earth’s crust. Fe is
the fourth most abundant element by weight, Ti the ninth and Mn the
twelfth. The first row of transition elements largely follow Harkins’ rule
that elements with an even atomic number are in general more abundant
than their neighbours with odd atomic numbers. Manganese is an
exception. The second and third row elements are much less abundant than
the first row. Tc does not occur in nature. Of the last six elements in the
second and third rows (Tc, Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Cd; Re, Os, Ir, Pt, Au, Hg)

Tone occurs to an extent of more than 0.16 parts per million (ppm) in the
earth's crust. :

 
