 

 

 

STEEL MAKING

75S

 

 

 

 

electric current through the metal. This process js still used to produce steel
alloys and other high quality steel. Stainless steel typically contains
12-15% of Ni, but that used for cutlery may contain 20% Cr and 10% Ni.
High speed cutting steel used as the cutting edges on lathes may contain
18% W and 5% Cr. Alloys with 0.4—1.6% Mn give steel with a high tensile
strength. Hadfield steel, which is very tough and is used for rock breaking
machinery and excavators, contains about 13% Mn and 1.25% C. Spring
steel contains 2.5% Si.

Basic oxygen process

The main process nowadays is the more modern basic oxygen process
(BOP). It originated in 1952 as the Kaldo and LD processes in Austria.
One problem with the older Bessemer and Thomas processes was that the
molten metal took up small amounts of nitrogen. In concentrations above
0.01% nitrogen makes steel brittle, and nitriding of the surface makes the
metal more difficult to weld. The remedy is to use pure O, instead of air to
oxidize the pig iron. If O2 was blown through the bottom of the furnace in
the same way as air was blown through in the Bessemer process, the
bottom of the furnace would melt. The Kaldo and LD processes both use
pure O2. In the LD process strong convection currents were set up in the
melt to obtain an effective reaction, whilst in the Kaldo process the
convertor was rotated to ensure mixing and hence an effective reaction.
The BOP process is now very widely used. The furnace is initially charged
with molten pig iron and lime, and pure O, is blown onto the surface of the
liquid metal at great speed through retractable water cooled lances. The O2
penetrates into the melt and oxidizes the impurities rapidly. The heat
evolved in oxidizing the impurities keeps the contents of the furnace
molten despite the rise in melting point as impurities are removed. No
external heat is required. Eventually the furnace is tipped and the molten
steel is poured either into moulds to give steel castings, or into ingots,

which in turn may be passed to rolling mills. The advantages of using O2
rather than air are:

1. There is a faster conversion, so a given plant can produce more in a day.
2, Larger quantities can be handled. (A 300 tonnes charge can be

Converted in 40 minutes compared with 6 tonnes in 20 minutes by the
Bessemer process.)

3. It gives a purer product, and the surface is free from nitrides.

Table 24.4 Composition of various steels

 

 

%C name

+0.15-0.3 Mild steel
0.3-0.6 Medium steel
0.6-0.8 High-carbon steel
0.8-1.4 Tool steel

 

iaeeneeneeemeeneeneeneeeeeeereene el
continued overleaf

 

 
