 

 

EXTRACTION OF IRON

 

EXTRACTION OF IRON

The extraction of iron has played a considerable part in the development of
modern civilization. The iron age began when man found how to use the
charcoal formed by burning wood to extract iron from iron ores, and how
to use it to make implements. The industrial revolution began when
Abraham Darby developed a process which used coke instead of charcoal
at Coalbrookdale in Shropshire, England, in 1773. It is much cheaper and
easier to produce coke from coal rather than make charcoal by partly
burning wood. Furthermore the greater mechanical strength of coke made
it possible to blow air through a mixture of coke and iron ore in a blast
furnace and thus extract iron on a much larger scale. These two factors
increased the availability of iron and greatly reduced its price. It became
possible for the first time to make bridges, ships, steam engines and railway
lines using iron. The scale on which iron and steel are produced and their
widespread use justify detailed examination of the processes involved.

Blast furnace

Iron is extracted from its oxides in a blast furnace. This is an almost
cylindrical furnace, lined with fire bricks. It runs continuously and works
on the counter-current principle. It is charged from the top with iron ore, a
reducing agent (coke) and slag forming substances (calcium carbonate).
The amount of CaCO; is varied, depending on the amount of silicate
materials in the ore. Air is blown in at the bottom. The coke burns
producing heat and CO. The temperature of the furnace is nearly 2000°C
at the point where the air enters, but is about 1500°C at the bottom and
200°C at the top. The iron oxide is reduced to iron mainly by CO (though
perhaps some reduction by C takes place). The molten iron dissolves
3-4% of C from the coke, resulting in the formation of pig iron. The
melting point of pure iron is 1535°C. The impurities in pig iron lower the
melting point, possibly to as low as 1015°C (the eutectic temperature) by
the presence of 4.3% C. Molten iron collects in the hearth at the bottom of
the blast furnace.

The temperature of the furnace decomposes CaCQ; to CaO, which then
Feacts with any silicate impurities present (such as sand or clay), forming
calcium silicate or slag. This is also molten and also drips to the bottom. The
Slag floats on the molten iron, thus protecting it from oxidation. Molten
slag and molten iron are drawn off through separate openings at intervals.
The Molten iron is run into moulds made of sand and is allowed to solidify
'nto ingots called ‘pigs’, Pig iron or cast iron is hard but is very brittle.
bin amount of pig iron is remelted and cast into metal parts, but the
thou ne makes it almost impossible to machine the metal on a lathe,
and 8 7 ‘he be shaped by grinding. Pig iron contains up to 4.3% carbon
elements ly other impurities such as Si, P, S and Mn. The non-metallic

must be removed to reduce the brittleness. All Fe/C alloys
continued overleaf

 

| [755]

Iron ore
coke and
limestone

in

 

{ron

Figure 24.1 Diagram of a
blast furnace.
