1.1 Biology is the science of life.

Properties of Life

In its broadest sense, biology is the study of living things—the
science of life. Living things come in an astounding variety of
shapes and forms, and biologists study life in many differ-
ent ways. They live with gorillas, collect fossils, and listen
to whales. They isolate viruses, grow mushrooms, and ex-
amine the structure of fruit flies. They read the messages
encoded in the long molecules of heredity and count how
many times a hummingbird’s wings beat each second.

What makes something “alive”? Anyone could deduce
that a galloping horse is alive and a car is not, but why? We
cannot say, “If it moves, it’s alive,” because a car can move,
and gelatin can wiggle in a bowl. They certainly are not
alive. What characteristics do define life? All living organ-
isms share five basic characteristics:

1. Order. All organisms consist of one or more cells
with highly ordered structures: atoms make up mole-
cules, which construct cellular organelles, which are
contained within cells. This hierarchical organization
continues at higher levels in multicellular organisms
and among organisms (figure 1.2).

2. Sensitivity. All organisms respond to stimuli. Plants
grow toward a source of light, and your pupils dilate
when you walk into a dark room.

3. Growth, development, and reproduction. All or-
ganisms are capable of growing and reproducing, and
they all possess hereditary molecules that are passed to
their offspring, ensuring that the offspring are of the
same species. Although crystals also “grow,” their
growth does not involve hereditary molecules.

4. Regulation. All organisms have regulatory mecha-
nisms that coordinate the organism’s internal func-
tions. These functions include supplying cells with nu-
trients, transporting substances through the organism,
and many others.

5. Homeostasis. All organisms maintain relatively
constant internal conditions, different from their envi-
ronment, a process called homeostasis.

 

All living things share certain key characteristics: order,
sensitivity, growth, development and reproduction,
regulation, and homeostasis.

 

FIGURE 1.2
Hierarchical organization of living things. Life is highly orga-
nized—from small and simple to large and complex, within cells,
within multicellular organisms, and among organisms.

4 Part The Origin of Living Things

 

 

WITHIN CELLS

   

Macromolecule

Molecule

 
