 

 

 

 

 

(+I) STATE

 

 

 

[827

 

the concentration of the developer solution, the pH, the temperature and
the length of time that the film is kept in the developer solution.

If the film was brought out into daylight at this stage, the unexposed
parts of the emulsion would turn black and thus destroy the picture. To
prevent this happening any unchanged silver halides are removed by
placing the film in a fixer solution. In the early days, strong ammonia was
used to dissolve the unchanged AgBr. Though this was effective, the smell
of ammonia in the confined space of a darkroom must have been un-
pleasant and harmful to the photographer. Nowadays a solution of sodium
thiosulphate is used as fixer. It forms a soluble complex with silver halides.

AgBr + 2NaS203 — Na;[Ag(S203)2] + NaBr

After fixing, the film can safely be brought out into daylight. Parts
blackened by silver represent the light parts of the original picture. This is
therefore a negative.

To obtain an image with light and dark the right way round, a print must
be made. Light is passed through the negative onto a piece of paper coated
with AgBr emulsion. This is then developed and fixed in the same way as
before.

(+11) STATE

The (+I!) state is the most stable and important for Cu. Cu?* has the
electronic configuration d° and has an unpaired electron. Its compounds
are typically coloured due to d—d spectra and the compounds are para-
magnetic. CuSO,-5H2O and many hydrated copper(I) salts (formerly
called cupric salts) are blue.

On strong heating, oxosalts such as Cu(NO3)2 decompose into CuO
which is black. Very strong heating (>800°C) gives Cu2O. The addition
of NaOH to a solution containing Cu2* gives a blue precipitate of the
hydroxide. The hydrated ion {Cu(H20),]?* is formed when the hydroxide
or carbonate are dissolved in acid, or when CuSO, or Cu(NO3)2 are
dissolved in water. This ion has the characteristic blue colour associated
with copper salts, and has a distorted octahedral shape. There are two long
bonds trans to each other, and four short bonds (Figure 27.1). This is
called tetragonal distortion and is a consequence of the d’ configuration.
The octahedral arrangement causes crystal field splitting of the d orbitals
on Cu into low energy fg and higher energy eg levels. The nine d
electrons are arranged (t2»)° and (e,)°. The three e, electrons occupy the
dy:_y2 and d.: orbitals, two in one orbital and one in the other. Since the ey
level is not symmetrically filled, Jahn—Teller distortion occurs. This re-
Moves the degeneracy of the ey and fo, orbitals (i.e. they-are no longer the
Same energy). Thus the complex is distorted. The d,2_y2 orbital is under the
influence of four ligands approaching along the directions +x, —x, ty and
reais orbital is under the influence of only two ligands approaching
thatoe Zand ~<. Thus the energy of the d,s_,2 orbital is raised more than

of the d.: orbital. Because of this, the three electrons in the fz, level are

 

 

 

 

 
