 

Mesophyll

 

cell
Bundle- A ,
Calvin
sheath
cell cycle
C, plants
FIGURE 10.22

 

Cy ,
pathway Night

Mesophyll
cell

Calvin

cycle Day

 

CAM plants

A comparison of C,and CAM plants. Both Cy and CAM plants utilize the Cy and the C3 pathways. In Cy plants, the pathways are
separated spatially: the Cy pathway takes place in the mesophyll cells and the Cs pathway in the bundle-sheath cells. In CAM plants, the
two pathways are separated temporally: the Cy pathway is utilized at night and the Cs pathway during the day.

The Crassulacean Acid Pathway

A second strategy to decrease photorespiration in hot re-
gions has been adopted by many succulent (water-storing)
plants such as cacti, pineapples, and some members of
about two dozen other plant groups. This mode of initial
carbon fixation is called crassulacean acid metabolism
(CAM), after the plant family Crassulaceae (the
stonecrops or hens-and-chicks), in which it was first dis-
covered. In these plants, the stomata (singular, stoma),
specialized openings in the leaves of all plants through
which CO) enters and water vapor is lost, open during the
night and close during the day. This pattern of stomatal
opening and closing is the reverse of that in most plants.
CAM plants open stomata at night and initially fix CO)
into organic compounds using the C4 pathway. These or-
ganic compounds accumulate throughout the night and

are decarboxylated during the day to yield high levels of
CO). In the day, these high levels of CO) drive the Calvin
cycle and minimize photorespiration. Like C4 plants,
CAM plants use both Cy and C3 pathways. They differ
from Cy plants in that they use the Cy pathway at night
and the C; pathway during the day within the same cells. In
Cy plants, the two pathways take place in different cells
(figure 10.22).

 

Photorespiration results in decreased yields of
photosynthesis. Cy and CAM plants circumvent this
problem through modifications of leaf architecture and
photosynthetic chemistry that locally increase CO?
concentrations. C4 plants isolate CO? production
spatially, CAM plants temporally.

 

Chapter 10 Photosynthesis 203
