11.2 Chromosomes are highly ordered structures.

Discovery of Chromosomes

Chromosomes were first observed by the German embryol-
ogist Walther Fleming in 1882, while he was examining the
rapidly dividing cells of salamander larvae. When Fleming
looked at the cells through what would now be a rather
primitive light microscope, he saw minute threads within
their nuclei that appeared to be dividing lengthwise. Flem-
ing called their division mitosis, based on the Greek word
mitos, meaning “thread.”

Chromosome Number

Since their initial discovery, chromosomes have been found
in the cells of all eukaryotes examined. Their number may
vary enormously from one species to another. A few kinds of
organisms—such as the Australian ant Myrmecia, the plant
Haplopappus gracilis, a relative of the sunflower that grows in
North American deserts; and the fungus Penicillium—have
only 1 pair of chromosomes, while some ferns have more
than 500 pairs (table 11.1). Most eukaryotes have between
10 and 50 chromosomes in their body cells.

Human cells each have 46 chromosomes, consist-
ing of 23 nearly identical pairs (figure 11.4). Each of
these 46 chromosomes contains hundreds or thou-
sands of genes that play important roles in determin-
ing how a person’s body develops and functions. For
this reason, possession of all the chromosomes is es-
sential to survival. Humans missing even one chro-
mosome, a condition called monosomy, do not sur-
vive embryonic development in most cases. Nor does
the human embryo develop properly with an extra
copy of any one chromosome, a condition called tri-
somy. For all but a few of the smallest chromosomes,

 

 

FIGURE 11.4

Human chromosomes. This photograph (950) shows human
chromosomes as they appear immediately before nuclear division.
Each DNA molecule has already replicated, forming identical
copies held together by a constriction called the centromere.

trisomy is fatal, and even in those few cases, serious
problems result. Individuals with an extra copy of the
very small chromosome 21, for example, develop
more slowly than normal and are mentally retarded, a
condition called Down syndrome.

 

All eukaryotic cells store their hereditary information in
chromosomes, but different kinds of organisms utilize
very different numbers of chromosomes to store this
information.

 

Table 11.1 Chromosome Number in Selected Eukaryotes

 

Total Number of Total Number of Total Number of
Group Chromosomes Group Chromosomes Group Chromosomes
FUNGI PLANTS VERTEBRATES
Neurospora (haploid) 7 Haplopappus gracilis 2 Opossum 22
Saccharomyces (a yeast) 16 Garden pea 14 Frog 26
INGRETS Corn 20 Mouse 40
7 Bread wheat 42 Human 46
Mosquito 6 p
Pons - Sugarcane 80 Chimpanzee 48
H ? b 32 Horsetail 216 Horse 64
aaa Adder’s tongue fern 1262 Chicken 78
Silkworm 56
Dog 78

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 209
