 

GENERAL PROPERTIES

 

 

 

785

 

melt.) These elements are both scarce and expensive, and have a limited
number ot specialist uses.

All the platinum metals have specific catalytic properties. A Pt/Rh alloy
was formerly used in the Ostwald process (for making HNOs) to oxidize
NH, to NO. Rh is an important catalyst in the control of car exhaust
emissions. Rh—phosphine complexes are used as catalysts for hydro-
genation reactions. Ir (like Os in the previous group) is used to make very
hard alloys which are used to make pivots for instruments. A Pt/Ir alloy
is used to make the electrodes for long life sparking plugs. These are
expensive but have important military uses, for example in helicopters.
The USA used a lot of this alloy during the Vietnam war.

OXIDATION STATES

The trend for the elements in the second half of the d-block not to use all
their outer electrons for bonding in the maximum oxidation state is
continued. A possible report of Co(+V) has been disproved, and even
Co(+IV) is unstable. The maximum oxidation state for Rh and Ir is (+ V1).
For Co, the (+II) and (+III) states are by far the most important. The
trend in the later elements of the first row for the (+IJ) state to be more
stable than (+III) is also observed. Co** ions and the hydrated ion
[Co(H20),}?* exist in many simple compounds and the hydrated ion is
stable in water. In contrast simple compounds containing Co(+III) are
oxidizing and are relatively unstable. However, Co(+III) is stable and is
very important in complexes.

The most stable states for the other elements are Rh(+III), Ir(+III) and
Ir(+IV). Simple ionic compounds of these elements are uncommon. The
oxides and halides formed are shown in Table 25.3.

GENERAL PROPERTIES

Co resembles iron and is very tough. It is harder and has a higher tensile
strength than steel. Co is bluish white and lustrous in appearance. Like
iron it is ferromagnetic, but on heating above 1000°C it changes to a non-
magnetic form.

Co is relatively unreactive, and does not react with H,O, H2, or No,
though it reacts with steam, forming CoO. It is oxidized when heated in air
and burns at white heat to CosO4. Co dissolves slowly in dilute acids, but
like Fe it is rendered passive by concentrated HNOs. Co combines readily
vith the halogens, and at elevated temperatures with S, C, P, As, Sb and

-Rh and Ir are also hard metals. In common with the other platinum
metals they are much more noble and unreactive. Ir has the highest density
Sian clement, 22.61 gcm75, Rh and Ir are resistant to acids, but react
a 2 and the halogens at high temperatures (Table 25.5). All three

ements form a large number of coordination compounds.

 
