 

 

{ BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRY OF IRON

i i ivi | nitrido complex
The osmate(VIII) ion reacts with NH; giving an unusua Mr
[OsO;N]”, and is reduced by EtOH to form trans-[Os¥'0.(OH)4?”

BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRY OF IRON

Iron is essential in small amounts for both plant and animal life. However,
like Cu and Se it is toxic in larger quantities. Biologically iron is the most
important transition element. It is involved in several different processes:

1. As an oxygen carrier in the blood of mammals, birds and fish (haemo-
globin).

2. For oxygen storage in muscle tissue (myoglobin).

3. Asan electron carrier-in plants, animals and bacteria (cytochromes) and
for electron transfer in plants and bacteria (ferredoxins).

4. For storage and scavenging of Fe in animals (ferretin and transferrin).

5. As nitrogenase (the enzyme in dinitrogen fixing bacteria).

6. As a number of other enzymes: aldehyde oxidase (oxidation of
aldehydes), catalase and peroxidase (decomposition of H2O02) and
succinic dehydrogenase (the aerobic oxidation of carbohydrates).

Haemoglobin

The human body contains about 4g of iron. About 70% of this is found as
haemoglobin, the red pigment in the erythrocytes (red blood cells). Most
of the rest is stored as ferretin. The function of haemoglobin is to pick up
dioxygen at the lungs. The arteries carry blood to parts of the body where
oxygen is required such as the muscles. Here the oxygen is transferred to a
myoglobin molecule, and stored until the oxygen is required to release
energy from glucose sugar. When O is removed from haemoglobin, it is
replaced by a water’ molecule. Next the protein part of haemoglobin
“absorbs H*. Indirectly this helps remove CO, from the tissues, since CO2
is converted to HCO; and H*. The blood removes the more soluble
HCO; ions and the reduced haemoglobin removes the H*. The blood
returns to the heart through the veins. It is then pumped to the lungs,
where the HCO} ions are converted back to CO>. This is excreted into the
air in the lungs and exhaled. The blood picks up dioxygen again, and the
process is repeated.

The important factor in haemoglobin acting as an oxygen carrier is the
reversibility of the process. If too stable a complex were formed with
dioxygen, then too much energy would be released in the lungs leaving less
energy when dioxygen is released in the muscles. The oxygenated form is
called oxyhaemoglobin and the reduced form is called deoxyhaemoglobin.
This transfer of O, is remarkable because it involves only Fe(+II), and not
Fe(+IIl). Other groups such as CO, CN~ and PF; can Occupy the O; site.
Coordination is still reversible, but is much stronger. In the case of CN™,
coordination is irreversible. These ligands reduce or prevent oxygen
transfer and may result in death. However, CN~ also interferes with the

 

775 |
