DNA. The histone cores thus act as “magnetic forms” that
promote and guide the coiling of the DNA. Further coiling
occurs when the string of nucleosomes wraps up into
higher order coils called supercoils.

Highly condensed portions of the chromatin are called
heterochromatin. Some of these portions remain perma-
nently condensed, so that their DNA is never expressed.
The remainder of the chromosome, called euchromatin, is
condensed only during cell division, when compact packag-
ing facilitates the movement of the chromosomes. At all
other times, euchromatin is present in an open configura-
tion, and its genes can be expressed. The way chromatin is
packaged when the cell is not dividing is not well under-
stood beyond the level of nucleosomes and is a topic of in-
tensive research.

Chromosome Karyotypes

Chromosomes may differ widely in appearance. They vary
in size, staining properties, the location of the centromere (a
constriction found on all chromosomes), the relative length
of the two arms on cither side of the centromere, and the
positions of constricted regions along the arms. The partic-
ular array of chromosomes that an individual possesses is
called its karyotype (figure 11.6). Karyotypes show marked
differences among species and sometimes even among indi-
viduals of the same species.

To examine a human karyotype, investigators collect a
cell sample from blood, amniotic fluid, or other tissue and
add chemicals that induce the cells in the sample to di-
vide. Later, they add other chemicals to stop cell division
at a stage when the chromosomes are most condensed and
thus most easily distinguished from one another. The
cells are then broken open and their contents, including
the chromosomes, spread out and stained. To facilitate
the examination of the karyotype, the chromosomes are
usually photographed, and the outlines of the chromo-
somes are cut out of the photograph and arranged in
order (see figure 11.6).

How Many Chromosomes Are in a Cell?

With the exception of the gametes (eggs or sperm) and a
few specialized tissues, every cell in a human body is
diploid (27). This means that the cell contains two nearly
identical copies of each of the 23 types of chromosomes,
for a total of 46 chromosomes. The haploid (1) gametes
contain only one copy of each of the 23 chromosome types,
while certain tissues have unusual numbers of chromo-
somes—many liver cells, for example, have two nuclei,
while mature red blood cells have no nuclei at all. The two
copies of each chromosome in body cells are called homol-
ogous chromosomes, or homologues (Greek homolgia,
“agreement”). Before cell division, each homologue repli-
cates, producing two identical sister chromatids joined at
the centromere, a condensed area found on all eukaryotic
chromosomes (figure 11.7). Hence, as cell division begins, a

 

FIGURE 11.6

A human karyotype. The individual chromosomes that make up
the 23 pairs differ widely in size and in centromere position. In
this preparation, the chromosomes have been specifically stained
to indicate further differences in their composition and to
distinguish them clearly from one another.

 

 

Centromere
Sister
chromatids
Homologous
chromosomes
FIGURE 11.7

The difference between homologous chromosomes and sister
chromatids. Homologous chromosomes are a pair of the same
chromosome—say, chromosome number 16. Sister chromatids
are the two replicas of a single chromosome held together by the
centromeres after DNA replication.

human body cell contains a total of 46 replicated chromo-
somes, each composed of two sister chromatids joined by
one centromere. The cell thus contains 46 centromeres and
92 chromatids (2 sister chromatids for each of 2 homo-
logues for each of 23 chromosomes). The cell is said to
contain 46 chromosomes rather than 92 because, by con-
vention, the number of chromosomes is obtained by count-
ing centromeres.

 

Eukaryotic genomes are larger and more complex than
those of bacteria. Eukaryotic DNA is packaged tightly
into chromosomes, enabling it to fit inside cells.
Haploid cells contain one set of chromosomes, while
diploid cells contain two sets.

 

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 211
