The Structure of Eukaryotic
Chromosomes

In the century since discovery of chromosomes, we have
learned a great deal about their structure and composition.

Composition of Chromatin

Chromosomes are composed of chromatin, a complex of
DNA and protein; most are about 40% DNA and 60%
protein. A significant amount of RNA is also associated
with chromosomes because chromosomes are the sites of
RNA synthesis. The DNA of a chromosome is one very
long, double-stranded fiber that extends unbroken through
the entire length of the chromosome. A typical human
chromosome contains about 140 million (1.4 x 108) nu-
cleotides in its DNA. The amount of information one
chromosome contains would fill about 280 printed books of
1000 pages each, if each nucleotide corresponded to a
“word” and each page had about 500 words on it. Further-

Chromosomes

Supercoil
within chromosome

FIGURE 11.5

Levels of eukaryotic
chromosomal
organization.
Nucleotides assemble into
long double strands of
DNA molecules. These 4 ar

strands require further a rd
. D as
—y D>

packaging to fit into the
cell nucleus. The DNA
duplex is tightly bound to
and wound around

 

P 1

more, if the strand of DNA from a single chromosome
were laid out in a straight line, it would be about 5 cen-
timeters (2 inches) long. Fitting such a strand into a nu-
cleus is like cramming a string the length of a football field
into a baseball—and that’s only 1 of 46 chromosomes! In
the cell, however, the DNA is coiled, allowing it to fit into
a much smaller space than would otherwise be possible.

Chromosome Coiling

How can this long DNA fiber coil so tightly? If we gently
disrupt a eukaryotic nucleus and examine the DNA with an
electron microscope, we find that it resembles a string of
beads (figure 11.5). Every 200 nucleotides, the DNA du-
plex is coiled around a core of eight histone proteins, form-
ing a complex known as a nucleosome. Unlike most
proteins, which have an overall negative charge, histones
are positively charged, due to an abundance of the basic
amino acids arginine and lysine. They are thus strongly at-
tracted to the negatively charged phosphate groups of the

 

 

Coiling
within =
supercoil [7 :

 

 

“> Chromatin

 

ae.

 

 

 

Chromatin fiber

proteins called histones. ~ 5 na
The DNA-wrapped i Nucleosome
histones are called SS Central

J, histone
nucleosomes. The oe
nucleosomes then f )

coalesce into chromatin
fibers, ultimately coiling
around into supercoil: that
make up the form of
DNA recognized as a
chromosome.

\ (
+
DNA’ DNA double helix (duplex)

210 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity
