 

 

{ (+I) STATE

and Cs,(CuBrs] the (Cuxa}- ions have a slightly squashed tetrahedral
shape. Tetrahedral [CuCl,}*~ ions are orange and square planar [CuCl,]°
ions are yellow. |

Most Cu(+I1) complexes and compounds have a distorted octahedral
structure and are blue or green. The metal ion has the d? electronic con-
figuration. This leaves only one ‘hole’ into which an electron may be
promoted, so the spectra should be similar to the d! case (e.g. Ti**) and
have a single broad absorption band. This is observed, and these com-
plexes absorb in the region 11.000-16000cm7'. However, octahedral
complexes of Cu'! are appreciably distorted (Jahn-Teller effect) so there
is more than one peak. These overlap so the band is not symmetrical. It is
not possible to assign the peaks unambiguously. The anhydrous salts of
CuF, and CuSO, are, perhaps surprisingly, white.

For many years no anhydrous nitrates of the transition metals were
known. Heating the hydrated salts simply decomposed them. Water is a
stronger ligand than the nitrate group, and so a hydrated nitrate prepared
in aqueous solution will lose nitrate groups rather than water on heating.
The remedy is to prepare anhydrous nitrates without water rather than
attempting to remove water from hydrated salts. Many anhydrous nitrates
have now been prepared using a non-aqueous solvent such as liquid
N30..

Anhydrous copper(II) nitrate can be made by dissolving Cu metal
in a solution of NO, in ethyl acctate. The reaction is vigorous, and
Cu(NO3)2-N2Oz is crystallized from the solution. This has the structure
NO*{Cu(NQ;)3]~. Heating to 90°C drives dff NO, and gives blue an-
hydrous Cu(NO3)2. Anhydrous Cu(NO3)2 can be sublimed at 150-200°C,
and has an unusual crystal structure. There are two different crystalline
forms. The structure of one of the two solid forms shows infinite chains of
Cu and NO} groups. Each Cu forms two short Cu—O bonds (.9A), and
the Cu is coordinated to six more oxygen atoms in other chains, forming
longer bonds (2.5A), making Cu eight-coordinate (Figure 27.2). In the
vapour, Cu(NO,)2 is monomeric.

Copper(II) acetate is dimeric and hydrated, Cu2(CH;COO),-2H20.
The structure (Figure 27.3) is similar to that of the carboxylate complexes
of Cr, Mo", Rh" and Ru", but there is an important difference. The
Structure consists of two Cu atoms each with a roughly octahedral struc-
ture. The four acetate groups act as bridging ligands between the two Cu
atoms. Thus O atoms from the acetate groups occupy four positions (in a
ihe plane) round each Cu. The fifth position round each Cu is occupied
can eo atom from a water molecule. The other Cu atom occupies the
* of the octahedral positions. So far the structure is the same as that of
Oana The difference is that the Cu—Cu distance is 2.64 A,
copper enibeantly longer than the distance of 2.55 A found in metallic
metals whieh n u does not form a M—M bond, whereas Cr and the other
ionsin then a carboxylate complexes do form M—M bonds. The Cul!
the two Co ne ex have a d” configuration with one unpaired electron. If

‘ons form a metal-metal bond these electrons will be paired

 

829 |
