 

 

 

OCCURRENCE, EXTRACTION AND USES

 

 

 

801}

 

 

once important, but are now little used. Important alluvial deposits in-
clude garnierite, a magnesium—nickel silicate of variable composition
(Mg,Ni)6SisO10(OH)s, and nickeliferous limonite (Fe,Ni)O(OH)(H20),.
Mine production of ore contained 850000 tonnes of Ni in 1992. The main
sources of ore were Canada 23%, the Soviet Union 21%, and New
Caledonia 12%.

The extraction of Ni is complicated by the presence of other metals.
Sulphide ores now provide most of the nickel produced. The ore is con-
centrated by flotation and magnetically, then heated with SiO). FeS
decomposes to FeO, which reacts with SiO, to form slag FeSiO3, which

Table 26.2 Abundance of the elements in
the earth’s crust, by weight

 

 

ppm Relative abundance
Ni 99 22
Pd 0.015 69
Pt 0.01 70

is easily removed. The remaining sulphide matte is cooled slowly giving
an upper silvery layer of Cu2S and a lower black layer of NiS3 which can
be separated mechanically. (A small amount of metallic Cu/Ni alloy is
also formed. This dissolves any of the platinum group metals present, and
is used as a source of these rare and expensive elements.) The Ni,S; is
then roasted with air and converted to NiO.‘This may be used directly in
steel making. Alternatively NiO may be reduced to the metal by carbon in
a smelter. The metal is cast into electrodes which are purified by electro-
lysis in an aqueous solution of NiSO,.

The Mond process provides an alternative method for producing high
purity Ni. This process was patented by L. Mond and was used in South
Wales from 1899 until about 1970. NiO and water gas (H, and CO) were
warmed under atmospheric pressure to 50°C. The Hz reduced NiO to Ni,
which in turn reacted with CO, forming volatile nickel carbonyl Ni(CO)4.
(This is highly toxic and flammable.) Any impurities remained solid. The
gas was heated to 230°C, when it decomposed to give pure metal and the
CO was recycled. A new plant in Canada now uses CO and impure metal,
but runs at 150°C and 20 atmospheres pressure to form Ni(CO)4.

. 50°C o
Ni + 4COS NCO), 5 Ni +4CO (Mond process)

Nickel silicate ores such as garnierite are mixed with gypsum (CaSO,)
and smelted with coke. The silicates form CaSiO3 slag, and the Ni forms
a sulphide matte which is treated as above.
niet or the Ni produced is used to make ferrous and non-ferrous alloys.
inte tf ves both the strength of steel and its resistance to chemical attack.

+ 569000 tonnes of ferronickel were produced. Stainless steel may
continued overleaf

 
