 

BIOINORGANIC CHEMISTRY OF IRON

 

 

 

7]

 

CO, is the end product from the breakdown of glucose to release energy.
‘There is an appreciable build-up of CO; in the muscles. This is removed
from the tissue and converted into soluble HCO} ions.

CO, + H,0 -» H* + HCO;z

This process is facilitated by the terminal amine groups of deoxyhaemo-
globin which pick up the protons produced and thus act as a buffer. The
reverse process occurs at the lungs.

The porphyrin ring is conjugated and planar. The characteristic red
colour arises from charge transfer between stable n and low-lying x*
orbitals on the ring and Fe.

Myoglobin

Haem is also important biologically in myoglobin which is used to store
dioxygen in muscles. Myoglobin is similar to one of the units in haemo-
globin. It contains only one Fe atom, has a molecular weight of about
17000, and binds O2 more strongly than haemoglobin.

Cytochromes

There are many cytochromes, which differ in slight detail, but these are
broadly grouped together as cytochrome a, cytochrome b and cytochrome
c. The prosthetic group in all cytochromes comprises four haem units, and
cytochromes have a molecular weight of about 12400. As in haemoglobin,
Fe is bonded to four N atoms in each porphyrin ring. and the fifth site is
occupied by a N atom from the associated protein. The big difference is
that the sixth position is usually occupied by a S atom from an amino acid
such as methionine, which is part of a protein.

Cytochromes are involved in the release of energy by oxidizing glucose
with molecular O, in the mitochondria inside living cells. The cytochromes
are reversibly oxidized (and thus act as electron carriers). The Fe is in the
low-spin state, and it changes reversibly between the (+II) and (+IJI)
states. Cytochromes a, b and c have slightly different reduction potentials
and reactions involve all three one after the other in the order b, c, a. In
this way the energy from oxidizing glucose is released gradually. The

energy is stored in the form of adenosine triphosphate ATP, which is used
when required by the cell.

Table 24.8 Reduction potentials E° for

cytochrome

re
Cytochrome b 0.04. V
Cytochrome c 0.26V
Cytochrome a 0.28V

eee
