11.3 Mitosis is a key phase of the cell cycle.

Phases of the Cell Cycle

The increased size and more complex organization of eu-
karyotic genomes over those of bacteria required radical
changes in the process by which the two replicas of the
genome are partitioned into the daughter cells during cell
division. This division process is diagrammed as a cell
cycle, consisting of five phases (figure 11.8).

  

The Five Phases

G, is the primary growth phase of the cell. For many or-
ganisms, this encompasses the major portion of the cell’s
life span. S is the phase in which the cell synthesizes a
replica of the genome. G3 is the second growth phase, in
which preparations are made for genomic separation.
During this phase, mitochondria and other organelles
replicate, chromosomes condense, and microtubules
begin to assemble at a spindle. Gj, S, and G) together
constitute interphase, the portion of the cell cycle be-
tween cell divisions.

Mis the phase of the cell cycle in which the microtubu-
lar apparatus assembles, binds to the chromosomes, and
moves the sister chromatids apart. Called mitosis, this
process is the essential step in the separation of the two
daughter genomes. We will discuss mitosis as it occurs in
animals and plants, where the process does not vary much
(it is somewhat different among fungi and some protists).
Although mitosis is a continuous process, it is traditionally
subdivided into four stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase,
and telophase.

C is the phase of the cell cycle when the cytoplasm di-
vides, creating two daughter cells. This phase is called
cytokinesis. In animal cells, the microtubule spindle
helps position a contracting ring of actin that constricts
like a drawstring to pinch the cell in two. In cells with a
cell wall, such as plant cells, a plate forms between the di-
viding cells.

Duration of the Cell Cycle

The time it takes to complete a cell cycle varies greatly
among organisms. Cells in growing embryos can com-
plete their cell cycle in under 20 minutes; the shortest
known animal nuclear division cycles occur in fruit fly
embryos (8 minutes). Cells such as these simply divide
their nuclei as quickly as they can replicate their DNA,
without cell growth. Half of the cycle is taken up by S,
half by M, and essentially none by Gy or G2. Because ma-
ture cells require time to grow, most of their cycles are
much longer than those of embryonic tissue. Typically, a
dividing mammalian cell completes its cell cycle in about

212 PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

 

Metaphase  Anaphase

Telophase

 

 

 

 

Interphase (G,, S, G, phases)

 

Bi Mitosis (M)
BD Cytokinesis (C)

FIGURE 11.8

The cell cycle. Each wedge represents one hour of the 22-hour
cell cycle in human cells growing in culture. G; represents the
primary growth phase of the cell cycle, S the phase during which a
replica of the genome is synthesized, and G; the second growth
phase.

24 hours, but some cells, like certain cells in the human
liver, have cell cycles lasting more than a year. During
the cycle, growth occurs throughout the G; and G)
phases (referred to as “gap” phases, as they separate S
from M), as well as during the S phase. The M phase
takes only about an hour, a small fraction of the entire
cycle.

Most of the variation in the length of the cell cycle
from one organism or tissue to the next occurs in the G;
phase. Cells often pause in G; before DNA replication
and enter a resting state called Go phase; they may re-
main in this phase for days to years before resuming cell
division. At any given time, most of the cells in an ani-
mal’s body are in Go phase. Some, such as muscle and
nerve cells, remain there permanently; others, such as
liver cells, can resume Gj phase in response to factors re-
leased during injury.

 

Most eukaryotic cells repeat a process of growth and
division referred to as the cell cycle. The cycle can vary
in length from a few minutes to several years.

 
