Il

How Cells Divide

 

Concept Outline

11.1 Bacteria divide far more simply than do
eukaryotes.

Cell Division in Prokaryotes. Bacterial cells divide by
splitting in two.

11.2 Chromosomes are highly ordered structures.

Discovery of Chromosomes. All eukaryotic cells contain
chromosomes, but different organisms possess differing
numbers of chromosomes.

The Structure of Eukaryotic Chromosomes. Proteins
play an important role in packaging DNA in chromosomes.

11.3 Mitosis is a key phase of the cell cycle.

Phases of the Cell Cycle. The cell cycle consists of three
growth phases, a nuclear division phase, and a cytoplasmic
division stage.

Interphase: Preparing for Mitosis. In interphase, the
cell grows, replicates its DNA, and prepares for cell
division.

Mitosis. In prophase, the chromosomes condense and
microtubules attach sister chromosomes to opposite poles
of the cell. In metaphase, chromosomes align along the
center of the cell. In anaphase, the chromosomes separate;
in telophase the spindle dissipates and the nuclear envelope
reforms.

Cytokinesis. In cytokinesis, the cytoplasm separates into
two roughly equal halves.

11.4 The cell cycle is carefully controlled.

General Strategy of Cell Cycle Control. At three points
in the cell cycle, feedback from the cell determines whether
the cycle will continue.

Molecular Mechanisms of Cell Cycle Control. Special
proteins regulate the “checkpoints” of the cell cycle.

Cancer and the Control of Cell Proliferation. Cancer
results from damage to genes encoding proteins that
regulate the cell division cycle.

 

FIGURE 11.1

Cell division in bacteria. It’s hard to imagine fecal coliform
bacteria as beautiful, but here is Escherichia coli, inhabitant of the
large intestine and the biotechnology lab, spectacularly caught in
the act of fission.

A species of organisms—bacteria, alligators, the weeds
in a lawn—grow and reproduce. From the smallest of
creatures to the largest, all species produce offspring like
themselves and pass on the hereditary information that
makes them what they are. In this chapter, we begin our
consideration of heredity with an examination of how cells
reproduce (figure 11.1). The mechanism of cell reproduc-
tion and its biological consequences have changed signifi-
cantly during the evolution of life on earth.

207
