Se CONT

 

Ey a

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e _ http://www.biocourse.com

Questions

Chapter 10

Summary Media Resources

10.1 What is photosynthesis?

 

¢ Light is used by plants, algae, and some bacteria, in a
process called photosynthesis, to convert atmospheric
carbon (CO)) into carbohydrate.

1. Where do the oxygen atoms
in the O2 produced during
photosynthesis come from?

10.2 Learning about photosynthesis: An experimental journey.

* Art Activity:
Chloroplast Structure

Chloroplast

 

* Aseries of simple experiments demonstrated that
plants capture energy from light and use it to convert
the carbon atoms of CO) and the hydrogen atoms of
water into organic molecules.

10.3 Pigments capture energy from sunlight.

2. How did van Helmont
determine that plants do not
obtain their food from the soil?

Energy Conversion
Photosynthesis

Light Dependent
Reactions

Light Independent
Reactions

Light and
Pigmentation

 

* Light consists of energy packets called photons; the
shorter the wavelength of light, the more its energy.
When photons are absorbed by a pigment, electrons
in the pigment are boosted to a higher energy level.

* Photosynthesis channels photon excitation energy
into a single pigment molecule. In bacteria, that
molecule then donates an electron to an electron
transport chain, which drives a proton pump and
ultimately returns the electron to the pigment.

¢ Plants employ two photosystems. Light is first
absorbed by photosystem IT and passed to
photosystem I, driving a proton pump and bringing
about the chemiosmotic synthesis of ATP.

¢ When the electron arrives at photosystem I, another
photon of light is absorbed, and energized electrons
are channeled to a primary electron acceptor, which
reduces NADP* to NADPH. Use of NADPH rather
than NADH allows plants and algae to keep the
processes of photosynthesis and oxidative respiration
separate from each other.

3. How is the energy of light
captured by a pigment molecule?
Why does light reflected by the
pigment chlorophyll appear
green?

4. What is the function of the
reaction center chlorophyll?
What is the function of the
primary electron acceptor?

5. Explain how photosynthesis in
the sulfur bacteria is a cyclic
process. What is its energy yield
in terms of ATP molecules
synthesized per electron?

6. How do the two photosystems
in plants and algae work? Which
stage generates ATP and which
generates NADPH?

 

Art Activity:
Electromagnetic
Spectrum

10.4 Cells use the energy and reducing power captured by the light reactions to make organic molecules.

 

¢ The ATP and reducing power produced by the light
reactions are used to fix carbon in a series of reactions
called the Calvin cycle.

* RuBP carboxylase, the enzyme that fixes carbon in
the Calvin cycle, also carries out an oxidative reaction
that uses the products of photosynthesis, a process
called photorespiration.

¢ Many tropical plants inhibit photorespiration by
expending ATP to increase the intracellular
concentration of CO}. This process, called the Cy
pathway, nearly doubles the energetic cost of

204yntbssizing gEAséeics

7. Ina C; plant, where do the
light reactions occur? Where
does the Calvin cycle occur?

8. What is photorespiration?
What advantage do Cy plants
have over C; plants with respect
to photorespiration? What
disadvantage do C, plants have
that limits their distribution
primarily to warm regions of the
earth?

* The Calvin Cycle

cA
Sy

* Photorespiration
