 

 

DIHALIDES

 

 

 

843 |

 

Basic properties increase down the group. ZnO is amphoteric. It dis-
solves in-acids, forming salts, and in alkali, forming zincates such ‘as
[Zn(OH),)~ and [Zn(OH)3-H2O]~. Addition of alkali to an aqueous
solution of a Zn* salt first gives a white gelatinous precipitate of
Zn(OH)2, which redissolves in excess alkali, forming zincates. CdO is
largely basic, but with very strong alkali Na2{Cd(OH),] is formed. Both
Zn(OH), and Cd(OH), dissolve in excess ammonia, giving ammine com-
plexes. HgO is completely basic.

All three oxides are formed by direct combination of the elements or by
heating the nitrates. ZnO and CdO both sublime, showing that they are
appreciably covalent. HgO does not sublime as it decomposes on heating.

2Hg0 MAZE, Hg + O2
The thermal stability of the oxides thus decreases from Zn to Cd to Hg.

ZnO is white when cold but turns yellow on heating. It returns to white
on cooling. CdO may be yellow, green or brown at room temperature,
depending on its previous heat treatment. However, it is white at liquid air
temperature. These divalent compounds have a complete d shell, so the
colour is not from d—d spectra. Their colour is due to defects in the solid
structure. (On heating ZnO it loses O.) The number of defects increases
with temperature and is zero at absolute zero (see Chapter 3). HgO exists
in red and yellow forms.

Addition of a base to a solution of the salts precipitates Zn(OH)2,
Cd(OH), and a yellow form of HgO, not Hg(OH)2. The yellow form of
HgO has the same crystal structure as the more common red form which is
formed by heating the elements or Hg(NO3)2. The difference in colour
is due to the particle size.

When Zn(OH) and Cd(OH)2 are treated with HO, they form per-
oxides which have variable compositions.

DIHALIDES

All 12 dihalides MX, are known. The fluorides have appreciably higher
melting points than the other halides, and the fluorides are ionic. The
melting points of the chlorides, bromides and iodides are fairly low. This
Suggests that they are partly covalent.

ZnF,, CdF, and HgF, are white solids and are considerably more ionic

Table 28.5 Dihalides and their melting points

ZnF, 872°C CdF, 1049°C Hi, “
a IgF, 645°C (decomp.)
gach 283°C CdCl, 568°C HgCl, 276°C
nBrz 394°C CdBr, 567°C HgBr, 236°C

Zak; 446°C CdI, 387°C Hgl, 259°C
