11.1

Cell Division in Prokaryotes

In bacteria, which are prokaryotes and lack a nucleus, cell
division consists of a simple procedure called binary fission
(literally, “splitting in half”), in which the cell divides into
two equal or nearly equal halves (figure 11.2). The genetic
information, or genome, replicates early in the life of the cell.
It exists as a single, circular, double-stranded DNA mole-
cule. Fitting this DNA circle into the bacterial cell is a re-
markable feat of packaging—fully stretched out, the DNA
of a bacterium like Escherichia coli is about 500 times longer
than the cell itself.

The DNA circle is attached at one point to the cytoplas-
mic surface of the bacterial cell’s plasma membrane. At a
specific site on the DNA molecule called the replication ori-
gin, a battery of more than 22 different proteins begins the
process of copying the DNA (figure 11.3). When these en-
zymes have proceeded all the way around the circle of
DNA, the cell possesses two copies of the genome. These
“daughter” genomes are attached side-by-side to the plasma
membrane.

The growth of a bacterial cell to about twice its initial
size induces the onset of cell division. A wealth of recent ev-
idence suggests that the two daughter chromosomes are ac-
tively partitioned during this process. As this process pro-
ceeds, the cell lays down new plasma membrane and cell
wall materials in the zone between the attachment sites of
the two daughter genomes. A new plasma membrane grows
between the genomes; eventually, it reaches all the way into
the center of the cell, dividing it in two. Because the mem-
brane forms between the two genomes, each new cell is as-
sured of retaining one of the genomes. Finally, a new cell
wall forms around the new membrane.

The evolution of the eukaryotes introduced several addi-
tional factors into the process of cell division. Eukaryotic

Replication
origin

FIGURE 11.3

  

Bacteria divide far more simply than do eukaryotes.

FIGURE 11.2

Fission (40,000x). Bacteria divide by a process of simple cell
fission. Note the newly formed plasma membrane between the
two daughter cells.

cells are much larger than bacteria, and their genomes con-
tain much more DNA. Eukaryotic DNA is contained in a
number of linear chromosomes, whose organization is much
more complex than that of the single, circular DNA mole-
cules in bacteria. In chromosomes, DNA forms a complex
with packaging proteins called histones and is wound into
tightly condensed coils.

 

Bacteria divide by binary fission. Fission begins in the
middle of the cell. An active partitioning process ensures
that one genome will end up in each daughter cell.

 

How bacterial DNA replicates. The replication of the circular DNA molecule (b/ue) that constitutes the genome of a bacterium begins at
a single site, called the replication origin. The replication enzymes move out in both directions from that site and make copies (red) of each
strand in the DNA duplex. When the enzymes meet on the far side of the molecule, replication is complete.

208 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity
