FIGURE 2.5

Atomic energy levels. When an electron

absorbs energy, it moves to higher energy M L
levels farther from the nucleus, When an Energy Energy
electron releases energy, it falls to lower level level
energy levels closer to the nucleus. 3 2

Every atom exhibits a ladder of potential energy values,
rather than a continuous spectrum of possibilities, a discrete
set of orbits at particular distances from the nucleus.

During some chemical reactions, electrons are trans-
ferred from one atom to another. In such reactions, the loss
of an electron is called oxidation, and the gain of an elec-
tron is called reduction (figure 2.6). It is important to real-
ize that when an electron is transferred in this way, it keeps
its energy of position. In organisms, chemical energy is
stored in high- energy electrons that are transferred from
one atom to another in reactions involving oxidation and
reduction.

Because the amount of energy an electron possesses is
related to its distance from the nucleus, electrons that are
the same distance from the nucleus have the same energy,
even if they occupy different orbitals. Such electrons are
said to occupy the same energy level. In a schematic dia-
gram of an atom (figure 2.7), the nucleus is represented as a
small circle and the electron energy levels are drawn as con-
centric rings, with the energy level increasing with distance
from the nucleus. Be careful not to confuse energy levels,
which are drawn as rings to indicate an electron’s energy,
with orbitals, which have a variety of three-dimensional
shapes and indicate an electron’s most likely Jocation.

 

Electrons orbit a nucleus in paths called orbitals. No
orbital can contain more than two electrons, but many
orbitals may be the same distance from the nucleus and,
thus, contain electrons of the same energy.

 

FIGURE 2.7

Electron energy levels for helium and nitrogen. Gold balls
represent the electrons. Each concentric circle represents a
different distance from the nucleus and, thus, a different electron
energy level.

 

 

§
§
oe
% S
%, §
S S
&
K K a M
Energy Energy Energy —_ Energy
level level level level
1 1 2 3
Oxidation Reduction
FIGURE 2.6

Oxidation and reduction. Oxidation is the loss of an electron;
reduction is the gain of an electron.

 

Q *

Helium

@*}

 

 

 

 

Nitrogen

Nu¢leus
x
%

Chapter 2 The Nature of Molecules 23
