 

 

[ (41) STATE

 

 

789

 

 

PPhy

i _

oN
ba co

 

PPh,

Figure 25.4 [Ir'"Cl(CO)(O2)(PPh;)2] complex.

RNCO and RC=CR are added to the (+1) square planar compounds.
(The added molecules all contain multiple bonds.) Here the added
molecule acts as a bidentate ligand, thus forming a cyclic structure (Figure
25.4).

Vaska's compound is yellow, and it readily absorbs O2 and becomes
orange coloured. The O may be removed by flushing with N2. This rever-
sible oxygenation has been studied as a model for the oxygen carrying
ability of haemoglobin (see Chapter 24). Oxidative addition reactions have
been observed for complexes where the central metal has a d* or d'°
configuration involving Rh', Ir', Ni®, Pd”, Pt", Pd" and Pt! There must be
non-bonding d electrons available on the metal, and also two vacant
coordination sites.

Wilkinson's catalyst [Rh(C1)(PPh)s] is red—violet in colour, and is made
by refluxing RhCl, -3H,O with tripheny} phosphine. It has a square planar
structure; It is very effective for selective hydrogenation of organic
molecules at room temperature and pressure. Alkene groups at the end of a
chain (alk-I-enes) are hydrogenated but double bonds elsewhere in the
chain are not affected. It is of importance in the pharmaceutical industry.

Wilkinson's catalyst and various Co compounds such as the carbonyl
hydride HCo!(CO), have been used as catalysts in the OXO process. In
this process. CO and H> are added to an alkene, thus forming an aldehyde.
A temperature of 150°C and 200 atmospheres pressure are required. The
OXO process is of considerable industrial importance. as the aldehydes
produced can be converted into alcohols. About 3 million tonnes of C,—Cy
alcohols are produced annually in this way. These are a mixture of straight
chain and branched chain molecules depending on the position of the
double bond in the hydrocarbon. The straight chain alcohols are used to
make polyvinyl chloride and detergents. Efforts to improve the yield of the
Straight chain products involve the use of triphenylphosphine substituted
carbonyls of Co. The complex trans-[Rh(CO)(H)(PPh;)s] has also been
used in the OXO process, and is an important catalyst in the hydrogenation
of alkenes. It is active at 25°C and 1 atmosphere pressure, and for steric

reasons it is specific to terminal alkenes rather than double bonds
elsewhere in the chain.

 
