 

a EXTRACTION AND USES

the gaseous mixture of Zn and CO, was simply removed from the
furnace and cooled, then some reoxidation of Zn would occur. Thus the
zinc powder obtained would contain large amounts of ZnO.

ZnO + CO = Zn + CO,

Modern smelters minimize the reoxidation in two ways:

(a) by having excess carbon, so the CO, formed is converted to CO.

(b) by shock cooling the gases leaving the smelter so they do not have
time to attain equilibrium. This rapid cooling is achieved by spray-
ing the hot gas with droplets of molten lead. This gives 99% pure
Zn. Any cadmium present can be separated by distillation.

. Alternatively ZnS is heated in air at a lower temperature, yielding
ZnO and ZnSO. These are dissolved in H2SO4. Zn dust is added to
precipitate Cd, and then the ZnSO, solution is electrolysed to give pure
Zn. The electrolytic process is expensive and is not used in the UK.

nV

Extraction of cadmium

Cd is found as traces (2-3 parts per thousand) in most Zn ores, and is
extracted from these. The ore is treated and yields a solution of ZnSO,
containing a small amount of CdSO,. Cd is recovered by adding a more
electropositive metal (i.e. one higher in the electrochemical series) to
displace it from solution. Zn powder is added to the ZnSO,/CdSO,4
solution, when the Zn dissolves and Cd metal is precipitated. Zn is higher
in the electrochemical series than Cd, and elements high in the series
displace elements lower in the series.

Znonsy + CAStunony —> Znedtanony + Cdeonasy -E? = 0.36 V

The Cd concentrate so obtained is then dissolved in H2SOg, and purified by
electrolysis. The Zn is recovered from the ZnSO, solution by electrolysis.

Extraction of mercury

He is also scarce. It is mined as the bright red coloured ore cinnabar HgS
mainly in the USSR, Spain, Mexico and Algeria. Sometimes droplets of
He are found in these ores. The ore is crushed and as HgS has a very high
density (8.1 gcm7) it is separated from other rocks and concentrated by
sedimentation. If the ore is lean, it is heated in air. The Hg vapour formed
is condensed, and the SO, is used to make H2SO,.

Hgs + 0,"S, He + so,
Pich ores are heated with scrap iron or quicklime.

HgS + Fe > Hg + FeS
4HgS + CaO > 4Hg + CaSO, + 3CaS

continued overleaf

 

1837,
