 

 

 

EXTRACTION AND USES

and traces of its daughter product Ra are also present, and are more
radioactive.

2, Bastnaesite is a mixed fluorocarbonate M'"'CO3F where M is La or the
lanthanides. Large amounts are mined in the USA, and it provides 22%
of the total supply of lanthanides. It is only found in the USA and
Madagascar.

3. Very small amounts of another mineral, xenotime, are also mined.

Monazite is treated with hot concentrated H2SO,. Th, La and the lan-
thanides dissolve as sulphates, and are separated from insoluble material.
Th is precipitated as ThO2 by partial neutralization with NH,OH. Na,SO4
is used to salt out La and the light lanthanides as sulphates, leaving the
heavy lanthanides in solution. The light lanthanides are oxidized with
bleaching powder Ca(OCl)2. Ce** is oxidized to Ce** which is precipitated
as Ce(IO3)s and removed. La**+ may be removed by solvent extraction
with tri-n-butylphosphate. The individual elements can be obtained by ion
exchange if required. The treatment of bastnaesite is slightly simpler as it
does not contain Th.

Once the different lanthanide elements have been separated completely
or partially, the metal may be obtained as follows:

1. By electrolysis of the fused LnCl;, with NaCl or CaCl, added to lower
the melting point.

2. La and the lighter metals Ce to Eu are obtained by reducing anhydrous
LnCl, with Ca at 1000-1100°C in an argon-filled vessel. The heavier
elements have higher melting points and so require a temperature of
1400°C. At this temperature CaCl boils, so LnF are used instead, and
in some cases Li is used instead of Ca.

About 5000 tonnes of La and 13000 tonnes of the lanthanides are
produced annually. The metals are of little use on their own. The main use
is for an unseparated mixture of La and the lanthanides called Mischmetal
(50% Ce, 40% La, 7% Fe, 3% other metals). This is added to steel to
improve its strength and workability. It is also used in Mg alloys. Misch-
metal is also used in small amounts as ‘lighter flints’. La,O3 is used in
Crooke’s lenses, which give protection from UV light by absorbing it.
CeO, is used to polish glass and as a coating in ‘self-cleaning’ ovens.
Ce'*(SO,)2 is used as an oxidizing agent in volumetric analysis. Gas
mantles are treated with a mixture of 1% CeO, and 99% ThOs to increase
the amount of light emitted by coal gas flames. Other lanthanide oxides are
used as phosphors in colour TV tubes. ‘Didymium oxide’ (a mixture of
prascodymium and neodymium oxides) is used with CuCl, as the catalyst
in the new Deacon process to make Cls from HCl. Nd2O; is used dissolved
pees as a liquid laser. (Selenium oxochloride is used as the solvent
inet, it contains no light atoms which would convert the input energy
as et) Lanthanide elements are present in warm superconductors such
and Ver BacCude ry and YBa;Cu,O7_,, and others (Sm, Eu, Nb, Dy
i b) have been substituted. These are described at the end of Chapter 5.

 

| [363]
