 

 

GENERAL PROPERTIES

 

 

 

803

 

 

A new and increasing use of Pt is in ‘three-way catalytic convertors’,
These convertors are fitted to many new cars to reduce pollution from the
exhaust gases. It is essential that lead-free.petrol is used in the car. The
main component of the convertor is a ceramic honeycomb which is coated
with Pt, Pd and Rh. The exhaust gases from the engine exhaust pass
through the honeycomb at about 300°C. The precious metals convert
unburnt fuel, CO and oxides of nitrogen into harmless CO2 and Np.
(Leaded petrol must not be used as Pb poisons the catalyst.) \

Both Pd and Pt find extensive chemical uses as catalysts. PdCl, is used
in the Wacker process for converting C,H, to CH;CHO. Pd is used for
hydrogenations such as phenol to cyclohexanone, and also for dehydro-
genations. Pt is very important as a catalyst in the oil industry in the
reforming of hydrocarbons. Pt/PtO is used as Adam’s catalyst for reduc-
tions. At one time Pt was used in the Contact process in the manufacture
of H,SO, (to convert SO2 to SO3); V2Os is now used as catalyst instead
of Pt as it is cheaper and less susceptible to poisoning. A Pt/Rh alloy was
formerly used to oxidize NH3 to NO in the Ostwald process for making
HNO.

In the laboratory Pt crucibles are sometimes used and Pt is also used to
make apparatus to handle HF. Pt is also used to seal into soda glass to
allow electrical connections to pass through the glass. This is important in
making electrodes, thermionic valves etc. Soda glass and Pt have almost
the same coefficient of expansion, so the glass does not crack on cooling.

 

 

“OXIDATION STATES

Ni shows a range of oxidation states from (—I) to (+IV), but its chemistry
is predominantly that of the (+II) state. [Ni(H2O),]?* ions are green
coloured and are stable both in solution and in many simple co..ipounds.
Ni(+II) also forms many complexes, which are mainly square planar or
octahedral. The higher oxidation states of all three metals are unstable.

Pd(+Il) is the most important state, and occurs as the hydrated ion
[Pd(H,0),]?* and in complexes. Pt does not form an aqua ion. Both
Pt(+II) and Pt(+IV) are important, but these are not ionic. The (+II)
complexes are square planar and (+VI) complexes are octahedral.

Zero-valent states occur for all three elements with 7 bonding ligands
such as CO. The maximum oxidation state of (+VI) is only attained in
PIF, and Pt(+V) occurs in [PtFe]~. The highest oxidation state attained
by Ni and Pd is (+IV) in NiF, and PdF,. The so-called PdF; does not
contain Pd" but is really Pd?*[Pd'F,]?- The oxides and halides formed
are shown in Table 26.3.

GENERAL PROPERTIES

Niis a silvery white metal, and Pd and Pt are both grey—white. All three
clements are unreactive in the massive state. They do not tarnish or react
with air Or water at normal temperatures.

Ni is often electroplated on to other metals to provide a protective

 
