 

The lanthanide series 29

 

INTRODUCTION

These 14 elements are called the lanthanons, or lanthanides. They are
characterized by the filling up of the antepenultimate 4f energy levels.
They are extremely similar to each other in properties, and until 1907 they
were thought to be a single element. In the past they were called the rare
earths. This name is not appropriate because many of the elements are not
particularly rare. Furthermore, the name is not precise since in addition to
the 14 lanthanides it has been used to include La, or Sc, Y and La which
are d-block elements, and sometimes Th (an attinide) and Zr (another
d-block element).

ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE

The electronic structures of the lanthanide metals are shown in Table 29.1.
Lanthanum (the d-block element preceding this series) has the electronic
structure: xenon core 5d! 6s?. It might be expected that the 14 elements
from cerium to lutetium would be formed by adding 1, 2, 3,. . .14 electrons
into the 4f level. However, it is energetically favourable to move the single
5d electron into the 4f level in most of the elements, but not in the cases of
Ce, Gd and Lu. The reason why Gd has a Sd! arrangement is that this
leaves a half filled 4f level, which gives increased stability. Lu has a Sd!
atrangement because the f shell is already full. The lanthanides are
characterized by the uniform (+III) oxidation state shown by all the
metals. They typically form compounds which are ionic and trivalent. The
clectronic structures of the ions are Ce** f!, Pr* f?, Nd** f3,...Lue* f'4.

The 4f electrons in the antepenultimate shell are very effectively
shielded from their chemical environment outside the atom by the 5s and
Sp electrons. Consequently the 4f electrons do not take part in bonding.
They are neither removed to produce ions nor do they take any significant
Part in crystal field stabilization of complexes. Crystal field stabilization is
very important with the d-block elements. The octahedral splitting of f
orbitals A, is only about 1kJ mol~!. Whether the f orbitals are filled or
empty has little effect on the normal chemical properties. However, it does
affect their spectra and their magnetic properties.
