 

 

556,

 

“GROUP 12 TRE ZINC GROUP 1

 

2a

»

3

3B

35

7

38

9

40

‘A monomene complex of cobalt gave the following results on analyss
Co NH; Clr SO
% NM WIT U8 3865
“The compound 1s diamagnetic and contains no other groups or
clements except water might be present
Caleulate the empirical formula of the compound, gve the structural
formulae of all posuble isomers. and suggest methods to distagush
between the somers
Give examples of metal clusters in transition metal ions
Draw the structures of sx different carbonyl complexes.
Discuss the oniin of square planar complexes formed by Nill) and
‘explain what athec st apes ay he formed
Suggest seasons why the noble metals are relatively unreactive
Gave examples of compounds contaming metal-metal bonds
‘Compare and contrast the chemustry ofthe elements copper, silver and
gold
‘What are the electronic structures of Zn Cd and Hg. and of ther 2+
sons? Discuss their position in the periodic table Would you expect
them to behave as typical transition elements?
Draw the structure of aie blende. What» the coordination numberof
the 1ons and what 1s the radius ratio?
Explain how Zn w sacrificed 1m the extraction of Cd
Explain why a solution of zine sulphate gwes a white precipitate when

added fo an aqueous solution of ammonia but not when added to an
aqueous solution of ammonta containing ammonium chlonde

What 1s codmum used for how 36 t produced and why are there
problems of cadmium poisoning in the vicimty of zine smelters?

List the main ways in which mercury compounds are discharged rito
‘the envronment’ Comment on the toxicity of inorganic and organo
‘mercury compounds

Grve an account of dsproportionation Why 1s the mercury!) 00

wnatten Hg3” whilst the copper(I) 10m is weitten Cu?

What evidence 1s there that the mercury(l) son 1s Hg?* rather thar
is"?

When mercury 15 omdzed with a limited amount of oxidizing agent

(ve an excess of Hg) then Hg’ compounds are formed If there 18 an

‘ess of ving agent then Hg" compounds are formes Expat
ths
