i
is

Ths
il

ne
nt
pst

*e

. Ainscough, EW. and

 

 

FURTHER READING

 

 

 

833

 

 

animal suffers from anaemia. The Cu is bound to proteins in the body
either as metalloproteins or as enzymes. Examples include various oxi-
dases and blue proteins. These include:

1. Amine oxidases (oxidation of amines).

2. Ascorbate oxidase (oxidation of ascorbic acid).

3. Cytochrome oxidase (acts with haem as the terminal oxidase step).

4. Galactose oxidase (oxidation of an OH group to CHO in the mono-
saccharide galactose). 1

Copper is also important in:

1. Lysine oxidase, which affects the elasticity of aortic walls. ,
2. Dopamine hydroxylase, which affects brain function.

3. Tyrosinase, which affects skin pigmentation.

4. Ceruloplasmin, which plays a role in Fe metabolism.

Wilson’s disease is a hereditary shortage of ceruloplasmin, causing Cu
accumulation in the liver, kidneys and brain. This disease is treated by
feeding the patient with a chelating agent such as EDTA. The Cu forms a
complex and is excreted. At the same time many other essential metals
involved in other enzyme systems form EDTA complexes and are ex-
creted. The treatment would thus upset many different enzyme systems,
so the required metals must be replaced in the diet and treatment must be
very carefully monitored.

Haemocyanin is a copper containing protein which is important as an
oxygen carrier in some invertebrate animals. Despite its name it is a non-
haem protein. The molecular weight is roughly one million, and the
molecule contains two Cu" ions. Despite the d? configuration of Cu** the
molecule is diamagnetic because of strong antiferromagnetic coupling
between the copper ions. Haemocyanin is found in the blood of snails,
crabs, lobsters, octapuses, and scorpions. The oxygenated haemocyanins
are blue coloured (unlike human blood), and have one dioxygen molecule
attached to two Cu atoms. Deoxygenated haemocyanin contains Cu! and
is also blue.

There are several blue proteins which contain Cu. They act as electron
transfer agents by means of a Cu?*/Cu* couple. Their colour is much
More intense than would be expected for d—d spectra. The colour is
thought to be caused by charge transfer between Cu and S. Examples
include plastocyanin and azurin. Plastocyanin occurs in the chloroplasts
of green plants, has a molecular weight of about 10500 and contains one
a i is important in photosynthesis as an electron carrier. Azurin is
sini acteria. i contains one Cu per molecule and is structurally

‘ar to plastocyanin, but it has a molecular weight of about 16000.

FURTHER READING

ee Brodie, A.M. (1985) Gold chemistry and its medical
applications, Education in Chemieny 22 ar % .

 
