 

~ TOXICITY OF CADMIUM AND MERCURY
and plants, and for treating a plant disease called clubroot in brassicas.
More recently organomercury compounds such as dimethyl mercury
Hg(Me)2 and MeHpxX have been used for treating seeds against attack by
fungi. Alkyl mercury compounds such as dimethyl mercury are much more
toxic than inorganic mercury compounds. Aryl mercury compounds are
even more dangerous. They cause brain damage giving numbness, loss of
vision. deafness, madness and death.

There have been several alarming incidents involving mercury poisoning.

. Inthe early 1900s mercury salts were used in the production of felt hats.

~ The dust affected the central nervous system of workers, causing tremor
of muscles called ‘hatter’s shakes’. This led to the expression ‘mad as a
hatter’!

. More recently 52 people died at Minamata (Japan) in 1952 through
eating fish contaminated by mercury. The Hg came from losses from a
factory using Hg" salts to catalyse the production of ethanal (acetal-
dehyde) from ethyne (acetylene). The HgCl, was converted to an
organomercurial compound MeHgSMe by ariaerobic bacteria in the
mud on the sea bed. This is concentrated in the food chain. First it is
taken up by plankton, which is eaten by the fish, and other seafood,
which in turn is eaten by man. There were outbreaks of mercury
poisoning in Japan in 1960 and again in 1965 arising through eating
contaminated shellfish.

. Corn seeds which had been treated with an organomercurial compound
to prevent fungal attack were eaten as food:rather than being planted to
grow a crop in Iraq in 1956 and again in 1960. This resulted in many
deaths. There have also been problems through loss of mercury salts
used as antifungicides in paper mills in Sweden.

Ww

w

The problems of mercury poisoning are now better understood. Though
inorganic hiercury salts are poisonous, they are nothing like as toxic as
alkyl and aryl merciry compounds. However, the loss of inorganic
Mercury compounds must be prevented as Hg?* and (Hg,)** can be
methylated by bacteria present in fivérs, lakes and the sea. Algae, molluscs
and fish may concentrate the small amounts present by a factor of 2-10
times, and they may be eaten by something else and concentrated again.
HeMe2 and Hg—Me* are both very stable and persist for a long time
because they have a strong Hg—C bond. Considerable efforts are now
being made to prevent the discharge of mercury compounds with industrial
effluent. The main problems come from acetaldehyde and vinyl chloride
monomer plants where mercury compounds are used as a catalyst, and

from the electrolytic production of NaOH and Cl where it is used as the
ode.

4. The most recent problein is from the widespread use of mercury to
extract gold in Brazil. River water and silt are passed over mercury,
When the gold dissolves in the mercury, forming an amalgam. Losses of
mercury have poisoned considerable stretches of the Amazon river.

si
