 

 

 

occupying the other two diagonally opposite corners on the bottom face. S
atoms fill the four unoccupied positions. In addition, each Fe is bonded to a
S atom in a cysteine molecule.

Haemerythrin

Despite its name, haemerythrin is a non-haem iron protein which serves as
the oxygen carrier in some marine worms. It has a molecular weight of
about 108000, and is made up of eight subunits. Other marine worms have
myohaemerythrin in their muscles which comprises just one of these
subunits. This is analogous to haemoglobin and myoglobin in higher
animals. However, deoxyhaemerythrin contains two high-spin Fe!! atoms
and oxyhaemerythrin contains two Fe!!! atoms and oxygen bound as O3-.

CYCLOPENTADIENYL AND RELATED COMPOUNDS

Interest in organometallic chemistry began in 1951 when G. Wilkinson
etal, reported making an astonishing iron—hydrocarbon derivative called
di-n-cyclopentadienyliron, Rather surprisingly two research groups
working independently prepared the same compound about the same time.

2CsHsMgBr + FeCl, > Fe(CsHs)2 + MgBr2 + MgCl,

This cc.npound is now called ferrocene and has the formula (n-CsHs)2Fe.
It is stable in air, forms orange crystals, and is diamagnetic. Ferrocene is
soluble in organic solvents (alcohol, ether and benzene), and insoluble in
water, NaOH solution and concentrated HCI. It is thermally stable up to
500°C. The X-ray structure shows that this has a sandwich structure in
which the metal atom is sandwiched betweem two parallel planar cyclo-
pentadienyl rings. This gave the clue that organic ligands could use their x
system to bond to metals, and this opened up the study of compounds with
metal-carbon bonds.

For ferrocene the symmetry of the space group requires the two ,five-
membered rings to have the staggered conformation. In contrast, in the
corresponding Ru and Os compounds ruthenocene and osmocene the rings
adopt the eclipsed conformation (Figure 24.9). The exact arrangement in
ferrocene is not simple. The barrier to internal rotation of the rings is only
about 4kJ mol”'. and electron diffraction (on the gas) suggests an eclipsed
arrangement. It is possible that crystal packing forces result in the
staggered arrangement. More recent X-ray and neutron diffraction studies
On the solid suggest the space group symmetry is met by a disordered
arrangement of nearly eclipsed molecules with an angle of 9° between the
rings rather than (? for eclipsed and 36° for a staggered conformation.

Fe the ange ftoms in the cyclopentadienyl ring are equidistant from
clemente fone Sraptielty n of er n’-CsHs. All the first row transition
ferrocene. simila mpounds, but they are much less stable than

The perpendicular distance between the rings is 3.25 A compared with

NTADIENYLANDRELATEDCOMPOUNDS [79]
