Overlapping microtubules

el
Metaphase

FIGURE 11.12

     

Late anaphase

Microtubules slide past each other as the chromosomes separate. In these electron micrographs of dividing diatoms, the overlap of the
microtubules lessens markedly during spindle elongation as the cell passes from metaphase to anaphase.

Anaphase and Telophase: Separation of the
Chromatids and Reformation of the Nuclei

Of all the stages of mitosis, anaphase is the shortest and
the most beautiful to watch. It starts when the centromeres
divide. Each centromere splits in two, freeing the two sister
chromatids from each other. The centromeres of all the
chromosomes separate simultaneously, but the mechanism
that achieves this synchrony is not known.

Freed from each other, the sister chromatids are pulled
rapidly toward the poles to which their kinetochores are at-
tached. In the process, two forms of movement take place
simultaneously, each driven by microtubules.

First, the poles move apart as microtubular spindle fibers
physically anchored to opposite poles slide past each other,
away from the center of the cell (figure 11.12). Because an-
other group of microtubules attach the chromosomes to
the poles, the chromosomes move apart, too. If a flexible
membrane surrounds the cell, it becomes visibly elongated.

Second, the centromeres move toward the poles as the mi-
crotubules that connect them to the poles shorten. This
shortening process is not a contraction; the microtubules
do not get any thicker. Instead, tubulin subunits are re-
moved from the kinetochore ends of the microtubules by
the organizing center. As more subunits are removed, the
chromatid-bearing microtubules are progressively disas-
sembled, and the chromatids are pulled ever closer to the
poles of the cell.

216 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity

When the sister chromatids separate in anaphase, the
accurate partitioning of the replicated genome—the es-
sential element of mitosis—is complete. In telophase, the
spindle apparatus disassembles, as the microtubules are
broken down into tubulin monomers that can be used to
construct the cytoskeletons of the daughter cells. A nu-
clear envelope forms around each set of sister chromatids,
which can now be called chromosomes because each has
its own centromere. The chromosomes soon begin to un-
coil into the more extended form that permits gene ex-
pression. One of the early group of genes expressed are
the rRNA genes, resulting in the reappearance of the
nucleolus.

 

During prophase, microtubules attach the
centromeres joining pairs of sister chromatids to
opposite poles of the spindle apparatus. During
metaphase, each chromosome is drawn to a ring along
the inner circumference of the cell by the
microtubules extending from the centromere to the
two poles of the spindle apparatus. During anaphase,
the poles of the cell are pushed apart by microtubular
sliding, and the sister chromatids are drawn to
opposite poles by the shortening of the microtubules
attached to them. During telophase, the spindle is
disassembled, nuclear envelopes are reestablished, and
the normal expression of genes present in the
chromosomes is reinitiated.

 
