 

FORCES IN THE NUCLEUS

 

 

907

 

2. Elements of even atomic number are richer in isotopes and never have
less than three stable isotopes (average 5.7). Elements with odd atomic
numbers often have only one stable isotope and never have more than
two.

3. There is a tendency for the number of neutrons and the number of
protons in the nucleus to be even (Table 31.1).

Table 31.1 The number of neutrons, protons and stable nucler

——_—_—_—

 

Number of protons Number of neutrons Number of
P(=Z) N stable isotopes
Even Even 164
Eeven Odd 55

Odd Even 50

Odd . Odd 4

 

This suggests that nucleons may be paired in the nucleus in a similar way
to the pairing of electrons in atomic and molecular orbitals. If two protons
spin in opposite directions. the magnetic fields they produce will mutually
cancel each other. The small amount of binding energy generated is
sufficient to stabilize the nucleus. However, this is not the most important
source of energy in the nucleus.

Certain nuclei are extra-stable, and this is attributable to a filled shell.
Nuclei with 2, 8, 20, 28, 50. 82 or 126 neutrons or protons are particularly
stable and havé a large number of isotopes. These numbers are termed
‘magic numbers’. The numbers 114, 164 and 184 should also be included in
the series of magic numbers. When both the number of protons and the
number of neutrons are magic numbers the nucleus is very stable. For
example. *SPb is very stable and has 82 protons, and 208 — 82 = 126
neutrons. The emission of y rays by the nucleus is readily explained by the
shell model. If nucleons in an excited state fall to a lower nuclear energy
devel, they will emit energy as y rays.

.. Thus some nuclear properties imply that the nucleons are free to move
within the nucleus, and others suggest that nucleons exist in energy levels.

FORCES IN THE NUCLEUS

Protons have a positive charge. In any nucleus containing two or more
protons there will be electrostatic repulsion between the like charges. In a
stable nucleus, the attractive forces are greater than the repulsive forces. In
an unstable nucleus the repulsive forces exceed the attractive forces and
spontaneous fission occurs. The attractive forces in the nucleus cannot be
electrostatic for two reasons:

1, There are no oppositely charged particles.
2. The forces only act over a very short distance of 2-3 fm.

M the nuclear particles are separated by a distance much greater than this,
Taction ceases. Electrostatic forces diminish only slowly with distance.

 
