 

L ELECTRONIC SPECTRA OF TRANSITION METAL COMPLEXES

ELECTRONIC SPECTRA OF TRANSITION METAL COMPLEXES

Spectra arise because electrons may be promoted from one energy level to
another. Such electronic transitions are of high energy, and in addition
much lower energy vibrational and rotational transitions always occur. The
vibrational and rotational levels are too close in energy to be resolved into
separate absorption bands, but they result in considerable broadening of
the electronic absorption bands in d~d spectra. Band widths are commonly
found to be of the order of 1000-3000cm~".

The spectrum of a coloured solution may be measured quite easily using
a spectrophotometer. A beam of monochromatic light obtained using a
prism and a narrow slit is passed through the solution and on to a
photoelectric cell. The amount of light absorbed at any particular
frequency can be read off, or a whole frequency range can be scanned, and
the absorbance A plotted as a graph on a paper chart recorder. The
absorbance was formerly called the optical density. If Jy is the intensity of
the original beam of light, and / the intensity after passing through the

solution, then
‘) _
log ( 7) = A

ihe molar absorption coefficient © is usually calculated from the
absorbance

where c is the concentration of the solution in moll~!, and / is the path
length in centimetres. (Cells are commonly 1cm long.)

Not all of the theoretically possible electronic transitions are actually
observed. The position is formalized into a set of selection rules which
distinguish between ‘allowed’ and ‘forbidden’ transitions. ‘Allowed’ transi-
tions occur commonly. ‘Forbidden’ transitions do occur, but much less
frequently, and they are consequently of much lower intensity.

Laporte ‘orbital’ selection rule

Transitions which involve a change in the subsidiary quantum number
AI = +1 are ‘Laporte allowed’ and therefore have a high absorbance.
Thus for Ca, s? — s'p', | changes by +1 and the molar absorption
Coefficient £ is 5000-10000 litres per mol per centimetre. In contrast d—d
‘ransitions are ‘Laporte forbidden’, since the change in / = 0, but spectra of
much lower absorbance are observed (e = 5-10 Imol~!cm™') because of

| [951]
