Interphase: Preparing for Mitosis

The events that occur during interphase, made up of the Gi,
S, and G phases, are very important for the successful com-
pletion of mitosis. During Gj, cells undergo the major por-
tion of their growth. During the S phase, each chromosome
replicates to produce two sister chromatids, which remain at-
tached to each other at the centromere. The centromere is
a point of constriction on the chromosome, containing a
specific DNA sequence to which is bound a disk of protein
called a kinetochore. This disk functions as an attachment
site for fibers that assist in cell division (figure 11.9). Each
chromosome’s centromere is located at a characteristic site.

The cell grows throughout interphase. The G; and G)
segments of interphase are periods of active growth, when
proteins are synthesized and cell organelles produced. The
cell’s DNA replicates only during the S phase of the cell cycle.

After the chromosomes have replicated in S phase, they
remain fully extended and uncoiled. This makes them invis-
ible under the light microscope. In G) phase, they begin the
long process of condensation, coiling ever more tightly.
Special motor proteins are involved in the rapid final conden-
sation of the chromosomes that occurs early in mitosis. Also
during G) phase, the cells begin to assemble the machinery
they will later use to move the chromosomes to opposite
poles of the cell. In animal cells, a pair of microtubule-
organizing centers called centrioles replicate. All eukary-
otic cells undertake an extensive synthesis of tubulin, the
protein of which microtubules are formed.

Chromatid

  
  
 

Kinetochore

Kinetochore [
microtubules |_

 

Centromere
region of
chromosome

Metaphase
chromosome

FIGURE 11.9
Kinetochores. In a metaphase chromosome, kinetochore
microtubules are anchored to proteins at the centromere.

 

Interphase is that portion of the cell cycle in which the
chromosomes are invisible under the light microscope
because they are not yet condensed. It includes the G1,
S, and G) phases. In the G? phase, the cell mobilizes its
resources for cell division.

 

A Vocabulary of

Cell Division

 

binary fission Asexual reproduction of a
cell by division into two equal or nearly
equal parts. Bacteria divide by binary
fission.

centromere A constricted region of a
chromosome about 220 nucleotides in
length, composed of highly repeated DNA
sequences (satellite DNA). During mitosis,
the centromere joins the two sister chro-
matids and is the site to which the kineto-
chores are attached.

chromatid One of the two copies of a
replicated chromosome, joined by a single
centromere to the other strand.

chromatin The complex of DNA and
proteins of which eukaryotic chromosomes
are composed.

chromosome The structure within cells
that contains the genes. In eukaryotes, it
consists of a single linear DNA molecule as-
sociated with proteins. The DNA is repli-
cated during S phase, and the replicas sepa-
rated during M phase.

cytokinesis Division of the cytoplasm of a
cell after nuclear division.

euchromatin The portion of a chromo-
some that is extended except during cell di-
vision, and from which RNA is transcribed.

heterochromatin The portion of a chro-
mosome that remains permanently con-
densed and, therefore, is not transcribed
into RNA. Most centromere regions are
heterochromatic.

homologues Homologous chromosomes;
in diploid cells, one of a pair of chromo-
somes that carry equivalent genes.

kinetochore A disk of protein bound to
the centromere and attached to micro-
tubules during mitosis, linking each chro-
matid to the spindle apparatus.

microtubule A hollow cylinder, about 25
nanometers in diameter, composed of sub-
units of the protein tubulin. Microtubules
lengthen by the addition of tubulin subunits
to their end(s) and shorten by the removal
of subunits.

mitosis Nuclear division in which repli-
cated chromosomes separate to form two
genetically identical daughter nuclei. When
accompanied by cytokinesis, it produces
two identical daughter cells.

nucleosome The basic packaging unit of
eukaryotic chromosomes, in which the
DNA molecule is wound around a cluster of
histone proteins. Chromatin is composed of
long strings of nucleosomes that resemble
beads on a string.

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 213
