11.4 The cell cycle is carefully controlled.

General Strategy of Cell
Cycle Control

The events of the cell cycle are coordinated in much the
same way in all eukaryotes. The control system human cells
utilize first evolved among the protists over a billion years
ago; today, it operates in essentially the same way in fungi
as it does in humans.

The goal of controlling any cyclic process is to adjust
the duration of the cycle to allow sufficient time for all
events to occur. In principle, a variety of methods can
achieve this goal. For example, an internal “clock” can be
employed to allow adequate time for each phase of the
cycle to be completed. This is how many organisms con-
trol their daily activity cycles. The disadvantage of using
such a clock to control the cell cycle is that it is not very
flexible. One way to achieve a more flexible and sensitive
regulation of a cycle is simply to let the completion of
each phase of the cycle trigger the beginning of the next
phase, as a runner passing a baton starts the next leg in a
relay race. Until recently, biologists thought this type of
mechanism controlled the cell division cycle. However,
we now know that eukaryotic cells employ a separate, cen-
tralized controller to regulate the process: at critical
points in the cell cycle, further progress depends upon a
central set of “go/no-go” switches that are regulated by
feedback from the cell.

This mechanism is the same one engineers use to con-
trol many processes. For example, the furnace that heats
a home in the winter typically goes through a daily heat-
ing cycle. When the daily cycle reaches the morning
“turn on” checkpoint, sensors report whether the house
temperature is below the set point (for example, 70°F). If
it is, the thermostat triggers the furnace, which warms
the house. If the house is already at least that warm, the
thermostat does not start up the furnace. Similarly, the
cell cycle has key checkpoints where feedback signals
from the cell about its size and the condition of its chro-
mosomes can either trigger subsequent phases of the
cycle, or delay them to allow more time for the current
phase to be completed.

Architecture of the Control System

Three principal checkpoints control the cell cycle in cu-
karyotes (figure 11.15):

Cell growth is assessed at the G; checkpoint. Lo-
cated near the end of Gj, just before entry into S phase,
this checkpoint makes the key decision of whether the
cell should divide, delay division, or enter a resting stage
(figure 11.16). In yeasts, where researchers first studied
this checkpoint, it is called START. If conditions are fa-
vorable for division, the cell begins to copy its DNA,

218 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity

 

 

 

[G2 checkpoint

 

 

 

 

 

 

G; checkpoint

 

 

FIGURE 11.15
Control of the cell cycle. Cells use a centralized control system
to check whether proper conditions have been achieved before
passing three key “checkpoints” in the cell cycle.

      
   

a FIGURE 11.16
(proceed 10 87} The G; checkpoint.
pause? Feedback from the
withdraw to Go? cell determines
: f whether the cell cycle

will proceed to the S
phase, pause, or
withdraw into Go for
an extended rest
period.

initiating S phase. The G, checkpoint is where the more
complex cukaryotes typically arrest the cell cycle if envi-
ronmental conditions make cell division impossible, or if
the cell passes into Go for an extended period.

The success of DNA replication is assessed at the
G) checkpoint. The second checkpoint, which occurs
at the end of G), triggers the start of M phase. If this
checkpoint is passed, the cell initiates the many molecu-
lar processes that signal the beginning of mitosis.
Mitosis is assessed at the M checkpoint. Occurring
at metaphase, the third checkpoint triggers the exit from
mitosis and cytokinesis and the beginning of G.

 

The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints.

 
