 

NUCLEAR POWER STATIONS

The yield was equivalent to 13 kilotonnes of TNT. Four square miles were
devastated, and there were 70 000 immediate deaths. On 9 August 1945 the
Pu bomb ‘Fat Man’ was dropped on Nagasaki. The yield was equivalent to
23 kilotonnes of TNT. Two square miles were devastated, and there were
45000 immediate fatalities.

NUCLEAR POWER STATIONS

A nuclear power station consists of a nuclear reactor in which a controlled
chain reaction occurs using either U or Pu as fuel. The heat produced is
extracted from the reactor and used to generate steam, which drives a
turbine and produces electricity. The earliest nuclear reactors were built to
irradiate U and produce plutonium for bombs, and for experimental
purposes. The first commercial nuclear power station was commissioned in
1956 at Calder Hall (Cumberland, UK). In 1989 there were over 120
nuclear power plants in the USA and over 400 in the rest of the world.
France produces two thirds of its electricity from nuclear plants.

Table 31.2 Countries with seven or more nuclear plants

 

 

 

USA 129 Spain 18
France 67 Czechoslovakia 13
USSR 61 Sweden 12
UK India 10
Japan Korea 9
West Germany East Germany 7
Canada
Moderators

Neutrons can only be obtained by nuclear reactions, and they are divided
into three groups depending on their kinetic energy:

1, Slow neutrons, with an energy <O.1eV
2. Intermediate neutrons, with an energy 0.1eV to 2MeV
3. Fast neutrons, with an energy > 2MeV

Neutrons ejected from a nucleus usually have a very high energy and are
called ‘fast neutrons’. These travel so fast that they escape. ‘Slow neutrons’
are needed to cause fission and maintain a chain reaction.

In a thermal reactor a moderator is used to slow down some of the fast
neutrons. The neutrons collide with the nuclei of the moderator, and thus
lose some of their kinetic energy. The best moderators are light atoms
which do not capture neutrons. for example 7H, $He. 2Be and '2C.
Graphite is the most widely used. Heavy water DO which contains 2H is
also used. Sometimes ordinary H2O is used. Be and He are not used
suffices Be is poisonous and expensive. and He. being gaseous. is not

ciently dense. Fast breeder reactors do not use a moderator.

a
