 

 

PROTACTINIUM

 

 

889 |

 

probably Th‘*, 21 and 2 electrons in a conduction band. ThIs is probably
Th‘*, 317 and an electron in a conduction band. ThS has also been made.

About 500 tonnes of thorium compounds are produced annually. The
two industrial uses are as follows:

1. When thorium dioxide containing 1% cerium is heated in a gas flame
it emits a brilliant white light. Because of this it was widely used for
making incandescent gas mantles. At one time gas lighting provided the
main source of artificial light. (Electric light bulbs and fluorescent tubes
have largely replaced gas lighting except for mobile use, e.g. in
caravans. However, making gas mantles still accounts for half the Th
produced.)

2. Naturally occurring thorium is almost entirely *’Th. This isotope is
not fissionable, but if irradiated in the outer part of a nuclear reactor,
2334 is formed.

232

ny Ba B
2aTn ts Th—2s pa—L. *Bu
22 min 27 days

This isotope of uranium does not occur in nature, and has a half life of
1.6 X 10° years. It is fissionable. Since more reactor fuel is produced
than is consumed by the reactor it is important as the basis of ‘breeder-
reactors’.

PROTACTINIUM

Traces of Pa (about 0.1 ppm of 7'Pa) are found in the uranium ore
pitchblende UO. The Pa is formed as a decay product of 5U in the
actinium decay series (see Chapter 31). It also occurs in the neptunium and
uranium natural decay series. It is difficult to isolate Pa from minerals. It is
usually prepared artificially either from Th by the reaction given above, or
obtained as **'Pa from processing spent uranium fuel elements removed
from nuclear reactors.

The study of protactinium is a story of scientific cooperation which is
rarely encountered. The chemistry of this element was almost unknown
until 1960 when A.G. Maddock and a team at the UK Atomic Energy
Authority extracted 130 g of the element from over 50 tonnes of waste from
the extraction of U. They sent samples to major laboratories throughout
the world. This rapidly produced most of the information on this element.

The chemistry of Pa is particularly difficult to study because the
compounds hydrolyse readily. In addition the ions polymerize forming
colloidal precipitates in water and most acids. These precipitates are
adsorbed on to the vessel walls or onto other precipitates. Colloidal pre-

Cipitates are not formed when Pa is handled in fluoride solutions, because it
forms fluoride complexes.

Pa can be eatracted fro

m solutions in HCI i
phosphate. It is then precipi in HCI or HNOs by tributyl

tated as PaFs, and reduced to the metal with
