Cancer and the Control of Cell
Proliferation

The unrestrained, uncontrolled growth of cells, called
cancer, is addressed more fully in chapter 18. However,
cancer certainly deserves mention in a chapter on cell di-
vision, as it is essentially a disease of cell division—a fail-
ure of cell division control. Recent work has identified one
of the culprits. Working independently, cancer scientists
have repeatedly identified what has proven to be the same
gene! Officially dubbed p53 (researchers italicize the gene
symbol to differentiate it from the protein), this gene
plays a key role in the G, checkpoint of cell division. The
gene’s product, the p53 protein, monitors the integrity of
DNA, checking that it is undamaged. If the p53 protein
detects damaged DNA, it halts cell division and stimu-
lates the activity of special enzymes to repair the damage.
Once the DNA has been repaired, p53 allows cell division
to continue. In cases where the DNA is irreparable, p53
then directs the cell to kill itself, activating an apoptosis

(cell suicide) program (see chapter 17 for a discussion of
apoptosis).

By halting division in damaged cells, p53 prevents the
development of many mutated cells, and it is therefore con-
sidered a tumor-suppressor gene (even though its activities
are not limited to cancer prevention). Scientists have found
that p53 is entirely absent or damaged beyond use in the
majority of cancerous cells they have examined! It is pre-
cisely because p53 is nonfunctional that these cancer cells
are able to repeatedly undergo cell division without being
halted at the G; checkpoint (figure 11.20). To test this, sci-
entists administered healthy p53 protein to rapidly dividing
cancer cells in a petri dish: the cells soon ceased dividing
and died.

Scientists at Johns Hopkins University School of Medi-
cine have further reported that cigarette smoke causes mu-
tations in the p53 gene. This study, published in 1995, rein-
forced the strong link between smoking and cancer
described in chapter 18.

 

NORMAL p53

 

  

 

 

 

p53 allows cells with
repaired DNA to divide.

 

 

—
C+
-—»

Stage 1 Stage 2
DNA damage is caused
by heat, radiation, or

chemicals.

 

Cell division stops, and p53 triggers
enzymes to repair damaged region.

p53 triggers the destruction of cells
damaged beyond repair.

 

 

ABNORMAL p53

 

 

 

 

Stage 1
DNA damage is caused
by heat, radiation, or
chemicals.

Stage 2
The p53 protein fails to stop
cell division and repair DNA.
Cell divides without repair to
damaged DNA.

 

 

Cancer
cell

 

Stage 3
Damaged cells continue to divide.
If other damage accumulates, the
cell can turn cancerous.

 

 

FIGURE 11.20

Cell division and p53 protein. Normal p53 protein monitors DNA, destroying cells with irreparable damage to their DNA. Abnormal
p53 protein fails to stop cell division and repair DNA. As damaged cells proliferate, cancer develops.

222 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity
