 

URANIUM

 

 

[891

 

Occurrence

Uranium vanadates such as carnotite K2(UOz)2(VO«)2-3H20 constitute
the chief ore of U. It occurs as a distinctive yellow or green—yellow crust,
or in sandstones and soft aggregates. U is also mined as oxide ores, the
most important being uraninite and pitchblende. These are black—brown
coloured, nonstoichiometric and approximate to UO2. They are often
oxidized, and gummite is orange-yellow, brown or black and is a mixture
of weathered U and Th ores. The stoichiometric oxides UO2, U3O, and
UO; are black—brown, green—black and orange—yellow respectively. U is
the forty-eighth most abundant element in the earth’s crust (2.3 ppm). It is
more abundant than some ‘well known’ elements such as Ag, Hg, Cd and
1. World production of U was 34400 tonnes in 1992. This is based on the
metal content, and is equivalent to 40600 tonnes of U,05. The main
producers of U ores are the Soviet Union 32%, Canada 27%, Niger 9%,
Australia and Namibia 7% each, France 6%, and the USA and South
Africa 5% each. Half of the USA production comes from the Grants area
of New Mexico.

Extraction

The extraction processes are complex. Ores are crushed and concentrated
by physical and chemical means. Ore may contain 0.2% U, so 1 tonne of
ore yields only 4 Ibs or under 2kg of U3Ox. First the ore is concentrated
using the very high density of U in flotation methods. Then it is roasted in
air, and leached with H,SO, (often with an oxidizing agent such as MnO
to ensure conversion to U(+VI)). This is precipitated as sodium diuranate
Na,U20;, a bright yellow solid called ‘yellowcake’. This dissolves in
HNO, forming uranyl nitrate UO2(NO3)3;(H2O),. Uranyl nitrate is
purified either by adding ammonia to precipitate UO3, or by solvent
extraction of uranyl nitrate from aqueous solution into tributyl phosphate
in an inert hydrocarbon diluent. The final steps are conversion to UF,
followed by reduction of UF, with Ca or Mg to give the metal.

Nuclear fission

Naturally occurring uranium contains three isotopes: 99.3% 7*U, 0.7%
°U and traces of ““U. The isotope >5U is fissile, and if it is irradiated
with thermal (slow) neutrons the nucleus breaks up into two smaller nuclei.
At least a million times more energy is liberated by this fission than from a
chemical reaction. The nucleus may split giving several products (see
Induced nuclear reactions’, Chapter 31), one such reaction being:

235;
aU + on 181 + SY + 3(dn) + 2 x 10"kI mol”? energy

Mone a neutrons evolved splits another U nucleus then a self-
vine ing nuclear chain reaction will be started. This liberates energy at
a stant rate, Since three neutrons are evolved per fission, these could in

 
