 

PREPARATION OF THE ACTINIDES

 

 

[883 |

 

was formed (typ for *38U is 4.5 x 10° years, and fi for 2351) is 7.04 x 10°
years). The elements following U have shorter half lives, and any present
when the earth was formed has already decayed. .

If the elements are significantly radioactive they must be handled with
care. The later actinides have very short half lives (often a few minutes or
less). Thus it is not possible to get high concentrations, or perform any-
thing other than quick tracer experiments. Studying some of the elements
is complicated because the radiation decomposes water into H and OH
tadicals. These radicals may reduce higher oxidation states such as
Pu(+ VI), Pu(+V), Am(+VI), Am(+V) and Am(+IV).

The radioactivity produces self-heating. Ten grams of 239Py generates
0.02 watts of heat. This cannot be used as a large scale power source since
this isotope is fissile and thus undergoes nuclear fission. (The critical mass
of 2°Pu js only about } kg.) The heat may decompose some compounds. It
also prevents accurate structure determination by X-ray diffraction, since
the atoms have an unusually high degree of thermal motion. The
production of heat in this way by some of the actinides is used in light-
weight power sources, For example, the heat is used to produce electricity
with a thermopile in heart ‘pace-makers’. They were used in the first moon
probes, the Apollo space mission and in satellites. The isotopes 238Pu and
220m are used for this purpose. They are a emitters, and very little
shielding is required as a particles are easily stopped by surrounding
material, 74m has also been used, but it emits y rays in addition to a
trays, and thus requires extensive shielding.

Up to 10% Th is found in Monazite sand, mixed with the lanthanides as
(ThLn)POg. It is also found as the ore thorite ThSiO,. U is mined as the
ore pitchblende UO}. Very small amounts of Ac, Pa, Np and Pu have been
detected in these ores. These four elements are only available by synthetic
toutes. Plutonium is formed in large amounts by irradiating uranium fuel
in nuclear reactors. This is important because plutonium is fissile, and can
be used for military purposes (to make atomic weapons) and also as a fuel
for nuclear gencrating stations to make electricity.

The chemistry of Th and U resembles that of the Ti and Cr groups of
transition metals in several respects. The elements with higher atomic
numbers than Uare called the transuranium elements. These have all been
produced artificially in the period since 1940. These elements were pro-
duced using a nuclear reactor to irradiate suitable elements with neutrons.
They are also made using an accelerator to bombard a sample with a
particles (He nuclei), or the nuclei of light atoms such as C, B, N, OorNe.

Most of the transuranium elements were discovered (first made) at the
University of California.

PREPARATION OF THE ACTINIDES

The carly members of the series are t:
which are usually followed by
bombardment of U in a cycl

are usually formed by (n,y) reactions
B emission. They were first made in 1940 by
lotron at Berkeley. They are now obtained
