 

[ ‘THE LATER ACTINIDE ELEMENTS

Table 30.8 Halides of neptunium, plutonium and americium :

.
NpF, purple-black PuF; purple AmF; pink
a Noch white PuCl, emerald green AmCl, pink
NpBry green PuBr; green AmBr, white
NpI, brown Pul, brown Aml;_ yellow
+IV NpF, green PuF, brown . AmF, tan

NpCl, red-brown
NpBr, red-brown ,
+V1 NpF, brown PuF, red~brown

Snare rn ID

Interest in these elements is largely concerned with showing that the
second half of the actinides resemble the lanthanides quite closely. In spite
of similarities, the actinides can be separated from the lanthanides quite
easily, as the actinides form complexes more readily. For example, with
concentrated HCI the actinides form chloro complexes. If both groups of
ions are adsorbed on a cation exchange column, the actinides can be eluted
with concentrated HCl. The actinide ions are separated from each other by
ion exchange using citrate solutions to elute them. The order in which the
actinides are eluted shows a close similarity to the order in which the
Janthanides are eluted.

The (+III) oxidation state is the most stable for all but one of the
elements with atomic numbers 96-103, i.e. Cm, Bk, Cf, Es, Fm, Md, (No)
and Lw. The exception is No, which is most stable as No(+II). This is
stable because it has a favourable f'* electronic configuration.

There is evidence of (+I}) states for the elements 98-102, i.e. cali-
fornium to nobelium. Except for nobelium this state is reducing or strongly
teducing in nature. Higher oxidation states of Cm(+IV) are found in the
solid but not in solution with compounds such as CmF, and Rb{CmF,].
Bk(+IV) compounds are oxidizing. They exist in both-the solid and in
solution. and BkO; and Cs2[BkCl,] have been isolated. Lawrencium exists
only in the (+III) state and resists both oxidation and reduction, again
illustrating the stability of an f'* electronic arrangement.

The first three elements curium, berkelium and californium have been
obtained in milligram quantities. Their chemistry has been studied by
normal small scale methods, and compounds have been isolated. The
remaining elements have been studied by radioactive tracer methods,
reuse they are only available in such minute amounts. In this technique
the pena anid clements are precipitated, or form complexes, in
chemical properties. Thee es of a carrier element, which has similar
clemem cored . us mendelevium is studied using the lanthanide

: curoplum, and the mendelevium is detected and followed by its
radioactivity.

The elements up to 100 fermi
emitting « particles or (3
increasingly unstable
halt hie of only th

‘rmium undergo radioactive decay mainly by
particles (see Chapter 31). The elements become
as the atomic number increases. and nobelium has a
Fee seconds (Table 30.3). With these very heavy

 

897 |
