The atomic nucleus

 

STRUCTURE OF THE NUCLEUS

An atom consists of a positively charged nucleus, surrounded by a cloud of
one or more negatively charged electrons. The charges balance exactly and
the atom is electrically neutral. The nucleus is made up of positively
charged protons and electrically neutral neutrons, which are bound
together by very strong forces. These are short range forces, which fall off
very rapidly as the distance between the particles increases. The particles
which make up the nucleus are called collectively nucleons.

The radius of a nucleus is incredibly small, roughly 10-'Sm. Nuclear
distances are measured in femtometres (1 fm = 107° m). (Most atoms are
1-2A, i.e. 1-2 x 107!m in radius. The nucleus of oxygen, for example,
has a radius of 2.5 fm.) To get some feel for how small the nucleus really is,
imagine the nucleus measures 1cm in diameter. On the same scale the
diameter of the atom would be about 1000 m. Most of the mass of an atom
is concentrated in the nucleus. As a result its density is very high, approxi-
mately 2.4 x 10'*gcm? or about 10! times the density of the densest
element iridium (22.61 gem™5).

The atomic number Z of an element is the number of protons in the
nucleus. This is equal to the number of orbital electrons round the atom.
The mass number A is the sum of the neutrons and protons in the nucleus.

Liquid drop model

The nucleus is sometimes described in terms of a ‘liquid drop’. A small
liquid drop is almost spherical. It is held together by short range forces —
the attraction to near neighbours. Molecules at the edge of the drop feel
the attractive force on one side only: this is the surface tension effect. A
large liquid drop becomes elongated, and needs only a little disturbance to
make it break into pieces,
oun, Similar way a nucleus is held together by short range forces (the
exeta ee z imesons), The ‘surface tension effect’ ensures that small
hee pherical. As the mass of the nucleus increases, the repulsion
‘een protons increases more rapidly than the attractive forces. To
