Molecular Mechanisms of Cell
Cycle Control

Exactly how does a cell achieve central control of the divi-
sion cycle? The basic mechanism is quite simple. A set of
proteins sensitive to the condition of the cell interact at the
checkpoints to trigger the next events in the cycle. Two key
types of proteins participate in this interaction: cyclin-
dependent protein kinases and cyclins (figure 11.17).

The Cyclin Control System

Cyclin-dependent protein kinases (Cdks) are enzymes
that phosphorylate (add phosphate groups to) the serine
and threonine amino acids of key cellular enzymes and
other proteins. At the G) checkpoint, for example, Cdks
phosphorylate histones, nuclear membrane filaments, and
the microtubule-associated proteins that form the mitotic
spindle. Phosphorylation of these components of the cell
division machinery initiates activities that carry the cycle
past the checkpoint into mitosis.

Cyclins are proteins that bind to Cdks, enabling the
Cdks to function as enzymes. Cyclins are so named because
they are destroyed and resynthesized during each turn of
the cell cycle (figure 11.18). Different cyclins regulate the
G, and G) cell cycle checkpoints.

The G2 Checkpoint. During G), the cell gradually accu-
mulates G) cyclin (also called mitotic cyclin). This cyclin
binds to Cdk to form a complex called MPF (mitosis-pro-
moting factor). At first, MPF is not active in carrying the
cycle past the G checkpoint. But eventually, other cellular
enzymes phosphorylate and so activate a few molecules of
MPF. These activated MPFs in turn increase the activity of
the enzymes that phosphorylate MPF, setting up a positive
feedback that leads to a very rapid increase in the cellular
concentration of activated MPF. When the level of acti-
vated MPF exceeds the threshold necessary to trigger mito-
sis, G2 phase ends.

MPF sows the seeds of its own destruction. The
length of time the cell spends in M phase is determined
by the activity of MPF, for one of its many functions is to
activate proteins that destroy cyclin. As mitosis proceeds
to the end of metaphase, Cdk levels stay relatively con-
stant, but increasing amounts of G) cyclin are degraded,
causing progressively less MPF to be available and so ini-
tiating the events that end mitosis. After mitosis, the
gradual accumulation of new cyclin starts the next turn of
the cell cycle.

The G; Checkpoint. The G; checkpoint is thought to
be regulated in a similar fashion. In unicellular eukaryotes
such as yeasts, the main factor triggering DNA replication
is cell size. Yeast cells grow and divide as rapidly as possi-
ble, and they make the START decision by comparing
the volume of cytoplasm to the size of the genome. As a

FIGURE 11.17

A complex of two proteins
triggers passage through
cell cycle checkpoints. Cdk
is a protein kinase that
activates numerous cell
proteins by phosphorylating
them. Cyclin is a regulatory
protein required to activate
Cdk; in other words, Cdk

does not function unless Cyclin-dependent kinase
cyclin is bound to it. (Cak)

Cyclin

Trigger mitosis

M-phase-promoting factor

| >
c MPF Y
Mitotic ¢ aw
cyclin
Gacheckpoint
° cS
1 checkpoint Oo
a

Gi cyclin

a
e n°
Start kinase

Trigger DNA replication

FIGURE 11.18

How cell cycle control works. As the cell cycle passes through
the G, and G; checkpoints, Cdk becomes associated with
different cyclins and, as a result, activates different cellular
processes. At the completion of each phase, the cyclins are
degraded, bringing Cdk activity to a halt until the next set of
cyclins appears.

cell grows, its cytoplasm increases in size, while the
amount of DNA remains constant. Eventually a threshold
ratio is reached that promotes the production of cyclins
and thus triggers the next round of DNA replication and
cell division.

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 219
