 

: NUCLEAR FUSION 925

 

 

 

Water cooled thermal reactors (al) use H,O or DO as moderator)

Canadian deuterium uranium reactor (CANDU)

These are a Canadian design. and use natural (not enriched) UO: as fuel,
and heavy water D2O as both moderator and coolant.

Pressurized water reactor (PWR)

These arc a US design. and use UO; pellets enriched to 3% as fuel. Water
is used as both moderator and coolant. The casing must withstand the huge
pressure from the steam produced, and is typically 10 inches (25cm) of
stainless steel surrounded by concrete.

Boiling water reactor (BWR)

This is similar to the PWR except that the UOz fuel is only enriched to
2.2%. It works at a much lower pressure. and so the reactor casing need
not be so strong.

Steam,generating heavy water reactor (SGHWR)

These use UO, pellets enriched to 2.3% as fuel. with D,O as moderator
and HO as coolant.

Fast breeder reactors (these do not use a moderator)

These are much less developed than are thermal reactors. They use PuOz
as fucl. Enrichment is not necessary as all isotopes of Pu are fissile. No
maderator is used, and so the neutrons in the reactor are ‘fast neutrons’.
Some reactors use liquid Na as coolant, whilst others use He gas under a
high pressure. If depleted UO, (i.e. UO which has had the fissile >“*U
removed) is put in such a reactor, then the non-fissile 8U is converted into
fissile Pu, The name ‘breeder reactor’ arises because more fissile material is

produced than is used in the process. Potentially this process could provide
an unlimited source of energy.

In Great Britain there are three generations of nuclear power stations:

- The ageing Magnox reactors (British design).

. The second generation advanced gas cooled reactors (British design).

- A limited number of American designed pressurized water reactors.
These are claimed to be the design which will be used into the twenty-
first century. However. the cost. the time taken to commission and the

safety aspects (particularly of the pressure casing) of these PWRs have
been called into question.

bre

NUCLEAR FUSION

Nuclear fusion is the

process of releasing energy from matter. which occurs
in the sun. the stars

and the hydrogen bomb. During fusion, atoms of light
