Controlling the Cell Cycle in
Multicellular Eukaryotes

The cells of multicellular eukaryotes are not free to make
individual decisions about cell division, as yeast cells are.
The body’s organization cannot be maintained without se-
verely limiting cell proliferation, so that only certain cells
divide, and only at appropriate times. The way that cells in-
hibit individual growth of other cells is apparent in mam-
malian cells growing in tissue culture: a single layer of cells
expands over a culture plate until the growing border of
cells comes into contact with neighboring cells, and then
the cells stop dividing. If a sector of cells is cleared away,
neighboring cells rapidly refill that sector and then stop di-
viding again. How are cells able to sense the density of the
cell culture around them? Each growing cell apparently
binds minute amounts of positive regulatory signals called
growth factors, proteins that stimulate cell division (such
as MPF). When neighboring cells have used up what little
growth factor is present, not enough is left to trigger cell
division in any one cell.

Growth Factors and the Cell Cycle

As you may recall from chapter 7 (cell-cell interactions),
growth factors work by triggering intracellular signaling
systems. Fibroblasts, for example, possess numerous recep-
tors on their plasma membranes for one of the first growth

factors to be identified: platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF). When PDGF binds to a membrane receptor, it
initiates an amplifying chain of internal cell signals that
stimulates cell division. PDGF was discovered when inves-
tigators found that fibroblasts would grow and divide in tis-
sue culture only if the growth medium contained blood
serum (the liquid that remains after blood clots); blood
plasma (blood from which the cells have been removed
without clotting) would not work. The researchers hypoth-
esized that platelets in the blood clots were releasing into
the serum one or more factors required for fibroblast
growth. Eventually, they isolated such a factor and named
it PDGF. Growth factors such as PDGF override cellular
controls that otherwise inhibit cell division. When a tissue
is injured, a blood clot forms and the release of PDGF trig-
gers neighboring cells to divide, helping to heal the wound.
Only a tiny amount of PDGF (approximately 10-!0 M) is
required to stimulate cell division.

Characteristics of Growth Factors. Over 50 different
proteins that function as growth factors have been isolated
(table 11.2 lists a few), and more undoubtedly exist. A spe-
cific cell surface receptor “recognizes” each growth factor,
its shape fitting that growth factor precisely. When the
growth factor binds with its receptor, the receptor reacts by
triggering events within the cell (figure 11.19). The cellular
selectivity of a particular growth factor depends upon
which target cells bear its unique receptor. Some growth

Table 11.2 Growth Factors of Mammalian Cells

Growth Range of
Factor Specificity
Epidermal growth Broad
factor (EGF)

Erythropoietin Narrow
Fibroblast growth Broad
factor (FGF)

Insulin-like Broad
growth factor

Interleukin-2 Narrow
Mitosis-promoting Broad
factor (MPF)

Nerve growth Narrow
factor (NGF)

Platelet-derived growth Broad
factor (PDGF)

Transforming growth Broad
factor B (TGF-B)

220 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

Effects

Stimulates cell proliferation in many tissues; plays a key role in
regulating embryonic development

Required for proliferation of red blood cell precursors and their
maturation into erythrocytes (red blood cells)

Initiates the proliferation of many cell types; inhibits maturation
of many types of stem cells; acts as a signal in embryonic
development

Stimulates metabolism of many cell types; potentiates the effects
of other growth factors in promoting cell proliferation

Triggers the division of activated T lymphocytes

during the immune response

Regulates entrance of the cell cycle into the M phase

Stimulates the growth of neuron processes during neural
development

Promotes the proliferation of many connective tissues and some
neuroglial cells

Accentuates or inhibits the responses of many cell types to other
growth factors; often plays an important role in cell differentiation
