 

HALF LIFE PERIOD

 

[a

 

ip + Te > intv

This process increases the N/P ratio. Usually an electron from the shell
closest to the nucleus is captured. This is called the K shell, so the process
js called K-electron capture. An electron from a higher energy level drops
back to fill the vacancy in the K shell and characteristic X-radiation is
emitted. Electron capture is not common. It occurs in nuclei where the N/P
ratio is low and the nucleus has insufficient energy for positron emission,
that is 2 x 0.51 = 1.02MeV. Some examples are:

JBe + Ye 3Li+v
WK + fe Ar + vy
Where the difference in mass of parent and daughter nuclei is equivalent to

more than the required 1:02MeV for positron emission, both positron
emission and K capture occur.

* (88%) .
gy 2) ti

K capture (42%)

Proton emission

Except for nuclei in a very high energy state, proton emission is unlikely as
the energy needed to remove a proton is about 8 MeV.

GAMMA RADIATION

Immediately following any nuclear change, the neutrons and protons often
have not arranged themselves in their most stable positions. The newly
formed daughter nucleus is thus in an excited state, and has a higher energy
than the ground state. Generally the nucleons rearrange themselves quite
rapidly, thus lowering the energy of the daughter nucleus to the ground
‘State. The corresponding amount of energy is emitted. This is in the range
0.1-1MeV, and is emitted as electromagnetic radiation of very short
wavelength, called y rays.

HALF LIFE PERIOD

The time taken for half the radioactive nuclei in a sample to decay is called
the half life period. This is a characteristic of a particular isotope.

For a single radioactive decay process, the number of nuclei which
disintegrate in a short time period depends only on the relative number of
radioactive atoms present. Thus the size of the sample does not affect the
time taken to undergo radioactive decay. Nuclear decay is therefore a first
order reaction. If n is the number of radioactive nuclei and 1 the time

interval, the Tate of decay (that is the change in the number of radioactive
nuclei with time) is given by:
