 

 

| THE STORY BEHIND PRODUCTION OF THE ATOMIC BOMB

Thermal diffusion

Two gases of different density are placed in a long vertical tube with an
electrically heated wire down the centre of the tube. The lighter gas
diffuses more readily towards the hot wire, where it is heated and rises in a
convection current. Thus the lighter gas accumulates at the top of the tube,
and the heavier gas streams downwards on the surface of the tube.

Electromagnetic separation of UCI; using a mass spectrometer

Tons must first be produced by bombarding the sample with electrons at
low pressure. The ions are attracted by a high voltage across a vacuum
chamber. A magnetic field deflects the particles by different amounts
devending on their mass. This method can deliver pure isotopes, and
though it is primarily used for small quantities, kilogram quantities have
been produced.

Gaseous diffusion of UF.

UF, is gaseous above its sublimation temperature of 56°C. The gas is
pumped through thousands of filter barriers (pinholes) in the enrichment
process. The slightly smaller 7**U passed through the barriers a little more
easily. The rate of diffusion of a gas is determined by Graham’s law of
diffusion:

rate of diffusion = K//D

where K is a constant and D is the density of the gas. The vapour density is
equal to the molecular weight/2. Thus the rate of diffusion of ?°UF, is
marginally faster than that of >*UF, by a factor ¥(352/349) = 1.0043. This
operation is repeated many thousands of times by pumping the gas in a
cascade process. After each stage the lighter fraction is passed forwards
and the heavier fraction backwards. Gaseous diffusion plants are very
large. The K25 building at Oak Ridge housed the original gaseous diffusion
plant and occupied 10° square feet of floor space. A second plant was built
at Hanford in Washington State. The method uses an enormous amount of
electrical energy. (The Oak Ridge site had two advantages in the wartime
Period. Its remoteness and low population were advantages as the work
had unknown hazards. In addition cheap electricity was available from
humerous hydroelectric power stations built in the Tennessee valley in the
1930s to make work during the years of the depression.) Gaseous diffusion
was once important but now is only carried out at one site in the USA.

Using a gas centrifuge to separate ?''UF, and? SUF,

A has Subsequently become the method used in the UK and the
ctherlands. Centrifuges rotating at 1700 revolutions per second con-

‘ate 25 >
Sentrate UF, towards the centre and ?*“UF, towards the walls of a
cylindrical centrifuge,

| [924

 
