 

 

: RADIOACTIVE DECAY SERIES

formed. Elements of low atomic number have a smaller N/P ratio, so some
neutrons will be left over after fission. Most of these neutrons are emitted,
but a few may change to protons with B emission. The neutrons emitted
may be captured (absorbed) by another nucleus. This nucleus then
becomes unstable and itself undergoes fission, liberating more neutrons.
Thus a chain reaction has been started.

Alpha decay occurs only very rarely with nuclides with Z < 83 (atoms
lighter than Bi). However, the great stability of the a particle causes a few
very light, unstable atoms whose nuclear composition corresponds to, or
nearly corresponds to, two or three a particles to undergo decay. When
“Be undergoes this type of a decay the energy released is 0.09 MeV.

3Be — 2(3He) + energy
XLi — 2(3He) + _Ye + energy

RADIOACTIVE DISPLACEMENT LAWS

1. Emission of an a particle produces an element which is four mass units
lighter and the atomic number decreases by two. The daughter element
is therefore two places to the left of the parent in the periodic table.

. When a 8 particle is emitted the mass number remains the same.
However, the atomic number increases by one and the new element is

_ one place to the right of the parent in the periodic system. These

* changes are shown in the following series:

Vv

223p_ 4 219 ui 3 a B @ B
gRa— 79Rn> 73Po— 2Pb—> 7UBi— ATI Pb

RADIOACTIVE DECAY SERIES

The heavy radioactive elements may be grouped into four decay series.
The common radioactive elements thorium, uranium and actinium occur
naturally and belong to three different series named after them. They are
the parent members of their respective series and have the longest half life
Periods. They decay by-a series of a and B emissions, and produce radio-
active elements which are successively more stable until finally a stable
isotope is reached. All three series terminate with lead (?45Pb, 743Pb and
s3Pb). Following the discovery of the artificial post-uranium elements, the
neptunium series has been added, which ends'with bismuth, 7J3Bi.

Thorium (47) series
Neptunium (4n + 1) series
Uranium (4n + 2) series
Actinium (4n + 3) series

The numbers in brackets indicate that the parent and all the members of a
Porncular series have mass numbers exactly divisible by four, or divisible
rae with a remainder of one, two or three. There is no natural cross-

‘ng between the four series, although this can be performed artificially.

 

[915]
