Mitosis
Prophase: Formation of the Mitotic Apparatus

When the chromosome condensation initiated in G7 phase
reaches the point at which individual condensed chromo-
somes first become visible with the light microscope, the
first stage of mitosis, prophase, has begun. The condensa-
tion process continues throughout prophase; consequently,
some chromosomes that start prophase as minute threads
appear quite bulky before its conclusion. Ribosomal RNA
synthesis ceases when the portion of the chromosome bear-
ing the rRNA genes is condensed.

Assembling the Spindle Apparatus. The assembly of
the microtubular apparatus that will later separate the
sister chromatids also continues during prophase. In ani-
mal cells, the two centriole pairs formed during G2 phase
begin to move apart early in prophase, forming between
them an axis of microtubules referred to as spindle fibers.
By the time the centrioles reach the opposite poles of the
cell, they have established a bridge of microtubules called
the spindle apparatus between them. In plant cells, a
similar bridge of microtubular fibers forms between op-
posite poles of the cell, although centrioles are absent in
plant cells.

During the formation of the spindle apparatus, the nu-
clear envelope breaks down and the endoplasmic reticulum
reabsorbs its components. At this point, then, the micro-
tubular spindle fibers extend completely across the cell,
from one pole to the other. Their orientation determines
the plane in which the cell will subsequently divide,
through the center of the cell at right angles to the spindle
apparatus.

In animal cell mitosis, the centrioles extend a radial
array of microtubules toward the plasma membrane when
they reach the poles of the cell. This arrangement of mi-
crotubules is called an aster. Although the aster’s func-
tion is not fully understood, it probably braces the centri-
oles against the membrane and stiffens the point of
microtubular attachment during the retraction of the
spindle. Plant cells, which have rigid cell walls, do not
form asters.

Linking Sister Chromatids to Opposite Poles. Each
chromosome possesses two kinetochores, one attached to
the centromere region of each sister chromatid (see fig-
ure 11.9). As prophase continues, a second group of mi-
crotubules appears to grow from the poles of the cell to-
ward the centromeres. These microtubules connect the
kinetochores on each pair of sister chromatids to the two
poles of the spindle. Because microtubules extending
from the two poles attach to opposite sides of the cen-
tromere, they attach one sister chromatid to one pole and
the other sister chromatid to the other pole. This
arrangement is absolutely critical to the process of mito-
sis; any mistakes in microtubule positioning can be disas-

214 PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

 

Chromosome
Centrioles
=
- is
Ast : = ‘
(er: raf %
=
Mctaphase-“® Spindle
plate fibers
"hs
FIGURE 11.10

Metaphase. In metaphase, the chromosomes array themselves in
a circle around the spindle midpoint.

trous. The attachment of the two sides of a centromere
to the same pole, for example, leads to a failure of the sis-
ter chromatids to separate, so that they end up in the
same daughter cell.

Metaphase: Alignment of the Centromeres

The second stage of mitosis, metaphase, is the phase
where the chromosomes align in the center of the cell.
When viewed with a light microscope, the chromosomes
appear to array themselves in a circle along the inner cir-
cumference of the cell, as the equator girdles the earth (fig-
ure 11.10). An imaginary plane perpendicular to the axis of
the spindle that passes through this circle is called the
metaphase plate. The metaphase plate is not an actual struc-
ture, but rather an indication of the future axis of cell divi-
sion. Positioned by the microtubules attached to the kine-
tochores of their centromeres, all of the chromosomes line
up on the metaphase plate (figure 11.11). At this point,
which marks the end of metaphase, their centromeres are
neatly arrayed in a circle, equidistant from the two poles of
the cell, with microtubules extending back towards the op-
posite poles of the cell in an arrangement called a spindle
because of its shape.
