 

 

| INDUCED NUCLEAR REACTIONS

its presence makes living tissue appreciably radioactive. It may decay
either by 8 emission or K capture.

& 4
49K ——— Ca
K capture
| Keue TeAT

SC has a half life of 5720 years and any originally present in the earth will
have decayed before now. The fact that some exists shows that it must have
been produced since the earth was formed. ‘$C is produced continuously
from the action of the neutrons in cosmic rays on nitrogen in the
atmosphere. This involves a nuclear reaction:

WN + In NC + Ip
It is important in radiocarbon dating (see Chapter 12 under ‘Carbon
dating’).

INDUCED NUCLEAR REACTIONS

Many nuclear reactions can be brought about by bombarding the nucleus
with y rays or various particles. The particles include electrons, neutrons,
protons, a particles or the nuclei of other atoms such as carbon. The nuclei
of C atoms which have had the orbital electrons removed are called
‘stripped carbon’. The particle may be captured by the nucleus (fusion), or
the nucleus may undergo fission, depending on the conditions of the
bombardment.

Natural radiation may be used to induce nuclear reactions, but this limits
the energy of the bombarding particle. More usually the charged particles
are accelerated by a high voltage using a linear accelerator, or by alternate
attraction and repulsion using a cyclotron or a synchrotron. (There are
very large accelerators at CERN in France and Switzerland, at Berkeley
USA and in the USSR.) In this way particles can be accelerated, giving
them a very high kinetic energy which can be used to promote the nuclear
reaction. This high energy is necessary to overcome the repulsion between
a positively charged nucleus and a positively charged bombarding particle.
Neutrons have no charge so they would not be repelled by the nucleus, but
the absence of a charge means that they cannot be accelerated in this
manner. Thus neutron bombardment can only be carried out using
neutrons produced by nuclear reactions.

Some nuclear transformations are given below.

HN + 4He > YO + !H
TAL + $He > P+ In
TiNa + {H — Mg + in
'RCd + tn Cd + energy
In the first example the nitrogen is bombarded with a particles and a

Proton is formed. This is described as an (4. p) reaction. An alternative
‘ay of writing the reaction is:

| [917]
