 

 

 

SOME APPLICATIONS OF RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPES | | 933 |

objects. ‘$C occurs naturally and is used in radiocarbon dating of materials
of plant and animal origin. This is described in Chapter 12. It depends on
calculating when the sample was removed from free exchange with its
surroundings. '{C is produced continuously from the action of the neutrons
in cosmic rays on nitrogen in the atmosphere. Whilst the plant or animal is
alive it will have the same proportion of '£C as the surroundings. When the
plant or animal dies, the intake of radiocarbon stops and that already
present gradually decays. In a similar way helium dating may be used to
estimate the age of certain mineral deposits. Uranium minerals decay by
emitting a particles, thus producing helium. One gram of U produces
about 10~7g of He in a year. The age of the mineral can be estimated if
both the U and He contents are known. Corrections must be made for
some He escaping, and for the production of He from other elements such
as Th which may be present.

Isotope dilution analysis can be used to determine the solubility of
sparingly soluble materials. For example, a solid sample containing radio-
active 34SrSO, and normal SrSO, can be prepared and the activity per
gram measured. A known volume of a saturated solution is evaporated
and the activity of the residue measured. Comparison of the activities
gives the solubility. In a similar way the isotope #2P has been used to
measure the solubility of MgNHPO,-6H2O, and '34I has been used
to measure the solubility of PbI2. A similar technique can be applied to
vapour pressures of rather involatile materials.

Activation analysis is used to determine the amount of an element in a
sample. The sample to be analysed and another sample containing a known
amount of the element are placed in a nuclear reactor where they are
bombarded (usually with neutrons). After irradiation for a suitable period
(several times the half life of the expected radioisotope) the samples are
removed from the reactor. The induced radioactivity in both samples is
measured. The amount of the element present in the unknown sample is
obtained from the ratio of the activities of unknown and standard samples.
More than 50 elements (or strictly isotopes) can be determined in this way.
The method is most used to determine trace quantities. It has the
advantage that the sample is not destroyed, but the disadvantage that it
requires access to a reactor. Not all elements can be determined in this
way; for example, it is not feasible to determine C because 2C has a very
low absorption cross-section for neutrons, though activation analysis of C
can be performed by bombarding with deuterium in a cyclotron.

Isotope exchange reactions provide information on the mechanisms of
certain reactions. Thus exchange of 7D in heavy water D2O for 1H ina
compound occurs rapidly if H is bonded to N or O, but exchange is slow or
hardly occurs in most cases where H is bonded to C. This is related to the
mobility of protons and the higher polarity of N—H and O—H bonds.

D,0 + RO—H = HDO + RO—D

If labelled '"SNH,C1 is dissolved in liquid NH, and the solvent evaporated,
the activity from '3N is evenly distributed between the NH,CI and the
