 

 

OXIDATION STATES

There are many similarities between the lanthanides and the later
actinides. Cm closely resembles Gd, and both have the electronic con-
figuration f’, d', s?. The elution of Am, Cm, Bk and Cf from an ion-
exchange column exactly parallels that of the lanthanides Eu, Gd, 'Tb and
Dy. The melting points and densities of the actinide elements do not fit
with the values for the d-block (see Appendices II and III).

The elements Pa, U, Np, Pu and Cm have very sharp lines in their
absorption spectra. This is a characteristic feature of f-f spectra. Spectral
lines from the actinides are about ten times as intense as those from the
lanthanides. If there is only one f electron present there will be only one
peak in the spectrum, and therefore it will be easy to interpret. Usually the
spectra are very complex, and are very difficult to interpret. The magnetic
properties of the actinides are also difficult to interpret.

Whether the elements possess any d electrons in their ground state
configuration is of little practical importance. In the most common
oxidation state (+11) the two s electrons and the d electron (if present),
will be removed. The energies of the Sf and 6d orbitals are very close. The
bond energy is greater than the promotion energy Sf— 6d. The 7s and 7p
orbitals are of comparable energy. Thus the levels occupied by electrons
may change depending on the nature of the ligands, or between the solid
state and a solution. It is often impossible to say which orbitals are being
used.

The Sf orbitals extend into space beyond the 6s and 6p orbitals and
participate in bonding. This is in direct contrast to the lanthanides where
the 4f orbitals are buried deep inside thé atom, totally shielded by outer
orbitals and thus unable to take part in bonding. The participation of the 5f
orbitals explains the higher oxidation states shown by the earlier actinide
elements. The greater extension of the 5f orbitals compared with the 4f is
shown by the difference in electron resonance spectra, of Nd?* and U?*
ions in CaF, or SrF2. Both ions have an f? ground state (spectroscopic term
symbol “In. - see Chapter 29). The U>* signal shows hyperfine structure
caused by interaction! with fluorine nuclei, whilst Nd?* ions do not.

OXIDATION STATES

The known oxidation states of the elements are shown in Table 30.1.

The (+11) state is quite rare. Am?* has an f” configuration. It is the
analogue of Eu’* in the lanthanides, but it only exists in the solid as the
fluoride. In contrast Cf2*, Es?*, Fm?*, Md?* and No?* exist as ions in
Solution, Their properties are like the Group 2 metals, particularly Ba?*.
tis the most stable oxidation state for No. and corresponds to an f"*
atrangement,

The actinides all have an oxidation state of (+I1D), like the lanthanides.
However, this is not always the most stable oxidation state in the actinides.
(+111) is not the most stable oxidation state for the first four elements Th,
Pa, U and Np. For example, U>* is readily oxidized in air, and in solution.
The (+I) state is the most stable state for the later elements osAm >

| [881]
