Cytokinesis

Mitosis is complete at the end of telophase. The eukaryotic
cell has partitioned its replicated genome into two nuclei
positioned at opposite ends of the cell. While mitosis was
going on, the cytoplasmic organelles, including mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts (if present), were reassorted to areas
that will separate and become the daughter cells. The repli-
cation of organelles takes place before cytokinesis, often in
the S or G) phase. Cell division is still not complete at the
end of mitosis, however, because the division of the cell
proper has not yet begun. The phase of the cell cycle when
the cell actually divides is called cytokinesis. It generally
involves the cleavage of the cell into roughly equal halves.

Cytokinesis in Animal Cells

In animal cells and the cells of all other eukaryotes that lack
cell walls, cytokinesis is achieved by means of a constricting
belt of actin filaments. As these filaments slide past one an-
other, the diameter of the belt decreases, pinching the cell
and creating a cleavage furrow around the cell’s circumfer-
ence (figure 11.132). As constriction proceeds, the furrow
deepens until it eventually slices all the way into the center
of the cell. At this point, the cell is divided in two (figure
11.130).

Cytokinesis in Plant Cells

Plant cells possess a cell wall far too rigid to be squeezed in
two by actin filaments. Instead, these cells assemble mem-
brane components in their interior, at right angles to the
spindle apparatus (figure 11.14). This expanding membrane
partition, called a cell plate, continues to grow outward
until it reaches the interior surface of the plasma mem-
brane and fuses with it, effectively dividing the cell in two.
Cellulose is then laid down on the new membranes, creat-
ing two new cell walls. The space between the daughter
cells becomes impregnated with pectins and is called a
middle lamella.

Cytokinesis in Fungi and Protists

In fungi and some groups of protists, the nuclear mem-
brane does not dissolve and, as a result, all the events of mi-
tosis occurs entirely within the nucleus. Only after mitosis
is complete in these organisms does the nucleus then divide
into two daughter nuclei, and one nucleus goes to each
daughter cell during cytokinesis. This separate nuclear di-
vision phase of the cell cycle does not occur in plants, ani-
mals, or most protists.

After cytokinesis in any eukaryotic cell, the two daughter
cells contain all of the components of a complete cell.
While mitosis ensures that both daughter cells contain a
full complement of chromosomes, no similar mechanism
ensures that organelles such as mitochondria and chloro-

 

 

(a)

FIGURE 11.13 (b)
Cytokinesis in animal cells.

(@) A cleavage furrow forms around a dividing sea urchin egg
(30x). (b) The completion of cytokinesis in an animal cell. The
two daughter cells are still joined by a thin band of cytoplasm
occupied largely by microtubules.

 

Cell wall Nuclei

 

Vesiclés containing membrane
components fusing to form cell plate

FIGURE 11.14

Cytokinesis in plant cells. In this photograph and companion
drawing, a cell plate is forming between daughter nuclei. Once
the plate is complete, there will be two cells.

plasts are distributed equally between the daughter cells.
However, as long as some of each organelle are present in
each cell, the organelles can replicate to reach the number
appropriate for that cell.

 

Cytokinesis is the physical division of the cytoplasm of
a eukaryotic cell into two daughter cells.

 

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 217
