 

NUCLEAR FUSION

 

3. The plasma must be confined for an adequate time to allow fusion to
occur,

These and other ‘hydrogen burning’ processes occur at the centre of the
sun. This provides the enormous amount of solar energy which is radiated
to earth and the rest of the solar system.

Thermonuclear weapons , an

The only fusion processes carrizd out successfully on earth have been the
hydrogen bomb and other similar thermonuclear weapons. The very high
temperatures and high densities required to bring about nuclear fusion
reactions have been brought about by means of a small uranium fission
bomb. This heats a jacket of lighter elements to a sufficiently high
temperature to start the fusion reactions in the hydrogen and nitrogen
bombs. These are called thermonuclear reactions. The first thermonuclear
device was detonated at Eniwetoc in 1952: The energy yield is 100 times
greater than that from an atomic bomb using U or Pu fission. The complete
fusion of the nuclei in 1 1b (0.4kg) of deuterium would result in the same
energy release as 26000 tonnes of TNT.

Controlled fusion reactions

Many attempts have been made to build apparatus in which controlled
fusion reactions will occur. So far none have been successful. The problem
is how to handle very hot gas plasmas. If the plasma touches a solid (e.g. a
Steel vessel), the solid is vaporized and the plasma cools down rapidly. The
two main methods of confinement are magnetic and inertial. Since a
plasma consists of charged particles moving at high speed, it can be
deflected by a magnetic field. Plasma can be contained inside a doughnut
shaped ‘magnetic bottle’. (The extremely high magnetic fields required are
obtained with electromagnets using a superconducting niobium/titanium
alloy cooled in liquid helium to about 4K.) Inertial confinement involves
the rapid collapse of the fuel container to make the fuel so dense that the
fusion reactions occur. Alternatively laser fusion can be used, when high
powered, pulsed laser beams are used to heat and compress small ‘pellets’
of fuel.

It is just possible that fusion may be achieved by some totally different
technique without using plasma to attain the high energy conditions. There
Was great excitement in March 1989 when Fleischmann and Pons claimed
to have achieved ‘cold fusion’ in the laboratory at the University of Utah,
USA. They electrolysed 99.5% enriched heavy water D2O made con-
ducting by dissolving in it some LiOD (D is }H). Heat appeared to be
generated, and this was attributed to D-D fusion. In a similar experiment
Jones at Brigham Young University claimed neutrons were released.
Unfortunately they were wrong.

| a7]
