5-2 SOME PARTICULAR FORCES 105

From Eq. 5-8, we substitute mg for F,, finding

Fy — mg = may.
Then the magnitude of the normal force is
Fy = mg + ma, = m(g + ay) (5-13)

for any vertical acceleration a, of the table and block (they might be in an accel-
erating elevator). (Caution: We have already included the sign for g but a, can be
positive or negative here.) If the table and block are not accelerating relative to
the ground, then a, = Oand Eq. 5-13 yields

Fy = mg. (5-14)
Iv] Checkpoint 3

In Fig. 5-7, is the magnitude of the normal force Fy greater than, less than, or equal to
me if the block and table are in an elevator moving upward (a) at constant speed and
(b) at increasing speed?

Friction

If we either slide or attempt to slide a body over a surface, the motion is resisted
by a bonding between the body and the surface. (We discuss this bonding more in
the next chapter.) The resistance is considered to be a single force f’, called either
the frictional force or simply friction. This force is directed along the surface, op-
posite the direction of the intended motion (Fig. 5-8). Sometimes, to simplify a sit-
uation, friction is assumed to be negligible (the surface, or even the body, is said
to be frictionless).

Tension

When a cord (or a rope, cable, or other such object) is attached to a body and
pulled taut, the cord pulls on the body with a force T directed away from the
body and along the cord (Fig. 5-9a). The force is often called a tension force
because the cord is said to be in a state of tension (or to be under tension), which
means that it is being pulled taut. The tension in the cord is the magnitude T of the
force on the body. For example, if the force on the body from the cord has magni-
tude T = 50 N, the tension in the cord is 50 N.

A cord is often said to be massless (meaning its mass is negligible compared
to the body’s mass) and unstretchable. The cord then exists only as a connection
between two bodies. It pulls on both bodies with the same force magnitude T,

   
  

The forces at the two ends of
the cord are equal in magnitude.

 

(@) (b) (ce)
Figure §-9. (a) The cord, pulled taut, is under tension, If its mass is negligible, the cord
pulls on the body and the hand with force T, even if the cord runs around a massless,
frictionless pulley as in (b) and (c).

 

Direction of
attempted
slide

Figure 5-8 A frictional force f opposes the
attempted slide of a body over a surface.
