16 CHAPTER 2 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE

Figure 2-4 Calculation of the
average velocity between t = 1s
and t = 4s as the slope of the line
that connects the points on the
X(t) curve representing those times.
The swirling icon indicates that a
figure is available in WileyPLUS
as an animation with voiceover.

This is a graph
of position x 4
versus time t. 3
2
1

To find average velocity,
first draw a straight line,
start to end, and then
find the slope of the

line.

toward x = 0, passes through that point at ¢ = 3 s, and then moves on to increas-
ingly larger positive values of x. Rgure 2-3 also depicts the straight-line motion of
the armadillo (at three times) and is something like what you would see. The
graph in Fig. 2-3 is more abstract, but it reveals how fast the armadillo moves.

Actually, several quantities are associated with the phrase “how fast.” One of
them is the average velocity v,., which is the ratio of the displacement Av that
occurs during a particular time interval Af to that interval:

— Ax my -K

ee 5
“B At b-t

(2-2)
The notation means that the position is x, at time f; and then x, at time 4. A com-
mon unit for Vay is the meter per second (m/s). You may see other units in the
problems, but they are always in the form of length/time.

Graphs. On a graph of x versus f, Vayg is the slope of the straight line that
connects two particular points on the x(t) curve: one is the point that corresponds
to x) and f, and the other is the point that corresponds to x, and ¢. Like displace-
ment, Vayg has both magnitude and direction (it is another vector quantity). Its
magnitude is the magnitude of the line’s slope. A positive Vay. (and slope) tells us
that the line slants upward to the right; a negative Vay. (and slope) tells us that the
line slants downward to the right. The average velocity vay. always has the same
sign as the displacement Ax because At in Eq. 2-2 is always positive.

Figure 2-4 shows how to find Vayg in Fig. 2-3 for the time interval t= 1stot=4s.
‘We draw the straight line that connects the point on the position curve at the begin-
ning of the interval and the point on the curve at the end of the interval. Then we find
the slope Ax/At of the straight line. For the given time interval, the average velocity is

Vavg = Su =2m/s.

Average speed sqy is a different way of describing “how fast” a particle
moves. Whereas the average velocity involves the particle’s displacement Ax, the
average speed involves the total distance covered (for example, the number of
meters moved), independent of direction; that is,

total distance
Sag =p

(23)

Because average speed does not include direction, it lacks any algebraic sign.
Sometimes 5,yy is the same (except for the absence of a sign) as Vayy. However, the
two can be quite different.

 

   

End of interval

This vertical distance is how far
it moved, start to end:
Ax=2m- (4m) =6m

This horizontal distance is how long
it took, start to end:

Start of interval At=4s—1s=3s
