12.2 Meiosis has three unique features.

Unique Features of Meiosis

The mechanism of cell division varies in important details
in different organisms. This is particularly true of chromo-
somal separation mechanisms, which differ substantially in
protists and fungi from the process in plants and animals
that we will describe here. Meiosis in a diploid organism
consists of two rounds of division, mitosis of one. Although
meiosis and mitosis have much in common, meiosis has
three unique features: synapsis, homologous recombina-
tion, and reduction division.

Synapsis

The first unique feature of meiosis happens early during
the first nuclear division. Following chromosome replica-
tion, homologous chromosomes, or homologues (see chapter 11),
pair all along their length. The process of forming these
complexes of homologous chromosomes is called synapsis

Homologous Recombination

The second unique feature of meiosis is that genetic ex-
change occurs between the homologous chromosomes while they
are thus physically joined (figure 12.5a). The exchange
process that occurs between paired chromosomes is called
crossing over. Chromosomes are then drawn together
along the equatorial plane of the dividing cell; subse-
quently, homologues are pulled by microtubules toward
opposite poles of the cell. When this process is complete,
the cluster of chromosomes at each pole contains one of
the two homologues of each chromosome. Each pole is
haploid, containing half the number of chromosomes pres-
ent in the original diploid cell. Sister chromatids do not
separate from each other in the first nuclear division, so
each homologue is still composed of two chromatids.

Reduction Division

The third unique feature of meiosis is that the chromosomes
do not replicate between the two nuclear divisions, so that at the
end of meiosis, each cell contains only half the original
complement of chromosomes (figure 12.54). In most re-
spects, the second meiotic division is identical to a normal
mitotic division. However, because of the crossing over
that occurred during the first division, the sister chromatids
in meiosis IT are not identical to each other.

Meiosis is a continuous process, but it is most easily stud-
ied when we divide it into arbitrary stages. The stages of
meiosis are traditionally called meiosis I and meiosis II. Like
mitosis, each stage is subdivided further into prophase,
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase (figure 12.6). In meio-
sis, however, prophase I is more complex than in mitosis.

 

In meiosis, homologous chromosomes become
intimately associated and do not replicate between the
two nuclear divisions.

 

228 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

SYNAPSIS.

Centromere

Region of close
association, where
crossing over
occurs

    

Sister
chromatids

 

 

(a) Homologue _ Homologue
a REDUCTION
aaa DIVISION
germ-line
cell
Chromosome

<o

duplication

{I Meiosis |
{| Meiosis I

a

Haploid gametes

(b) A

AD

 

 

 

FIGURE 12.5

Unique features of meiosis. (a) Synapsis draws homologous
chromosomes together, creating a situation where the two
chromosomes can physically exchange parts, a process called
crossing over. (b) Reduction division, by omitting a chromosome
duplication before meiosis II, produces haploid gametes, thus
ensuring that chromosome number remains stable during the
reproduction cycle.
