5-2 SOME PARTICULAR FORCES

At Rest. This same gravitational force, with the same magnitude, still acts on
the body even when the body is not in free fall but is, say, at rest on a pool table or
moving across the table. (For the gravitational force to disappear, Earth would
have to disappear.)

‘We can write Newton’s second law for the gravitational force in these vector
forms:

F-

¢ (5-9)
where j is the unit vector that points upward along a y axis, directly away from
the ground, and ¢ is the free-fall acceleration (written as a vector), directed

downward.

— Fj = —mgi = mg,

Weight

The weight W of a body is the magnitude of the net force required to prevent the
body from falling freely, as measured by someone on the ground. For example, to
keep a ball at rest in your hand while you stand on the ground, you must provide
an upward force to balance the gravitational force on the ball from Earth.
Suppose the magnitude of the gravitational force is 2.0 N. Then the magnitude of
your upward force must be 2.0 N, and thus the weight W of the ball is 2.0 N. We
also say that the ball weighs 2.0 N and speak about the ball weighing 2.0 N.

A ball with a weight of 3.0N would require a greater force from you—
namely, a 3.0 N force—to keep it at rest. The reason is that the gravitational force
you must balance has a greater magnitude —namely, 3.0 N. We say that this sec-
ond ball is heavier than the first ball.

Now let us generalize the situation. Consider a body that has an acceleration
@ of zero relative to the ground, which we again assume to be an inertial frame.
Two forces act on the body: a downward gravitational force F, and a balancing
upward force of magnitude W. We can write Newton’s second law for a vertical y
axis, with the positive direction upward, as

Fyety = May.
In our situation, this becomes
W — F, = m(0) (5-10)
or W =F, (weight, with ground as inertial frame). (5-11)

This equation tells us (assuming the ground is an inertial frame) that

Ok) The weight W of a body is equal to the magnitude F; of the gravitational force
on the body.

Substituting mg for F, from Eq. 5-8, we find

W=mg (weight), (5-12)

which relates a body’s weight to its mass.

Weighing. To weigh a body means to measure its weight. One way to do this
is to place the body on one of the pans of an equal-arm balance (Fig. 5-5) and
then place reference bodies (whose masses are known) on the other pan until we
strike a balance (so that the gravitational forces on the two sides match). The
masses on the pans then match, and we know the mass of the body. If we know
the value of g for the location of the balance, we can also find the weight of the
body with Eq. 5-12.

We can also weigh a body with a spring scale (Fig. 5-6). The body stretches
a spring, moving a pointer along a scale that has been calibrated and marked in

103

   

Fy = me

Figure 5-5 An equal-arm balance. When the
device is in balance, the gravitational force
F., on the body being weighed (on the left
pan) and the total gravitational force Fn
on the reference bodies (on the right pan)
are equal. Thus, the mass m, of the body
being weighed is equal to the total mass
mg of the reference bodies.

Scale marked
in either
weight or
mass units

E,= nig

Figure 5-6 A spring scale. The reading is
proportional to the weight of the object on
the pan, and the scale gives that weight if
marked in weight units. If, instead, it is
marked in mass units, the reading is the
object’s weight only if the value of g at the
location where the scale is being used is
the same as the value of g at the location
where the scale was calibrated.
