Sexual Reproduction
and Meiosis

Concept Outline
12.1 Meiosis produces haploid cells from diploid cells.

Discovery of Reduction Division. Sexual reproduction
does not increase chromosome number because gamete
production by meiosis involves a decrease in chromosome
number. Individuals produced from sexual reproduction
inherit chromosomes from two parents.

12.2 Meiosis has three unique features.

Unique Features of Meiosis. Three unique features of
meiosis are synapsis, homologous recombination, and
reduction division.

12.3 The sequence of events during meiosis involves
two nuclear divisions.

Prophase I. Homologous chromosomes pair intimately,
and undergo crossing over that locks them together.
Metaphase I. Spindle microtubules align the
chromosomes in the central plane of the cell.

Completing Meiosis. The second meiotic division is like
a mitotic division, but has a very different outcome.

12.4 The evolutionary origin of sex is a puzzle.

Why Sex? Sex may have evolved as a mechanism to repair
DNA, or perhaps as a means for contagious elements to
spread. Sexual reproduction increases genetic variability by
shuffling combinations of genes.

 

FIGURE 12.1

Plant cells undergoing meiosis (600). This preparation of
pollen cells of a spiderwort, Tradescantia, was made by freezing
the cells and then fracturing them. It shows several stages of
meiosis.

Ms animals and plants reproduce sexually. Gametes
of opposite sex unite to form a cell that, dividing re-
peatedly by mitosis, eventually gives rise to an adult body
with some 100 trillion cells. The gametes that give rise to
the initial cell are the products of a special form of cell divi-
sion called meiosis (figure 12.1), the subject of this chapter.
Far more intricate than mitosis, the details of meiosis are
not as well understood. The basic process, however, is
clear. Also clear are the profound consequences of sexual
reproduction: it plays a key role in generating the tremen-
dous genetic diversity that is the raw material of evolution.

225
