96 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

> _
F
—_
Z

Figure 5-1 A force F on the standard
kilogram gives that body an acceleration a.

In other words, if the body is at rest, it stays at rest. If it is moving, it continues to
move with the same velocity (same magnitude and same direction).

Force

Before we begin working problems with forces, we need to discuss several fea-
tures of forces, such as the force unit, the vector nature of forces, the combining of
forces, and the circumstances in which we can measure forces (without being
fooled by a fictitious force).

Unit. We can define the unit of force in terms of the acceleration a force
would give to the standard kilogram (Fig. 1-3), which has a mass defined to be ex-
actly 1 kg. Suppose we put that body on a horizontal, frictionless surface and pull
horizontally (Fig. 5-1) such that the body has an acceleration of 1 m/s”. Then we
can define our applied force as having a magnitude of 1 newton (abbreviated N).
If we then pulled with a force magnitude of 2 N, we would find that the accelera-
tion is 2 m/s*. Thus, the acceleration is proportional to the force. If the standard
body of 1 kg has an acceleration of magnitude a (in meters per second per sec-
ond), then the force (in newtons) producing the acceleration has a magnitude
equal to a. We now have a workable definition of the force unit.

Vectors. Force is a vector quantity and thus has not only magnitude but also
direction. So, if two or more forces act on a body, we find the net force (or result-
ant force) by adding them as vectors, following the rules of Chapter 3. A single
force that has the same magnitude and direction as the calculated net force
would then have the same effect as all the individual forces. This fact, called the
principle of superposition for forces, makes everyday forces reasonable and pre-
dictable. The world would indeed be strange and unpredictable if, say, you and a
friend each pulled on the standard body with a force of 1 N and somehow the net
pull was 14 N and the resulting acceleration was 14 m/s”.

In this book, forces are most often represented with a vector symbol such as
F and a net force is represented with the vector symbol Fig. As with other vectors,
a force or a net force can have components along coordinate axes. When forces act
only along a single axis, they are single-component forces. Then we can drop the
overhead arrows on the force symbols and just use signs to indicate the directions
of the forces along that axis.

The First Law. Instead of our previous wording, the more proper statement
of Newton’s First Law is in terms of a net force:

te) Newton's First Law: If no net force acts on a body (Fie: = 0), the body’s velocity
cannot change; that is, the body cannot accelerate.

There may be multiple forces acting on a body, but if their net force is zero, the
body cannot accelerate. So, if we happen to know that a body’s velocity is con-
stant, we can immediately say that the net force on it is zero.

Inertial Reference Frames

Newton’s first law is not true in all reference frames, but we can always find
reference frames in which it (as well as the rest of Newtonian mechanics) is true.
Such special frames are referred to as inertial reference frames, or simply inertial
frames.

Oo An inertial reference frame is one in which Newton’s laws hold.

For example, we can assume that the ground is an inertial frame provided we can
neglect Earth’s astronomical motions (such as its rotation).
