72 CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

   

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 4-10 One ball is released from rest at
the same instant that another ball is shot
horizontally to the right. Their vertical
motions are identical.

The ball and the can fall
the same distance h.

 

hits the falling can. Each falls a distance h
from where it would be were there no
free-fall acceleration.

This feature allows us to break up a problem involving two-dimensional motion
into two separate and easier one-dimensional problems, one for the horizontal
motion (with zero acceleration) and one for the vertical motion (with constant
downward acceleration). Here are two experiments that show that the horizontal
motion and the vertical motion are independent.

Two Golf Balls

Figure 4-10 is a stroboscopic photograph of two golf balls, one simply released and
the other shot horizontally by a spring. The golf balls have the same vertical motion,
both falling through the same vertical distance in the same interval of time. The fact
that one ball is moving horizontally while it is falling has no effect on its vertical mo-
tion; that is, the horizontal and vertical motions are independent of each other.

A Great Student Rouser

In Fig. 4-11, a blowgun G using a ball as a projectile is aimed directly at a can sus-
pended from a magnet M. Just as the ball leaves the blowgun, the can is released. If g
(the magnitude of the free-fall acceleration) were zero, the ball would follow the
straight-line path shown in Fig. 4-11 and the can would float in place after the
magnet released it. The ball would certainly hit the can. However, g is not zero,
but the ball still hits the can! As Fig. 4-11 shows, during the time of flight of the
ball, both ball and can fall the same distance h from their zero-g locations. The
harder the demonstrator blows, the greater is the ball’s initial speed, the shorter
the flight time, and the smaller the value of h.

VI Checkpoint 3

Ata certain instant, fly ball has velocity ¥ = 251 — 4.9} (the x axis is horizontal, the
y axis is upward, and ¥ is in meters per second). Has the ball passed its highest point?

The Horizontal Motion

Now we are ready to analyze projectile motion, horizontally and vertically.
We start with the horizontal motion. Because there is no acceleration in the hori-
zontal direction, the horizontal component v, of the projectile’s velocity remains
unchanged from its initial value vo, throughout the motion, as demonstrated in
Fig. 4-12. At any time ¢, the projectile’s horizontal displacement x — x9 from an
initial position x9 is given by Eq. 2-15 with a = 0, which we write as
X — Xo = Vorl.

Because vo, = Vo COs A, this becomes

X — Xp = (Vo Cos Op)t. (4-21)

The Vertical Motion
The vertical motion is the motion we discussed in Module 2-5 for a particle in
free fall. Most important is that the acceleration is constant. Thus, the equations
of Table 2-1 apply, provided we substitute —g for a and switch to y notation. Then,
for example, Eq. 2-15 becomes

VY ~ Yo = Voyt — gt?
(v sin Op)t — 3gt?, (4-22)

where the initial vertical velocity component vo, is replaced with the equivalent
vo sin . Similarly, Eqs. 2-11 and 2-16 become

Vy = vosin 6 — gt (4-23)
and Vs = (Yo sin 8p)? — 2g(y — Yo). (4-24)
