will see, this has a key impact on
how the homologues separate later
in meiosis.

Diplotene. At the beginning of
diplotene, the protein lattice of the
synaptonemal complex disassem-
bles. Diplotene is a period of in-
tense cell growth. During this pe-
riod the chromosomes decondense
and become very active in tran-
scription.

Diakinesis. At the beginning of
diakinesis, the transition into
metaphase, transcription ceases
and the chromosomes recondense.

FIGURE 12.9
Chiasmata. This micrograph shows two distinct crossovers, or chiasmata.

Synapsis

During prophase, the ends of the
chromatids attach to the nuclear envelope at specific sites.
The sites the homologues attach to are adjacent, so that the
members of each homologous pair of chromosomes are
brought close together. They then line up side by side, ap-
parently guided by heterochromatin sequences, in the
process called synapsis.

Crossing Over

Within the synaptonemal complex, recombination is
thought to be carried out during pachytene by very large
protein assemblies called recombination nodules. A nod-
ule’s diameter is about 90 nm, spanning the central element
of the synaptonemal complex. Spaced along the synaptone-
mal complex, these recombination nodules act as large
multienzyme “recombination machines,” each nodule
bringing about a recombination event. The details of the
crossing over process are not well understood, but involve a
complex series of events in which DNA segments are ex-
changed between nonsister or sister chromatids. In hu-
mans, an average of two or three such crossover events
occur per chromosome pair.

When crossing over is complete, the synaptonemal com-
plex breaks down, and the homologous chromosomes are
released from the nuclear envelope and begin to move away
from each other. At this point, there are four chromatids
for each type of chromosome (two homologous chromo-
somes, each of which consists of two sister chromatids).
The four chromatids do not separate completely, however,
because they are held together in two ways: (1) the two sis-
ter chromatids of each homologue, recently created by
DNA replication, are held near by their common cen-
tromeres; and (2) the paired homologues are held together
at the points where crossing over occurred within the
synaptonemal complex.

 

FIGURE 12.10
The results of crossing over. During crossing over, nonsister
(shown above) or sister chromatids may exchange segments.

Chiasma Formation

Evidence of crossing over can often be seen under the light
microscope as an X-shaped structure known as a chiasma
(Greek, “cross”; plural, chiasmata; figure 12.9). The pres-
ence of a chiasma indicates that two chromatids (one from.
each homologue) have exchanged parts (figure 12.10). Like
small rings moving down two strands of rope, the chias-
mata move to the end of the chromosome arm as the ho-
mologous chromosomes separate.

 

Synapsis is the close pairing of homologous
chromosomes that takes place early in prophase I of
meiosis. Crossing over occurs between the paired DNA
strands, creating the chromosomal configurations
known as chiasmata. The two homologues are locked
together by these exchanges and they do not disengage
readily.

 

Chapter 12 Sexual Reproduction and Meiosis 231
