3-1 VECTORS AND THEIR COMPONENTS 43

in Fig. 3-7a. The z axis comes directly out of the page at the origin; we ignore it for
now and deal only with two-dimensional vectors.

A component of a vector is the projection of the vector on an axis. In
Fig. 3-7a, for example, a, is the component of vector @ on (or along) the x axis and
ay is the component along the y axis. To find the projection of a vector along an
axis, we draw perpendicular lines from the two ends of the vector to the axis, as
shown. The projection of a vector on an x axis is its x component, and similarly the
projection on the y axis is the y component. The process of finding the
components of a vector is called resolving the vector.

A component of a vector has the same direction (along an axis) as the vector.
In Fig. 3-7, a, and a, are both positive because @ extends in the positive direction
of both axes. (Note the small arrowheads on the components, to indicate their di-
rection.) If we were to reverse vector @, then both components would be negative
and their arrowheads would point toward negative x and y. Resolving vector Din
Fig. 3-8 yields a positive component b, and a negative component by.

In general, a vector has three components, although for the case of Fig. 3-7a
the component along the z axis is zero. As Figs. 3-7a and b show, if you shift a vec-
tor without changing its direction, its components do not change.

Finding the Components. We can find the components of @ in Fig. 3-7a geo-
metrically from the right triangle there:

a,=acos@ and a,=asin@, (3-5)
where @ is the angle that the vector @ makes with the positive direction of the
x axis, and a is the magnitude of @. Figure 3-7c shows that @ and its x and y com-
ponents form a right triangle. It also shows how we can reconstruct a vector from
its components: we arrange those components head to tail. Then we complete a
right triangle with the vector forming the hypotenuse, from the tail of one com-
ponent to the head of the other component.

Once a vector has been resolved into its components along a set of axes, the
components themselves can be used in place of the vector. For example, @ in
Fig. 3-7a is given (completely determined) by a and @. It can also be given by its
components a, and a,. Both pairs of values contain the same information. If we
know a vector in component notation (a, and a,) and want it in magnitude-angle
notation (a and 6), we can use the equations

a=Vaz+a; and

tan 9 = (36)
an ae =

i

to transform it.
In the more general three-dimensional case, we need a magnitude and two
angles (say, a, #, and ¢#) or three components (a,,4,, and a) to specify a vector.

[Vv] Checkpoint 2

This is the y component
of the vector.

     
 
  

 

This is the x component
of the vector.

The components af ja
and the vector A
forma right triangle. (,) “a u

Figure 3-7 (a) The components a, and a, of
vector @. (b) The components are unchanged if
the vector is shifted, as long as the magnitude
and orientation are maintained. (c) The com-
ponents form the legs of a right triangle whose
hypotenuse is the magnitude of the vector.

This is the x component
of the vector.

x(m)

This is the y component
of the vector.

Figure 3-8 The component of 5 on the
X axis is positive, and that on the y axis is
negative.

In the figure, which of the indicated methods for combining the x and y components of vector @ are proper to determine that vector?

ao

   

y

 

() (f)
