launch speed but for a different launch angle. Does the fruitcake
now land farther away or closer to the launch point?

7 Anairplane flying horizontally at a constant speed of 350 km/h
over level ground releases a bundle of food supplies. Ignore the ef-
fect of the air on the bundle. What are the bundle’s initial (a) verti-
cal and (b) horizontal components of velocity? (c) What is its hori-
zontal component of velocity just before hitting the ground? (d) If
the airplane’s speed were, instead, 450 km/h, would the time of fall
be longer, shorter, or the same?

8 In Fig. 4-25, a cream tangerine is thrown up past windows 1,2,
and 3, which are identical in size and regularly spaced vertically.
Rank those three windows according to (a) the time the cream tan-
gerine takes to pass them and (b) the average speed of the cream
tangerine during the passage, greatest first.

The cream tangerine then moves down past windows 4, 5,
and 6, which are identical in size and irregularly spaced horizon-
tally. Rank those three windows according to (c) the time the
cream tangerine takes to pass them and (d) the average speed of
the cream tangerine during the passage, greatest first.

 

Figure 4-25 Question 8.

9 Figure 4-26 shows three paths for a football kicked from ground
level. Ignoring the effects of air, rank the paths according to (a) time
of flight, (b) initial vertical velocity component, (c) initial horizontal
velocity component, and (d) initial speed, greatest first.

 

Figure 4-26 Question 9.

10 A ball is shot from ground level over level ground at a certain
initial speed. Figure 4-27 gives the range R of the ball versus its
launch angle @. Rank the three lettered points on the plot accord-
ing to (a) the total flight time of the ball and (b) the ball’s speed at
maximum height, greatest first.

R

%
Figure 4-27 Question 10.

QUESTIONS 83

 

11 Figure 4-28 shows four tracks (either half- or quarter-circles)
that can be taken by a train, which moves at a constant speed.
Rank the tracks according to the magnitude of a train’s accelera-
tion on the curved portion, greatest first.

 

 

Figure 4-28 Question 11.

12. In Fig, 4-29, particle P is in uniform circular motion, cen-
tered on the origin of an xy coordinate system. (a) At what values
of @is the vertical component r, of the position vector greatest in
magnitude? (b) At what values of @is the vertical component v,
of the particle’s velocity greatest in magnitude? (c) At what val-
ues of dis the vertical component a, of the particle’s acceleration
greatest in magnitude?

 

Figure 4-29 Question 12.

13. (a) Is it possible to be accelerating while traveling at constant
speed? Is it possible to round a curve with (b) zero acceleration and
(c) aconstant magnitude of acceleration?

14 While riding in a moving car, you toss an egg directly upward.
Does the egg tend to land behind you, in front of you, or back in your
hands if the car is (a) traveling at a constant speed, (b) increasing in
speed, and (c) decreasing in speed?

15 A snowball is thrown from ground level (by someone in a
hole) with initial speed vp at an angle of 45° relative to the (level)
ground, on which the snowball later lands. If the launch angle is in-
creased, do (a) the range and (b) the flight time increase, decrease,
or stay the same?

16 You are driving directly behind a pickup truck, going at the
same speed as the truck. A crate falls from the bed of the truck to
the road. (a) Will your car hit the crate before the crate hits the
road if you neither brake nor swerve? (b) During the fall, is the
horizontal speed of the crate more than, less than, or the same as
that of the truck?

17 Atwhat point in the path of a projectile is the speed a minimum?

18 In shot put, the shot is put (thrown) from above the athlete’s
shoulder level. Is the launch angle that produces the greatest range
45°, less than 45°, or greater than 45°?
