 

30 CHAPTER 2 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE

Sample Problem 2.06 Graphical integration a versus ¢, whiplash injury

“Whiplash injury” commonly occurs in a rear-end collision
where a front car is hit from behind by a second car. In the
1970s, researchers concluded that the injury was due to the
occupant’s head being whipped back over the top of the seat
as the car was slammed forward. As a result of this finding,
head restraints were built into cars, yet neck injuries in rear-
end collisions continued to occur.

Ina recent test to study neck injury in rear-end collisions,
a volunteer was strapped to a seat that was then moved
abruptly to simulate a collision by a rear car moving at
10.5 km/h. Figure 2-15a gives the accelerations of the volun-
teer’s torso and head during the collision, which began at time
t=. The torso acceleration was delayed by 40 ms because
during that time interval the seat back had to compress
against the volunteer. The head acceleration was delayed by
an additional 70 ms. What was the torso speed when the head
began to accelerate? eS

KEY IDEA

 

‘We can calculate the torso speed at any time by finding an
area on the torso a(t) graph.

Calculations: We know that the initial torso speed is vp = 0
at time f = 0, at the start of the “collision.” We want the
torso speed v, at time t; = 110 ms, which is when the head
begins to accelerate.

100
_ Head
cam
ae Torso
=
@ 0 40 80 120 160

(ms)

Combining Eqs. 2-27 and 2-28, we can write

) (2-31)

area between acceleration curve
Vy = ‘ :
oy and time axis, from f to f,

For convenience, let us separate the area into three regions
(Fig. 2-15). From 0 to 40 ms, region A has no area:

area, = 0.

From 40 ms to 100 ms, region B has the shape of a triangle, with
area
areag = 3(0.060 s)(50 m/s?) = 1.5 m/s.

From 100 ms to 110 ms, region C has the shape of a rectan-
gle, with area
areac = (0.010 s)(50 m/s’) = 0.50 m/s.
Substituting these values and vp = O into Eq. 2-31 gives us
vy, —-0=0+1.5 m/s + 0.50 m/s,

or v, = 2.0 m/s = 7.2 km/h. (Answer)

Comments: When the head is just starting to move forward,
the torso already has a speed of 7.2 km/h. Researchers argue
that it is this difference in speeds during the early stage of a
rear-end collision that injures the neck. The backward whip-
ping of the head happens later and could, especially if there is
no head restraint, increase the injury.

change in velocity.

 

t

40 100 110

Figure 2-15 (a) The a(t) curve of the torso and head of a volunteer
in a simulation of a rear-end collision. (b) Breaking up the region
between the plotted curve and the time axis to calculate the area.

PLUS additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Review & Summary

Position The position x of a particle on an x axis locates the par-
ticle with respect to the origin, or zero point, of the axis. The position
is either positive or negative, according to which side of the origin
the particle is on, or zero if the particle is at the origin. The positive
direction on an axis is the direction of increasing positive numbers;
the opposite direction is the negative direction on the axis.

Displacement The displacement Ax of a particle is the change
in its position:
Av =x) — x). (2-1)

Displacement is a vector quantity. It is positive if the particle has
moved in the positive direction of the x axis and negative if the
particle has moved in the negative direction.

Average Velocity When a particle has moved from position x;
to position x2 during a time interval At = fh — ft), its average velocity
during that interval is

ay ye

a 1 ~!
Yas = Gea @2)

  

 

The algebraic sign of v,,, indicates the direction of motion (Vay. is a
vector quantity). Average velocity does not depend on the actual
distance a particle moves, but instead depends on its original and
final positions.

Ona graph of x versus ¢, the average velocity for a time interval
Aris the slope of the straight line connecting the points on the curve
that represent the two ends of the interval.

The total area gives the
