12.3 The sequence of events during meiosis involves two nuclear divisions.

Prophase I

In prophase I of meiosis, the DNA coils tighter, and indi-
vidual chromosomes first become visible under the light
microscope as a matrix of fine threads. Because the DNA
has already replicated before the onset of meiosis, each of
these threads actually consists of two sister chromatids
joined at their centromeres. In prophase I, homologous
chromosomes become closely associated in synapsis, ex-
change segments by crossing over, and then separate.

An Overview

Prophase I is traditionally divided into five sequential
stages: leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and dia-
kinesis.

Leptotene. Chromosomes condense tightly.
Zygotene. A lattice of protein is laid down between
the homologous chromosomes in the process of synap-
sis, forming a structure called a synaptonemal complex
(figure 12.7).

Pachytene. Pachytene begins when synapsis is com-
plete (just after the synaptonemal complex forms; figure
12.8), and lasts for days. This complex, about 100 nm
across, holds the two replicated chromosomes in precise
register, keeping each gene directly across from its part-
ner on the homologous chromosome, like the teeth of a

Synaptonemal
complex

   

Chromosome
homologues

FIGURE 12.7

Structure of the synaptonemal complex. A portion of the
synaptonemal complex of the ascomycete Neotiella rutilans, a cup
fungus.

zipper. Within the synaptonemal complex, the DNA du-
plexes unwind at certain sites, and single strands of
DNA form base-pairs with complementary strands on
the other homologue. The synaptonemal complex thus
provides the structural framework that enables crossing
over between the homologous chromosomes. As you

 

 

 

Interphase _| _Leptotene

Zygotene

 

 

Pachytene Diplotene followed by diakinesis

 

      
   

Chromatid 1] "|
Paternal
sister
chromatids | Chromatid 2 | Formation
of the
synaptonemal
complex
Chromatid 3 f=)
aor A

sister

chromatids 5 Mi wy
Chromatid 4 et

    
  
 
     

Crossing over can occur
between homologous

chromosomes Chromatid 1

   

Disassembly Chromatid 2
of the
synaptonemal
complex

Chromatid 3

|

Chromatid 41

 

Time

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 12.8

Time course of prophase I. The five stages of prophase I represent stages in the formation and subsequent disassembly of the
synaptonemal complex, the protein lattice that holds homologous chromosomes together during synapsis.

230 PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity
