66

CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

toward zero. (2) The direction of AT/At (and thus of Vy.) approaches the
direction of the line tangent to the particle’s path at position 1. (3) The average
velocity Vy, approaches the instantaneous velocity V at t.

In the limit as At > 0, we have V,yy > V and, most important here, Vy. takes
on the direction of the tangent line. Thus, V has that direction as well:

Od

The direction of the instantaneous velocity ¥ of a particle is always tangent to the
particle’s path at the particle’s position.

The result is the same in three dimensions: V is always tangent to the particle’s path.
To write Eq. 4-10 in unit-vector form, we substitute for F from Eq. 4-1:

=~ dios 2 a, ax, dys
Va it yj + zk) = att ard

This equation can be simplified somewhat by writing it as

dz »
+ dt k.

V=vd + vj + vk, (4-11)

where the scalar components of V are

d. qd d:
ce a and es

eae? ae ve at

(4-12)

For example, dx/dt is the scalar component of V along the x axis. Thus, we can find
the scalar components of V by differentiating the scalar components of F.

Figure 4-4 shows a velocity vector V and its scalar x and y components. Note
that V is tangent to the particle’s path at the particle’s position. Caution: When a
position vector is drawn, as in Figs. 4-1 through 4-3, it is an arrow that extends
from one point (a “here”) to another point (a “there”). However, when a velocity
vector is drawn, as in Fig. 4-4, it does not extend from one point to another.
Rather, it shows the instantaneous direction of travel of a particle at the tail, and
its length (representing the velocity magnitude) can be drawn to any scale.

The velocity vector is always
tangent to the path.

y

  
   
 

‘Tangent \

| These are the x and y
components of the vector

Figure 4-4 The velocity ¥ of a at this instant.

particle, along with the scalar

components of V.
o

Iv] Checkpoint 1 y

The figure shows a circular path taken by a particle.

Ifthe instantaneous velocity of the particle is ¥ =

(2 m/s)i — (2 m/s)j, through which quadrant is the par- x
ticle moving at that instant if it is traveling (a) clockwise

and (b) counterclockwise around the circle? For both

cases, draw ¥ on the figure.
