3-1 VECTORS AND THEIR COMPONENTS 41

A vector has magnitude as well as direction, and vectors follow certain
(vector) rules of combination, which we examine in this chapter. A vector
quantity is a quantity that has both a magnitude and a direction and thus can be
represented with a vector. Some physical quantities that are vector quantities are
displacement, velocity, and acceleration. You will see many more throughout this
book, so learning the rules of vector combination now will help you greatly in
later chapters.

Not all physical quantities involve a direction. Temperature, pressure, energy,
mass, and time, for example, do not “point” in the spatial sense. We call such
quantities scalars, and we deal with them by the rules of ordinary algebra. A sin-
gle value, with a sign (as in a temperature of —40°F), specifies a scalar.

The simplest vector quantity is displacement, or change of position. A vec-
tor that represents a displacement is called, reasonably, a displacement vector.
(Similarly, we have velocity vectors and acceleration vectors.) If a particle changes
its position by moving from A to B in Fig. 3-1a, we say that it undergoes a displace-
ment from A to B, which we represent with an arrow pointing from A to B.The ar-
row specifies the vector graphically. To distinguish vector symbols from other
kinds of arrows in this book, we use the outline of a triangle as the arrowhead.

In Fig. 3-1a, the arrows from A to B, from A’ to B', and from A” to B" have
the same magnitude and direction. Thus, they specify identical displacement vec-
tors and represent the same change of position for the particle. A vector can be
shifted without changing its value if its length and direction are not changed.

The displacement vector tells us nothing about the actual path that the parti-
cle takes. In Fig. 3-1b, for example, all three paths connecting points A and B cor-
respond to the same displacement vector, that of Fig. 3-la. Displacement vectors
represent only the overall effect of the motion, not the motion itself.

Adding Vectors Geometrically

Suppose that, as in the vector diagram of Fg. 3-2a, a particle moves from A to B
and then later from B to C. We can represent its overall displacement (no matter
what its actual path) with two successive displacement vectors, AB and BC.
The net displacement of these two displacements is a single displacement from A
to C. We call AC the vector sum (or resultant) of the vectors AB and BC. This
sum is not the usual algebraic sum.

In Fig. 3-2b, we redraw the vectors of Fig. 3-2a and relabel them in the way
that we shall use from now on, namely, with an arrow over an italic symbol, as
in @. If we want to indicate only the magnitude of the vector (a quantity that lacks
a sign or direction), we shall use the italic symbol, as in a, b, and s. (You can use
just a handwritten symbol.) A symbol with an overhead arrow always implies
both properties of a vector, magnitude and direction.

We can represent the relation among the three vectors in Fig. 3-2b with the
vector equation

F=a+5, (3-1)
which says that the vector sis the vector sum of vectors @ and b.The symbol + in
Eg. 3-1 and the words “sum” and “add” have different meanings for vectors than
they do in the usual algebra because they involve both magnitude and direction.

Figure 3-2 suggests a procedure for adding two-dimensional vectors @ and B
geometrically. (1) On paper, sketch vector @ to some convenient scale and at the
proper angle. (2) Sketch vector B to the same scale, with its tail at the head of vec-
tor d, again at the proper angle. (3) The vector sum ¥ is the vector that extends
from the tail of @ to the head of b.

Properties. Vector addition, defined in this way, has two important proper-
ties. First, the order of addition does not matter. Adding @ to b gives the same

Br

Q

(b)
Figure 3-1 (a) All three arrows have the
same magnitude and direction and thus
represent the same displacement. (b) All
three paths connecting the two points cor-
respond to the same displacement vector.

c

Net displacement
is the vector sum

 

(a)

To add #and b,
draw them
head to tail.

 
  
  

This is the
resulting vector,
from tail of @

to head of B.

Figure 3-2 (a) AC is the vector sum of the
vectors AB and BC. (b) The same vectors
relabeled.
