Growth Factors and Cancer

How do growth factors influence the cell cycle? As you
have seen, there are two different approaches, one positive
and the other negative.

Proto-oncogenes. PDGF and many other growth fac-
tors utilize the positive approach, stimulating cell divi-
sion. They trigger passage through the G; checkpoint by
aiding the formation of cyclins and so activating genes
that promote cell division. Genes that normally stimulate
cell division are sometimes called proto-oncogenes because
mutations that cause them to be overexpressed or hyper-
active convert them into oncogenes (Greek onco, “can-
cer”), leading to the excessive cell proliferation that is
characteristic of cancer. Even a single mutation (creating
a heterozygote) can lead to cancer if the other cancer-
preventing genes are nonfunctional. Geneticists, using
Mendel’s terms, call such mutations of proto-oncogenes
dominant.

Some 30 different proto-oncogenes are known. Some
act very quickly after stimulation by growth factors.
Among the most intensively studied of these are myc, fos,
and jun, all of which cause unrestrained cell growth and
division when they are overexpressed. In a normal cell,
the myc proto-oncogene appears to be important in regu-
lating the Gj checkpoint. Cells in which myc expression is
prevented will not divide, even in the presence of growth
factors. A critical activity of myc and other genes in this
group of immediately responding proto-oncogenes is to
stimulate a second group of “delayed response” genes, in-
cluding those that produce cyclins and Cdk proteins (fig-
ure 11.21).

‘Tumor-suppressor Genes. Other growth factors utilize
a negative approach to cell cycle control. They block pas-
sage through the G; checkpoint by preventing cyclins from
binding to Cdk, thus inhibiting cell division. Genes that
normally inhibit cell division are called tumor-suppressor
genes. When mutated, they can also lead to unrestrained
cell division, but only if both copies of the gene are mutant.
Hence, these cancer-causing mutations are recessive.

The most thoroughly understood of the tumor-suppressor
genes is the retinoblastoma (Rb) gene. This gene was orig-
inally cloned from children with a rare form of eye cancer
inherited as a recessive trait, implying that the normal
gene product was a cancer suppressor that helped keep
cell division in check. The Rb gene encodes a protein pre-
sent in ample amounts within the nucleus. This protein
interacts with many key regulatory proteins of the cell
cycle, but how it does so depends upon its state of phos-
phorylation. In Go phase, the Rb protein is dephosphory-
lated. In this state, it binds to and ties up a set of regula-
tory proteins, like mye and fos, needed for cell
proliferation, blocking their action and so inhibiting cell
division (see figure 11.19). When phosphorylated, the Rb

protein releases its captive regulatory proteins, freeing

 

Levels of
myc protein

Time (h) 0 8 16 24

STM G2) Mpc) Gy]

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 11.21

The role of myc in triggering cell division. The addition of a
growth factor leads to transcription of the myc gene and rapidly
increasing levels of the myc protein. This causes Go cells to enter
the S phase and begin proliferating.

Growth
factor
receptor

 

Key proteins associated
with human cancers

 

 

Growth More per cell in
factor | many breast cancers
receptor
Ras | asin 20-30%
protein °

of all cancers

 

Src | Activated by mutations

 

Rb.
PEI) (protein

kinase | in 2-5% of all cancers
Rb Mutated in 40%
Cell cycle protein of all cancers
checkpoints
p53. Mutated in 50%
protein of all cancers

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mammalian cell

FIGURE 11.22

Mutations cause cancer. Mutations in genes encoding key
components of the cell division-signaling pathway are responsible
for many cancers. Among them are proto-oncogenes encoding
growth factor receptors, such as ras protein, and kinase enzymes,
such as sre, that aid ras function. Mutations that disrupt tumor-
suppressor proteins, such as Rb and p53, also foster cancer
development.

 

them to act and so promoting cell division. Growth fac-
tors lessen the inhibition the Rb protein imposes by acti-
vating kinases that phosphorylate it. Free of Rb protein
inhibition, cells begin to produce cyclins and Cdk, pass
the G; checkpoint, and proceed through the cell cycle.
Figure 11.22 summarizes the types of genes that can cause
cancer when mutated.

 

The progress of mitosis is regulated by the interaction
of two key classes of proteins, cyclin-dependent protein
kinases and cyclins. Some growth factors accelerate the
cell cycle by promoting cyclins and Cdks, others
suppress it by inhibiting their action.

 

Chapter 11 How Cells Divide 223
