7s CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

To find the period T of the motion, first note that the final
velocity is the reverse of the initial velocity. This means the

 

aircraft leaves on the opposite side of the circle from the i

tial point and must have completed half a circle in the given

AWiLey

24.0 s. Thus a full circle would have taken T= 48.0 s.
Substituting these values into our equation for a, we find

_ 2n(640.31 m/s)

S oes
ane 83.81 m/s? ~ 86g.

(Answer)

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

4-6 RELATIVE MOTION IN ONE DIMENSION

Learning Objective

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

4.18 Apply the relationship between a particle's position, ve-
locity, and acceleration as measured from two reference

Key Idea

frames that move relative to each other at constant velocity
and along a single axis.

 

@ When two frames of reference A and B are moving relative
to each other at constant velocity, the velocity of a particle P
as measured by an observer in frame A usually differs from
that measured from frame B. The two measured velocities are
related by

Vpa = Veg + Vea

where V’z, is the velocity of B with respect to A. Both ob-
servers measure the same acceleration for the particle:

Apa = App

 

Relative Motion in One Dimension

Suppose you see a duck flying north at 30 km/h. To another duck flying alongside,
the first duck seems to be stationary. In other words, the velocity of a particle de-
pends on the reference frame of whoever is observing or measuring the velocity.
For our purposes, a reference frame is the physical object to which we attach our
coordinate system. In everyday life, that object is the ground. For example, the
speed listed on a speeding ticket is always measured relative to the ground. The
speed relative to the police officer would be different if the officer were moving
while making the speed measurement.

Suppose that Alex (at the origin of frame A in Fig. 4-18) is parked by the side
of a highway, watching car P (the “particle”) speed past. Barbara (at the origin of
frame B) is driving along the highway at constant speed and is also watching car P.
Suppose that they both measure the position of the car at a given moment. From
Fig. 4-18 we see that

Frame B moves past
frame A while both

observe P.

Xpa = Xpp t Xpa- (4-40)

y y

Frame B

The equation is read: “The coordinate xp, of P as measured by A is equal to the

coordinate xpg of P as measured by B plus the coordinate xg, of B as measured

by A.” Note how this reading is supported by the sequence of the subscripts.
Taking the time derivative of Eq. 4-40, we obtain

 

ha Xpa=XpatXpa

Figure 4-18 Alex (frame A) and Barbara
(frame B) watch car P, as both B and P
move at different velocities along the com-
mon x axis of the two frames. At the
instant shown, xz, is the coordinate of B
in the A frame. Also, P is at coordinate xpg
in the B frame and coordinate xp, = xpg +
Xpa in the A frame.

d d d
a (pa) = a (xp) + a (pa)
Thus, the velocity components are related by
Vpa = Vpp + Vas. (4-41)

This equation is read: “The velocity vp, of P as measured by A is equal to the
