44 CHAPTER 3 VECTORS

Sample Problem 3.01

In an orienteering class, you have the goal of moving as far
(straight-line distance) from base camp as possible by
making three straight-line moves. You may use the follow-
ing displacements in any order: (a) @, 2.0km due east
(directly toward the east); (b) B, 2.0 ea 30° north of east
(at an angle of 30° toward the north from due east);
(c) €, 1.0 km due west. Alternatively, you may substitute
either —b for b or —€ for ¢. What is the greatest distance
you can be from base camp at the end of the third displace-
ment? (We are not concerned about the direction.)

Ree ee Using a convenient scale, we draw vectors @,
—B,and —@ asin Fig. 3-9a. We then mentally slide the
al over the page, connecting three of them at a time
in head-to-tail arrangements to find their vector sum d.
The tail of the first vector represents base camp. The head
of the third vector represents the point at which you stop.
The vector sum d extends from the tail of the first vector
to the head of the third vector. Its magnitude d is your dis-
tance from base camp. Our goal here is to maximize that
base-camp distance.
We find that distance d is greatest for a head-to-tail
arrangement of vectors @, b, and —€. They can be in any

Adding vectors in a drawing, orienteering

 

—————>>
a 30° ___
aa This is the vector result
for adding those three
Scale of km vectors in any order.
0 1 =

(a) (d)
Figure 3-9 (a) Displacement vectors; three are to be used. (b) Your
distance from base camp is s greatest if you undergo
displacements @, b, and —@, in any order.

order, because their vector sum is the same for any order.
(Recall from Eq. 3-2 that vectors commute.) The order
shown in Fig. 3-9b is for the vector sum

d=b+@+(-@).

Using the scale given in Fig. 3-9a, we measure the length d of
this vector sum, finding

d=48m. (Answer)

Sample Problem 3.02 Finding components, airplane flight

A small airplane leaves an airport on an overcast day and is
later sighted 215 km away, in a direction making an angle of
22° east of due north. This means that the direction is not
due north (directly toward the north) but is rotated 22° to-
ward the east from due north. How far east and north is the
airplane from the airport when sighted?

Distance (km)

 

10 100
Distance (km)

Figure 3-10 A plane takes off from an airport at the origin and is
later sighted at P

KEY IDEA

 

We are given the magnitude (215 km) and the angle (22° east
of due north) of a vector and need to find the components
of the vector.

Calculations: We draw an xy coordinate system with the
positive direction of x due east and that of y due north (Fig.
3-10). For convenience, the origin is placed at the airport.
(We don’t have to do this. We could shift and misalign the
coordinate system but, given a choice, why make the prob-
lem more difficult?) The airplane’s displacement d points
from the origin to where the airplane is sighted.

To find the components of d, we use Eq. 3-5 with @ =
68° (= 90° — 22°):

dcos @ = (215 km)(cos 68°)

  

 

=81km (Answer)
, = dsin @ = (215 km)(sin 68°)
= 199 km ~ 2.0 x 10° km. (Answer)

Thus, the airplane is 81 km east and 2.0 x 10° km north of
the airport.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
