14 CHAPTER 2 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE

Positive direction

Negative direction

 

2-1 0 1 2 3

origin/

Figure 2-1 Position is determined on an
axis that is marked in units of length (here
meters) and that extends indefinitely in
opposite directions. The axis name, here x,
is always on the positive side of the origin.

Motion

The world, and everything in it, moves. Even seemingly stationary things, such as a
roadway, move with Earth’s rotation, Earth’s orbit around the Sun, the Sun’s orbit
around the center of the Milky Way galaxy, and that galaxy’s migration relative to
other galaxies. The classification and comparison of motions (called kinematics) is
often challenging. What exactly do you measure, and how do you compare?

Before we attempt an answer, we shall examine some general properties of
motion that is restricted in three ways.

1. The motion is along a straight line only. The line may be vertical, horizontal, or
slanted, but it must be straight.

2. Forces (pushes and pulls) cause motion but will not be discussed until
Chapter 5. In this chapter we discuss only the motion itself and changes in the
motion. Does the moving object speed up, slow down, stop, or reverse
direction? If the motion does change, how is time involved in the change?

3. The moving object is either a particle (by which we mean a point-like object
such as an electron) or an object that moves like a particle (such that every
portion moves in the same direction and at the same rate). A stiff pig slipping
down a straight playground slide might be considered to be moving like a par-
ticle; however, a tumbling tumbleweed would not.

Position and Displacement

To locate an object means to find its position relative to some reference point, of-
ten the origin (or zero point) of an axis such as the x axis in Fig. 2-1. The positive
direction of the axis is in the direction of increasing numbers (coordinates), which
is to the right in Fig. 2-1. The opposite is the negative direction.

For example, a particle might be located at x = 5 m, which means it is 5 m in
the positive direction from the origin. If it were at x = —5 m, it would be just as
far from the origin but in the opposite direction. On the axis, a coordinate of
—5m is less than a coordinate of —1m, and both coordinates are less than a
coordinate of +5 m.A plus sign for a coordinate need not be shown, but a minus
sign must always be shown.

A change from position x, to position x, is called a displacement Ax, where

Ax =%- %. (2-1)

(The symbol A, the Greek uppercase delta, represents a change in a quantity,
and it means the final value of that quantity minus the initial value.) When
numbers are inserted for the position values x, and x, in Eq. 2-1, a displacement
in the positive direction (to the right in Fig. 2-1) always comes out positive, and
a displacement in the opposite direction (left in the figure) always comes out
negative. For example, if the particle moves from x; = 5m to x, = 12 m, then
the displacement is Ax = (12 m) — (5 m) = +7 m. The positive result indicates
that the motion is in the positive direction. If, instead, the particle moves from
x; =5m tox, = 1m, then Ax = (1 m) — (5m) = —4 m. The negative result in-
dicates that the motion is in the negative direction.

The actual number of meters covered for a trip is irrelevant; displacement in-
volves only the original and final positions. For example, if the particle moves
from x = 5m out to x = 200 m and then back to x = 5 m, the displacement from
start to finish is Ax = (5m) — (5 m) = 0.

Signs. A plus sign for a displacement need not be shown, but a minus sign
must always be shown. If we ignore the sign (and thus the direction) of a displace-
ment, we are left with the magnitude (or absolute value) of the displacement. For
example, a displacement of Ax = —4 mhas a magnitude of 4 m.
