H A P T 3d

Motion Along a Straight Line

2-1 POSITION, DISPLACEMENT, AND AVERAGE VELOCITY

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to ...

2.01 Identify that if all parts of an object move in the same di-
rection and at the same rate, we can treat the object as if it
were a (point-like) particle. (This chapter is about the mo-
tion of such objects.)

2.02 Identify that the position of a particle is its location as
read ona scaled axis, such as an x axis.

2.03 Apply the relationship between a particle's
displacement and its initial and final positions.

Key Ideas

@ The position x of a particle on an x axis locates the particle
with respect to the origin, or zero point, of the axis.

@ The position is either positive or negative, according
to which side of the origin the particle is on, or zero if
the particle is at the origin. The positive direction on
an axis is the direction of increasing positive numbers;
the opposite direction is the negative direction on

the axis.

@ The displacement Ax of a particle is the change in its
position:
Ax = x) — x4.

@ Displacement is a vector quantity. It is positive if the
particle has moved in the positive direction of the x axis
and negative if the particle has moved in the negative
direction.

What Is Physics?

2.04 Apply the relationship between a particle's average
velocity, its displacement, and the time interval for that
displacement.

2.05 Apply the relationship between a particle's average
speed, the total distance it moves, and the time interval for
the motion.

2.06 Given a graph of a particle's position versus time,
determine the average velocity between any two particular
times.

@ When a particle has moved from position x, to position x,
during a time interval At = 4 — t, its average velocity during
that interval is
— Ae ye My
Yee Ap ht”

@ The algebraic sign of vy, indicates the direction of motion
(Vayg is a vector quantity). Average velocity does not depend
on the actual distance a particle moves, but instead depends

on its original and final positions.

@ Ona graph of x versus ft, the average velocity for a time in-
terval Aris the slope of the straight line connecting the points
on the curve that represent the two ends of the interval.

@ The average speed 8. of a particle during a time interval Ar
depends on the total distance the particle moves in that time

interval: .
_ total distance

Seg At

One purpose of physics is to study the motion of objects—how fast they move, for
example, and how far they move in a given amount of time. NASCAR engineers
are fanatical about this aspect of physics as they determine the performance of
their cars before and during a race. Geologists use this physics to measure
tectonic-plate motion as they attempt to predict earthquakes. Medical
researchers need this physics to map the blood flow through a patient when
diagnosing a partially closed artery, and motorists use it to determine how they
might slow sufficiently when their radar detector sounds a warning. There are
countless other examples. In this chapter, we study the basic physics of motion
where the object (race car, tectonic plate, blood cell, or any other object) moves
along a single axis. Such motion is called one-dimensional motion.

13
