106

CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

even if the bodies and the cord are accelerating and even if the cord runs around
a massless, frictionless pulley (Figs. 5-9b and c). Such a pulley has negligible mass
compared to the bodies and negligible friction on its axle opposing its rotation. If
the cord wraps halfway around a pulley, as in Fig. 5-9c, the net force on the pulley
from the cord has the magnitude 2T.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

The suspended body in Fig. 5-9c weighs 75 N.Is Tequal to, greater than, or less than
75 N when the body is moving upward (a) at constant speed, (b) at increasing speed,
and (c) at decreasing speed?

5-3 APPLYING NEWTON'S LAWS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

5.14 Identify Newton's third law of motion and third-law force pairs.
5.15 For an object that moves vertically or on a horizontal or inclined
plane, apply Newton's second law to a free-body diagram of the

object.

Key Ideas

5.16 For an arrangement where a system of several objects
moves rigidly together, draw a free-body diagram and
apply Newton's second law for the individual objects
and also for the system taken as a composite object.

 

@ The net force Fin ona body with mass 7 is related to the body's

acceleration @ by

Fret = ma,

which may be written in the component versions

 

Fras = may Frery = may and

Book B y Crate C

(a)

Fn
eo

B c
()

Fae

The force on B

due to C has the same
magnitude as the
force on C due to B.

Figure 5-10 (a) Book B leans against crate

C. (b) Forces Fic (the force on the book

from the crate) and Fic, (the force on the
crate from the book) have the same mag-
nitude and are opposite in direction.

e@ Ifa force Fy acts on body B due to body C, then there is
a force Fg on body C due to body B:

Feo = —Fep:

Fret The forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in directions.

 

Newton’s Third Law

Two bodies are said to interact when they push or pull on each other—that is,
when a force acts on each body due to the other body. For example, suppose you
position a book B so it leans against a crate C (Fig. 5-10a). Then the book and
crate interact: There is a horizontal force Foc on the book from the crate (or due
to the crate) and a horizontal force Fy on the crate from the book (or due to the
book). This pair of forces is shown in Fig. 5-10b. Newton’s third law states that

o Newton's Third Law: When two bodies interact, the forces on the bodies from each
other are always equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.

For the book and crate, we can write this law as the scalar relation
Fc = Fog (equal magnitudes)
oras the vector relation

Fisc = Fen (5-15)

where the minus sign means that these two forces are in opposite directions. We
can call the forces between two interacting bodies a third-law force pair. When

(equal magnitudes and opposite directions),
