2-1 POSITION, DISPLACEMENT, AND AVERAGE VELOCITY 15

  

This is a graph
of position x x(m)
versus time —~
for a stationary ;
Figure 22 The graph of Plt
X(t) for an armadillo that
is stationary at —2m.
The value of x is —2m Same position
for all times ft. for any time.

Displacement is an example of a vector quantity, which is a quantity that has
both a direction and a magnitude. We explore vectors more fully in Chapter 3, but
here all we need is the idea that displacement has two features: (1) Its magnitude
is the distance (such as the number of meters) between the original and final po-
sitions. (2) Its direction, from an original position to a final position, can be repre-
sented by a plus sign or a minus sign if the motion is along a single axis.

Here is the first of many checkpoints where you can check your understanding
with a bit of reasoning. The answers are in the back of the book.

lv] Checkpoint 1

Here are three pairs of initial and final positions, respectively, along an x axis. Which
pairs give a negative displacement: (a) —3 m, +5 m;(b) 3m, —7 m; (c)7 m, —3m?

Average Velocity and Average Speed

A compact way to describe position is with a graph of position x plotted as a func-
tion of time t—a graph of x(¢). (The notation x(t) represents a function x of t, not
the product x times f.) As a simple example, Fig. 2-2 shows the position function
x(t) for a stationary armadillo (which we treat as a particle) over a7 s time inter-

val. The animal’s position stays atx = —2 m.
Figure 2-3 is more interesting, because it involves motion. The armadillo is
apparently first noticed at t= 0 when it is at the position x = —5 m. It moves

          
 
    
 

Atx=2mwhent=4s.
Plotted here.

This is a graph
of position x

versus time je
for a moving
object.

It is at position x=-5 m
when time t=0 s. Atx=Omwhent=3s.
Those data are plotted here. Plotted here.

5 0 ey 5 0 ey

Os 38

  
 

Figure 2-3 The graph of x(t) for a moving armadillo. The path associated with the graph is also shown, at three times.
