102 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

5-2 SOME PARTICULAR FORCES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

5.08 Determine the magnitude and direction of the gravita-
tional force acting on a body with a given mass, at a location
with a given free-fall acceleration.

5.09 Identify that the weight of a body is the magnitude of the
net force required to prevent the body from falling freely, as
measured from the reference frame of the ground.

5.10 Identify that a scale gives an object's weight when the
measurement is done in an inertial frame but not in an ac-
celerating frame, where it gives an apparent weight.

Key Ideas

5.11 Determine the magnitude and direction of the normal
force on an object when the object is pressed or pulled
onto a surface.

5.12 Identify that the force parallel to the surface is a frictional
force that appears when the object slides or attempts to
slide along the surface.

5.13 Identify that a tension force is said to pull at both ends of
acord (or a cord-like object) when the cord is taut.

 

@ A gravitational force F, on a body is a pull by another body.
In most situations in this book, the other body is Earth or

some other astronomical body. For Earth, the force is directed
down toward the ground, which is assumed to be an inertial
frame. With that assumption, the magnitude of F, is

R= mg,
where m is the body's mass and g is the magnitude of the
free-fall acceleration.

@ The weight W of a body is the magnitude of the upward force
needed to balance the gravitational force on the body. A body's
weight is related to the body's mass by

W=mg.

@ Anormal force Fy is the force ona body from a surface
against which the body presses. The normal force is always
perpendicular to the surface.

@ A frictional force f is the force on a body when the body
slides or attempts to slide along a surface. The force is always
parallel to the surface and directed so as to oppose the slid-
ing. On a frictionless surface, the frictional force is negligible.
@ When a cord is under tension, each end of the cord pulls
on a body. The pull is directed along the cord, away from the
point of attachment to the body. For a massless cord (a cord
with negligible mass), the pulls at both ends of the cord have
the same magnitude T, even if the cord runs around a mass-
less, frictionless pulley (a pulley with negligible mass and
negligible friction on its axle to oppose its rotation).

 

Some Particular Forces

The Gravitational Force

A gravitational force F, ona body is a certain type of pull that is directed toward
a second body. In these early chapters, we do not discuss the nature of this force
and usually consider situations in which the second body is Earth. Thus, when we
speak of the gravitational force F, on a body, we usually mean a force that pulls
on it directly toward the center of Earth—that is, directly down toward the
ground. We shall assume that the ground is an inertial frame.

Free Fall. Suppose a body of mass m is in free fall with the free-fall accelera-
tion of magnitude g. Then, if we neglect the effects of the air, the only force acting
on the body is the gravitational force F. ‘We can relate this downward force and
downward acceleration with Newton’s second law (F = ma). We place a vertical
y axis along the body’s path, with the positive direction upward. For this axis,
Newton’s second law can be written in the form Fy... = may, which, in our

situation, becomes

or

—F, =m(~8)

F, = mg. (5-8)

In words, the magnitude of the gravitational force is equal to the product mg.
