80 CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

4-7 RELATIVE MOTION IN TWO DIMENSIONS

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

frames that move relative to each other at constant velocity
and in two dimensions.

4.19 Apply the relationship between a particle's position, ve-
locity, and acceleration as measured from two reference

Key Idea

@ When two frames of reference A and B are moving relative Vea = Veg + Vax
to each other at constant velocity, the velocity of a particle

Pas measured by an observer in frame A usually differs from
that measured from frame B. The two measured velocities are

related by

where V;,,, is the velocity of B with respect to A. Both
observers measure the same acceleration for the particle:

Apa = App.

Relative Motion in Two Dimensions

Our two observers are again watching a moving particle P from the origins of refer-
ence frames A and B, while B moves at a constant velocity Vz, relative to A. (The
corresponding axes of these two frames remain parallel.) Figure 4-19 shows a cer-
tain instant during the motion. At that instant, the position vector of the origin of B
relative to the origin of A is 7'g4. Also, the position vectors of particle P are 7 p, rela-
tive to the origin of A and 7'pg relative to the origin of B. From the arrangement of
heads and tails of those three position vectors, we can relate the vectors with

 

Frame A

Tra = Trp + Fra. (4-43)

Figure 4-19 Frame B has the constant
two-dimensional velocity Vp, relative to
frame A. The position vector of B relative
to A is Fg,4. The position vectors of parti-
cle Pare Fp, relative to A and F pz
relative to B.

By taking the time derivative of this equation, we can relate the velocities Vp4
and Vp of particle P relative to our observers:
Vea = Vw + Vea. (4-44)

By taking the time derivative of this relation, we can relate the accelerations @p4
and @pg of the particle P relative to our observers. However, note that because
Vpa is constant, its time derivative is zero. Thus, we get

(4-45)
As for one-dimensional motion, we have the following rule: Observers on differ-

ent frames of reference that move at constant velocity relative to each other will
measure the same acceleration for a moving particle.

Sample Problem 4.08 Relative motion, two dimensional, airplanes

In Fig. 4-20a, a plane moves due east while the pilot points
the plane somewhat south of east, toward a steady wind that
blows to the northeast. The plane has velocity Vpy relative
to the wind, with an airspeed (speed relative to the wind)
of 215 km/h, directed at angle @ south of east. The wind
has velocity Vw relative to the ground with speed
65.0 km/h, directed 20.0° east of north. What is the magni-
tude of the velocity Vpg of the plane relative to the ground,
and what is 6?

KEY IDEAS

 

The situation is like the one in Fig. 4-19. Here the moving par-
ticle P is the plane, frame A is attached to the ground (call it
G), and frame B is “attached” to the wind (call it W). We need
a vector diagram like Fig. 4-19 but with three velocity vectors.

Calculations: First we construct a sentence that relates the
three vectors shown in Fig. 4-20b:
