76 CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

4-5 UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

4.16 Sketch the path taken in uniform circular motion and ex-
plain the velocity and acceleration vectors (magnitude and
direction) during the motion.

Key Ideas

e@ Ifa particle travels along a circle or circular arc of radius r at
constant speed v, it is said to be in uniform circular motion
and has an acceleration d@ of constant magnitude

4.17 Apply the relationships between the radius of the circu-
lar path, the period, the particle's speed, and the particle's
acceleration magnitude.

arc, and @ is said to be centripetal. The time for the particle to
complete a circle is

T= ar

v2
a=—.
r

v
T is called the period of revolution, or simply the period, of the

The direction of @ is toward the center of the circle or circular motion.

The acceleration vector
always points toward the
center.

The velocity
vector is always
tangent to the path.

Figure 4-16 Velocity and acceleration
vectors for uniform circular motion.

 

Uniform Circular Motion

A particle is in uniform circular motion if it travels around a circle or a circular
arc at constant (uniform) speed. Although the speed does not vary, the particle is
accelerating because the velocity changes in direction.

Figure 4-16 shows the relationship between the velocity and acceleration
vectors at various stages during uniform circular motion. Both vectors have
constant magnitude, but their directions change continuously. The velocity is
always directed tangent to the circle in the direction of motion. The accelera-
tion is always directed radially inward. Because of this, the acceleration associ-
ated with uniform circular motion is called a centripetal (meaning “center seek-
ing”) acceleration. As we prove next, the magnitude of this acceleration @ is

re]

a =— (centripetal acceleration), (4-34)
r

where r is the radius of the circle and v is the speed of the particle.
In addition, during this acceleration at constant speed, the particle travels the
circumference of the circle (a distance of 27) in time

2
ea rere (4-35)
v
T is called the period of revolution, or simply the period, of the motion. It is, in
general, the time for a particle to go around a closed path exactly once.

Proof of Eq. 4-34

To find the magnitude and direction of the acceleration for uniform circular
motion, we consider Fig. 4-17. In Fig. 4-17a, particle p moves at constant speed
v around a circle of radius r. At the instant shown, p has coordinates x, and y,.

Recall from Module 4-2 that the velocity ¥ of a moving particle is always
tangent to the particle’s path at the particle’s position. In Fig. 4-17a, that means
¥ is perpendicular to a radius r drawn to the particle’s position. Then the angle
6 that V makes with a vertical at p equals the angle 6 that radius r makes with
the x axis.
