70 CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

4-4 proJectiLe motion

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

4.13 Ona sketch of the path taken in projectile motion,
explain the magnitudes and directions of the velocity
and acceleration components during the flight.

Key Ideas

4.14 Given the launch velocity in either magnitude-angle or
unit-vector notation, calculate the particle's position, dis-
placement, and velocity at a given instant during the flight.

4.15 Given data for an instant during the flight, calculate the
launch velocity.

 

@ In projectile motion, a particle is launched into the air witha
speed vp and at an angle 6) (as measured from a horizontal x
axis). During flight, its horizontal acceleration is zero and its
vertical acceleration is —g (downward on a vertical y axis).

@ The equations of motion for the particle (while in flight) can
be written as

@ The trajectory (path) of a particle in projectile motion is par-
abolic and is given by

gx

y = (tan @)x — 2(v9 08 OH)?”

if xp and yo are zero.
@ The particle's horizontal range R, which is the horizontal

X — Xo = (vo cos W)t,
Y — Ww = (vosin @)t — 5g,
Vy = vosin 0 — gt
vy = (vosin 6) — 2g(y — yo).

distance from the launch point to the point at which the parti-
cle retums to the launch height, is

2
R =~ sin 26.
8

 

Projectile Motion

We next consider a special case of two-dimensional motion: A particle moves ina
vertical plane with some initial velocity Vp but its acceleration is always the free-
fall acceleration g, which is downward. Such a particle is called a projectile (mean-
ing that it is projected or launched), and its motion is called projectile motion. A
projectile might be a tennis ball (Fig. 4-8) or baseball in flight, but it is not a duck
in flight. Many sports involve the study of the projectile motion of a ball. For ex-
ample, the racquetball player who discovered the Z-shot in the 1970s easily won
his games because of the ball’s perplexing flight to the rear of the court. ee
Our goal here is to analyze projectile motion using the tools for two-
dimensional motion described in Module 4-1 through 4-3 and making the
assumption that air has no effect on the projectile. Figure 4-9, which we shall ana-
lyze soon, shows the path followed by a projectile when the air has no effect. The
projectile is launched with an initial velocity Vp that can be written as
Vo = Vort + Voy). (4-19)
The components vp, and vp, can then be found if we know the angle @ between Vo
and the positive x direction:

Vox = Vo Cos A and Voy = vo sin A. (4-20)

   

During its two-dimensional motion, the projectile’s position vector 7 and velocity
vector V change continuously, but its acceleration vector @ is constant and always
directed vertically downward.The projectile has no horizontal acceleration.

Projectile motion, like that in Figs. 4-8 and 4-9, looks complicated, but we
have the following simplifying feature (known from experiment):

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 4-8 A stroboscopic photograph of
a yellow tennis ball bouncing off a hard
surface. Between impacts, the ball has

projectile motion.

“©” In projectile motion, the horizontal motion and the vertical motion are indepen-

dent of each other; that is, neither motion affects the other.
