ss CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

tip’s speed and (c) the magnitude of its acceleration? (d) What is
the period of the motion?

°59 ILw A woman rides a carnival Ferris wheel at radius 15 m,
completing five turns about its horizontal axis every minute. What
are (a) the period of the motion, the (b) magnitude and (c) direction
of her centripetal acceleration at the highest point, and the (d) mag-
nitude and (e) direction of her centripetal acceleration at the lowest
point?

°60 A centripetal-acceleration addict rides in uniform circular
motion with radius r = 3.00 m. At one instant his acceleration is
@ = (6.00 m/s”)i + (—4.00 m/s”). At that instant, what are the val-
ues of (a) ¥+@ and (b) F x @?

°61 When a large star becomes a supernova, its core may be
compressed so tightly that it becomes a neutron star, with a radius of
about 20 km (about the size of the San Francisco area). If a neutron
star rotates once every second, (a) what is the speed of a particle on
the star’s equator and (b) what is the magnitude of the particle’s cen-
tripetal acceleration? (c) If the neutron star rotates faster, do the an-
swers to (a) and (b) increase, decrease, or remain the same?

°62 What is the magnitude of the acceleration of a sprinter run-
ning at 10 m/s when rounding a turn of radius 25 m?

63 © At f= 2.00s, the acceleration of a particle in counter-
clockwise circular motion is (6.00 m/s?)i + (4.00 m/s’)j. It moves at
constant speed. At time f, = 5.00s, the particle’s acceleration is
(4.00 m/s?)i + (—6.00 m/s*)j. What is the radius of the path taken
by the particle if t, — f; is less than one period?

 

64 @ A particle moves horizontally in uniform circular motion,
over a horizontal xy plane. At one instant, it moves through the
point at coordinates (4.00 m, 4.00 m) with a velocity of —5.001 m/s
and an acceleration of +12.5j m/s’. What are the (a) x and (b) y
coordinates of the center of the circular path?

65 A purse at radius 2.00 m and a wallet at radius 3.00 m travel
in uniform circular motion on the floor of a merry-go-round as the
ride turns. They are on the same radial line. At one instant, the ac-
celeration of the purse is (2.00 m/s?) + (4.00 m/s?)j. At that instant
and in unit-vector notation, what is the acceleration of the wallet?

66 A particle moves along a circular path over a horizontal xy
coordinate system, at constant speed. At time 4; = 4.00 s,it is at point
(5.00m, 6.00m) with velocity (3.00 m/s)j and acceleration in the
positive x direction. At time 5 = 10.0s, it has velocity (—3.00 m/s)i
and acceleration in the positive y direction. What are the (a) x and
(b) y coordinates of the center of the circular path if f — f; is less
than one period?

“67 SSM WWW A boy whirls a stone in a horizontal circle of
radius 1.5m and at height 2.0 m above level ground. The string
breaks, and the stone flies off horizontally and strikes the ground
after traveling a horizontal distance of 10 m. What is the magnitude
of the centripetal acceleration of the stone during the circular
motion?

68 © A cat rides a merry-go-round turning with uniform
circular motion. At time 1; = 2.005, the cat’s velocity is ¥; =
(3.00 m/s)i + (4.00 m/s)j, measured on a horizontal xy coordinate
system. At f = 5.00s, the cat’s velocity is ¥) = (—3.00 m/s)i +
(—4.00 m/s)j. What are (a) the magnitude of the cat’s centripetal
acceleration and (b) the cat’s average acceleration during the time
interval t) — t,, which is less than one period?

Module 4-6 Relative Motion in One Dimension

°69 A cameraman on a pickup truck is traveling westward at
20kmv/h while he records a cheetah that is moving westward
30 km/h faster than the truck. Suddenly, the cheetah stops, turns,
and then runs at 45 km/h eastward, as measured by a suddenly
nervous crew member who stands alongside the cheetah’s path. The
change in the animal’s velocity takes 2.0 s. What are the (a) magni-
tude and (b) direction of the animal’s acceleration according to the
cameraman and the (c) magnitude and (d) direction according to
the nervous crew member?

°70 A boat is traveling upstream in the positive direction of an x
axis at 14 km/h with respect to the water of a river. The water is
flowing at 9.0 km/h with respect to the ground. What are the (a)
magnitude and (b) direction of the boat’s velocity with respect to
the ground? A child on the boat walks from front to rear at
6.0 km/h with respect to the boat. What are the (c) magnitude and
(d) direction of the child’s velocity with respect to the ground?

“71 A suspicious-looking man runs as fast as he can along a
moving sidewalk from one end to the other, taking 2.50 s. Then se-
curity agents appear, and the man runs as fast as he can back along
the sidewalk to his starting point, taking 10.0 s. What is the ratio of
the man’s running speed to the sidewalk’s speed?

Module 4-7 Relative Motion in Two Dimensions

+72 A rugby player runs with the ball directly toward his
opponent's goal, along the positive direction of an x axis. He can
legally pass the ball to a teammate as long as the ball’s velocity rela-
tive to the field does not have a positive x component. Suppose the
player runs at speed 4.0 m/s relative to the field while he passes the
ball with velocity Vgp relative to himself. If Vgp has magnitude
6.0 m/s, what is the smallest angle it can have for the pass to be legal?

“73 Two highways intersect as shown in Fig. 4-46. At the instant
shown, a police car P is distance dp = 800 m from the intersection
and moving at speed vp = 80 km/h. Motorist M is distance dy =
600 m from the intersection and moving at speed vy = 60 km/h.

 

 

Figure 4-46 Problem 73.

(a) In unit-vector notation, what is the velocity of the motorist
with respect to the police car? (b) For the instant shown in Fig. 4-46,
what is the angle between the velocity found in (a) and the line of
sight between the two cars? (c) If the cars maintain their veloci-
ties, do the answers to (a) and (b) change as the cars move nearer
the intersection?
