82 CHAPTER 4 MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONS

Projectile Motion Projectile motion is the motion of a particle
that is launched with an initial velocity Vp. During its flight, the par-
ticle’s horizontal acceleration is zero and its vertical acceleration is
the free-fall acceleration —g. (Upward is taken to be a positive di-
rection.) If Vy is expressed as a magnitude (the speed vp) and an an-
gle @) (measured from the horizontal), the particle's equations of
motion along the horizontal x axis and vertical y axis are

Xx — xy = (vo cos B)t, (4-21)
Y — Y= (vo sin O)t — ge, (4-22)
Vy = vo sin  — gt, (4-23)
v2 = (vy sin &)? — 2g(y — yy). (4-24)

The trajectory (path) of a particle in projectile motion is parabolic
andis given by
gx?

2(v9 cos @)?” 425)

y = (tan @)x —
if x) and yy of Eqs. 4-21 to 4-24 are zero. The particle’s horizontal
range R, which is the horizontal distance from the launch point to
the point at which the particle returns to the launch height, is

2

R= > sin 26). (4-26)
<@Qu estions
1 Figure 4-21 shows the path taken by
a skunk foraging for trash food, from
initial point i. The skunk took the same
time T to go from each labeled point to
b c

the next along its path. Rank points a, b, ait
and c according to the magnitude of the
average velocity of the skunk to reach
them from initial point i, greatest first.
Figure 4-21

2 Figure 4-22 shows the initial posi-
Question 1.

tion i and the final position f of a parti-
cle. What are the (a) initial position
vector 7; and (b) final position vector 7}, both in unit-vector nota-
tion? (c) What is the x component of displacement A7?

    

 
   

t
‘3m >>
73m
y

Figure 4-22 Question 2.
3 28 When Paris was shelled from 100 km away with the WWI

long-range artillery piece “Big Bertha,” the shells were fired at an
angle greater than 45° to give them a greater range, possibly even

Uniform Circular Motion If a particle travels along a circle or
circular are of radius r at constant speed v, it is said to be in uniform
circular motion and has an acceleration @ of constant magnitude

v

a=—.

(4-34)

The direction of @ is toward the center of the circle or circular arc,
and @ is said to be centripetal. The time for the particle to complete
acircle is

=. -35
T 7 (4-35)
T is called the period of revolution, or simply the period, of the
motion.

Relative Motion When two frames of reference A and B are
moving relative to each other at constant velocity, the velocity of a par-
ticle P as measured by an observer in frame A usually differs from that
measured from frame B. The two measured velocities are related by

Vpa = Ven + Vpas (4-44)
where Vz, is the velocity of B with respect to A. Both observers
measure the same acceleration for the particle:

pa = App.

(4-45)

twice as long as at 45°. Does that result mean that the air density at
high altitudes increases with altitude or decreases?

4 You are to launch a rocket, from just above the ground, with
one of the following initial velocity vectors: (1) ¥y = 20i + 70),
(2) Vp = —201 + 70}, (3) Vy = 201 — 70}, (4) Vy = —201 — 70). In
your coordinate system, x runs along level ground and y increases
upward. (a) Rank the vectors according to the launch speed of the
projectile, greatest first. (b) Rank the vectors according to the time
of flight of the projectile, greatest first.

5 Figure 4-23 shows three situations in which identical projectiles
are launched (at the same level) at identical initial speeds and an-
gles. The projectiles do not land on the same terrain, however.
Rank the situations according to the final speeds of the projectiles
just before they land, greatest first.

Oa

() oO
Figure 4-23 Question 5.

6 The only good use of a fruitcake

is in catapult practice. Curve 1 in

Fig. 4-24 gives the height y of a cata-

pulted fruitcake versus the angle @

between its velocity vector and its

acceleration vector during flight. (a)

Which of the lettered points on that

curve corresponds to the landing of + * @
the fruitcake on the ground? (b)

Curve 2 is a similar plot for the same Figure 4-24 Question 6.
