110 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

Sample Problem 5.04 Cord accelerates box up a ramp

Many students consider problems involving ramps (inclined
planes) to be especially hard. The difficulty is probably visual
because we work with (a) a tilted coordinate system and (b) the
components of the gravitational force, not the full force. Here is
a typical example with all the tilting and angles explained. (In
WileyPLUS, the figure is available as an animation with
voiceover.) In spite of the tilt, the key idea is to apply Newton’s
second law to the axis along which the motion occurs.

In Fig. 5-15a, a cord pulls a box of sea biscuits up along a
frictionless plane inclined at angle @ = 30.0°. The box has
mass m = 5.00 kg, and the force from the cord has magni-
tude T = 25.0 N. What is the box’s acceleration a along the
inclined plane?

 

KEY IDEA

 

The acceleration along the plane is set by the force compo-
nents along the plane (not by force components perpendi-

Figure §-15 (a) A box is pulled up a plane by a
cord. (b) The three forces acting on the

box: the cord’s force T; the gravitational force
F,, and the normal force Fy. (c)(i) Finding
the force components along the plane and
perpendicular to it. In WileyPLUS, this figure
is available as an animation with voiceover.

This is a right
triangle.

   

f
@
( @

The net of these
forces determines

l\ the acceleration. Fz
mg cos 8 7 Oe
mg

  

eng sin 8

(g) (A)

The box accelerates.

cular to the plane), as expressed by Newton’s second law
(Eq. 5-1).

Calculations: We need to write Newton’s second law for
motion along an axis. Because the box moves along the in-
clined plane, placing an x axis along the plane seems reason-
able (Fig. 5-15b). (There is nothing wrong with using our
usual coordinate system, but the expressions for compo-
nents would be a lot messier because of the misalignment of
the x axis with the motion.)

After choosing a coordinate system, we draw a free-
body diagram with a dot representing the box (Fig. 5-15b).
Then we draw all the vectors for the forces acting on the box,
with the tails of the vectors anchored on the dot. (Drawing
the vectors willy-nilly on the diagram can easily lead to errors,
especially on exams, so always anchor the tails.)

Force T from the cord is up the plane and has magni-

tude T = 25.0 N. The gravitational force F, is downward (of

 

  
 

  
 

Cord's pull

Gravitational
force

Perpendicular

component of Adjacent leg

N Fy }\ (use cos 0)
z Hypotenuse
3
ie Parallel : Opposite leg
(2) component of () (use sine)
Fe

A These forces
merely balance.
=

  

@
