curve has a positive derivative (the slope is positive), which means that a(t) is
positive. When the cab slows to a stop, the derivative and slope of the v(t)
curve are negative; that is, a(t) is negative.

Next compare the slopes of the v(t) curve during the two acceleration peri-
ods. The slope associated with the cab’s slowing down (commonly called “decel-
eration”) is steeper because the cab stops in half the time it took to get up to
speed. The steeper slope means that the magnitude of the deceleration is larger
than that of the acceleration, as indicated in Fig. 2-6c.

Sensations. The sensations you would feel while riding in the cab of
Fig. 2-6 are indicated by the sketched figures at the bottom. When the cab first
accelerates, you feel as though you are pressed downward; when later the cab is
braked to a stop, you seem to be stretched upward. In between, you feel nothing
special. In other words, your body reacts to accelerations (it is an accelerometer)
but not to velocities (it is not a speedometer). When you are in a car traveling at
90 km/h or an airplane traveling at 900 km/h, you have no bodily awareness of
the motion. However, if the car or plane quickly changes velocity, you may be-
come keenly aware of the change, perhaps even frightened by it. Part of the thrill
of an amusement park ride is due to the quick changes of velocity that you un-
dergo (you pay for the accelerations, not for the speed). A more extreme example
is shown in the photographs of Fig. 2-7, which were taken while a rocket sled was

rapidly accelerated along a track and then rapidly braked to a stop. =
g Units. Large accelerations are sometimes expressed in terms of g units, with
lg =9.8m/s? (g unit). (2-10)

(As we shall discuss in Module 2-5, g is the magnitude of the acceleration of a
falling object near Earth’s surface.) On a roller coaster, you may experience brief
accelerations up to 3g, which is (3)(9.8 m/s’), or about 29 m/s”, more than enough
to justify the cost of the ride.

Signs. In common language, the sign of an acceleration has a nonscientific
meaning: positive acceleration means that the speed of an object is increasing, and
negative acceleration means that the speed is decreasing (the object is decelerat-
ing). In this book, however, the sign of an acceleration indicates a direction, not

Figure 2-7

Colonel J.P. Stapp in
a rocket sled as it is
brought up to high
speed (acceleration
out of the page) and
then very rapidly
braked (acceleration
into the page).

Courtesy U.S. Air Force

2-3 ACCELERATION

21

 
