46 CHAPTER 3 VECTORS

3-2 unit VECTORS, ADDING VECTORS BY COMPONENTS

 

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...
3.06 Convert a vector between magnitude-angle and unit- 3.08 Identify that, for a given vector, rotating the coordinate

vector notations.

system about the origin can change the vector’s compo-

3.07 Add and subtract vectors in magnitude-angle notation nents but not the vector itself.

and in unit-vector notation.

Key Ideas

@ Unit vectors i

 

 

, J, and k have magnitudes of unity and are in which ai, ay}, and ak are the vector components of @ and
directed in the positive directions of the x, y,

and z axes, ,, ay, and a, are its scalar components.

respectively, in a right-handed coordinate system. We can @ To add vectors in component form, we use the rules

write a vector @ in terms of unit vectors as

G@=ait+aj tak,

The unit vectors point
along axes.

 

Figure 313. Unit vectors i,j, and K define the
directions of a right-handed coordinate
system.

Figure 3-14 (a) The vector components
of vector @. (b) The vector components.
of vector b.

r=a+b, ty=ay+by r,=a,+b,

Here @ and B are the vectors to be added, and F is the vector
sum. Note that we add components axis by axis.

Unit Vectors

A unit vector is a vector that has a magnitude of exactly 1 and points in a particu-
lar direction. It lacks both dimension and unit. Its sole purpose is to point—that
is, to specify a direction. The unit vectors in the positive directions of the x, y,and
z axes are labeled i,j, and k, where the hat * is used instead of an overhead arrow
as for other vectors (Fig. 3-13). The arrangement of axes in Fig. 3-13 is said to be a
right-handed coordinate system. The system remains right-handed if it is rotated
rigidly. We use such coordinate systems exclusively in this book.

Unit vectors are very useful for expressing other vectors; for example, we can

express @ and Bb of Figs. 3-7 and 3-8 as
G=ait+aj (3-7)
and B= bit byj. (3-8)

These two equations are illustrated in Fig. 3-14. The quantities a,i and aj are vec-
tors, called the vector components of @. The quantities a, and ay are scalars, called
the scalar components of @ (or, as before, simply its components).

This is the y vector component.

   

This is the x vector
(@ component. O)

Adding Vectors by Components

‘We can add vectors geometrically on a sketch or directly on a vector-capable
calculator. A third way is to combine their components axis by axis.
