the intersection and the duration of the yellow light are (a) 40 m and
2.8s,and (b) 32 mand 1.8 s? Give an answer of brake, continue, either
(if either strategy works), or neither (if neither strategy works and the
yellow duration is inappropriate).

"47@ As two trains move Vy

along a track, their conductors
suddenly notice that they are
headed toward each other.
Figure 2-31 gives their velocities
v as functions of time ¢ as the
conductors slow the trains. The
figure’s vertical scaling is set by
v, = 40.0 m&. The slowing
processes begin when the trains are 200 m apart. What is their separa-
tion when both trains have stopped?

 

Figure 2-31 Problem 41.

429@ You are arguing over a cell phone while trailing an
unmarked police car by 25 m; both your car and the police car are
traveling at 110 knv/h. Your argument diverts your attention from
the police car for 2.0 s (long enough for you to look at the phone
and yell,“I won't do that!”). At the beginning of that 2.0 s, the po-
lice officer begins braking suddenly at 5.0 m/s. (a) What is the sep-
aration between the two cars when your attention finally returns?
Suppose that you take another 0.40s to realize your danger and
begin braking, (b) If you too brake at 5.0 m/s*, what is your speed
when you hit the police car?

+43 @© ~ When a high-speed passenger train traveling at
161 km/h rounds a bend, the engineer is shocked to see that a
locomotive has improperly entered onto the track from a siding
and is a distance D = 676 m ahead (Fig. 2-32). The locomotive is
moving at 29.0 knv/h. The engineer of the high-speed train imme-
diately applies the brakes. (a) What must be the magnitude of the
resulting constant deceleration if a collision is to be just avoided?
(b) Assume that the engineer is at x = 0 when, at t = 0, he first
spots the locomotive. Sketch x(t) curves for the locomotive and
high-speed train for the cases in which a collision is just avoided
and is not quite avoided.

D

 

. VUE
High-speed —

train Locomotive

rover

Figure 2-32 Problem 43.

Module 2-5 Free-Fall Acceleration

44 When startled, an armadillo will leap upward. Suppose it
rises 0.544 m in the first 0.200 s. (a) What is its initial speed as it
leaves the ground? (b) What is its speed at the height of 0.544 m?
(c) How much higher does it go?

°45 SSM www (a) With what speed must a ball be thrown verti-
cally from ground level to rise to a maximum height of 50m?
(b) How long will it be in the air? (c) Sketch graphs of y, v, and a
versus f for the ball. On the first two graphs, indicate the time at
which 50 mis reached.

PROBLEMS 35

°46 Raindrops fall 1700 m from a cloud to the ground. (a) If they
were not slowed by air resistance, how fast would the drops be
moving when they struck the ground? (b) Would it be safe to walk
outside during a rainstorm?

°47 SSM Ata construction site a pipe wrench struck the ground
with a speed of 24 m/s. (a) From what height was it inadvertently
dropped? (b) How long was it falling? (c) Sketch graphs of y, v,
and a versus ¢ for the wrench.

°48 A hoodlum throws a stone vertically downward with an ini-
tial speed of 12.0 m/s from the roof of a building, 30.0 m above the
ground. (a) How long does it take the stone to reach the ground?
(b) What is the speed of the stone at impact?

°49 ssM A hot-air balloon is ascending at the rate of 12 m/s and
is 80 m above the ground when a package is dropped over the side.
(a) How long does the package take to reach the ground? (b) With
what speed does it hit the ground?

*°50 At time ¢ = 0, apple 1 is dropped from a bridge onto a road-
way beneath the bridge; somewhat later, apple 2 is thrown down
from the same height. Figure 2-33 gives the vertical positions y of
the apples versus f during the falling, until both apples have hit the
roadway. The scaling is set by t, = 2.0 s. With approximately what
speed is apple 2 thrown down?

 

Figure 2-33 Problem 50.

“51 As a runaway scientific bal-
loon ascends at 19.6 m/s, one of its
instrument packages breaks free of a
harness and free-falls. Figure 2-34
gives the vertical velocity of the
package versus time, from before it
breaks free to when it reaches the
ground. (a) What maximum height
above the break-free point does it
rise? (b) How high is the break-free
point above the ground?

 

Figure 2-34 Problem 51.

52 © A bolt is dropped from a bridge under construction,
falling 90 m to the valley below the bridge. (a) In how much
time does it pass through the last 20% of its fall? What is its speed
(b) when it begins that last 20% of its fall and (c) when it reaches
the valley beneath the bridge?

“53 SSM ILW A key falls from a bridge that is 45 m above the
water. It falls directly into a model boat, moving with constant
velocity, that is 12 m from the point of impact when the key is re-
leased. What is the speed of the boat?

54 @ A stone is dropped into a river from a bridge 43.9 m
above the water. Another stone is thrown vertically down 1.00s
after the first is dropped. The stones strike the water at the same
time. (a) What is the initial speed of the second stone? (b) Plot
velocity versus time on a graph for each stone, taking zero time as
the instant the first stone is released.
