Average Speed The average speed s,,, of a particle during a
time interval At depends on the total distance the particle moves in
that time interval:

total distance
At '

(23)

 

Instantaneous Velocity The instantaneous velocity (or sim-
ply velocity) v of a moving particle is

Ax dx
= —=—, 2-4)
wo At dt @-4)
where Ay and Atare defined by Eq. 2-2. The instantaneous velocity
(at a particular time) may be found as the slope (at that particular
time) of the graph of x versus ¢. Speed is the magnitude of instanta-
neous velocity.

Average Acceleration Average acceleration is the ratio of a
change in velocity Av to the time interval Arin which the change occurs:

_ av
se At”

The algebraic sign indicates the direction of dyy,.

a (2-7)

Instantaneous Acceleration Instantaneous acceleration (or
simply acceleration) a is the first time derivative of velocity v(t)

<Questions

1 Figure 2-16 gives the velocity ofa y

particle moving on an x axis. What

are (a) the initial and (b) the final di-

rections of travel? (c) Does the parti- t
cle stop momentarily? (d) Is the ac-

celeration positive or negative? (e) Is

it constant or varying?

2 Figure 2-17 gives the accelera-
tion a() of a Chihuahua as it chases
a German shepherd along an axis. In
which of the time periods indicated
does the Chihuahua move at constant speed?

Figure 2-16 Question 1.

 

Figure 2-17 Question 2.

3 Figure 2-18 shows four paths along
which objects move from a starting
point to a final point, all in the same
time interval. The paths pass over a
grid of equally spaced straight lines.
Rank the paths according to (a) the av-
erage velocity of the objects and (b)
the average speed of the objects, great-
est first.

 

 

 

 

Figure 2-18 Question 3.

4 Figure 2-19 is a graph of a parti-
cle’s position along an x axis versus time. (a) At time ¢ = 0, what

QUESTIONS 31

and the second time derivative of position x(t):
dv _ d’x

dt de"
On a graph of v versus /, the acceleration a at any time ris the slope
of the curve at the point that represents f.

a=

(2-8,2-9)

Constant Acceleration The five equations in Table 2-1
describe the motion of a particle with constant acceleration:

 

v=vw tat, (2-11)
Xp = vot + fat?, (2-15)
vp + 2a(x — x»), (2-16)
Xp = HM + vt, (2-17)
X — Xy = vt — fat”. (2-18)

 

These are not valid when the acceleration is not constant.

Free-Fall Acceleration An important example of straight-
line motion with constant acceleration is that of an object rising or
falling freely near Earth’s surface. The constant acceleration equa-
tions describe this motion, but we make two changes in notation:
(1) we refer the motion to the vertical y axis with +y vertically up;
(2) we replace a with —g, where g is the magnitude of the free-fall
acceleration. Near Earth’s surface, g = 9.8 m/s? (= 32 ft/s’).

is the sign of the particle’s position?

Is the particle’s velocity positive,

negative, or 0 at (b)t=15,(c)t =2

s, and (d) t=3s? (e) How many 0 2
times does the particle go through

the point x = 0?

#(s)

5 Figure 2-20 gives the velocity of
a particle moving along an axis.
Point 1 is at the highest point on the
curve; point 4 is at the lowest point;
and points 2 and 6 are at the same
height. What is the direction of
travel at (a) time t = 0 and (b) point
4? (c) At which of the six numbered
points does the particle reverse its
direction of travel? (d) Rank the six
points according to the magnitude
of the acceleration, greatest first.

Figure 2-19 Question 4.

6 Atrf=0,a particle moving along an
X axis is at position x) = —20 m. The
signs of the particle’s initial velocity vo
(at time f)) and constant acceleration a
are, respectively, for four situations: (1)
+, +; (2) +, -; 3) —, +3 (4) —, -- In
which situations will the particle (a)
stop momentarily, (b) pass through the
origin, and (c) never pass through the
origin?

7 Hanging over the railing of a
bridge, you drop an egg (no initial ve-
locity) as you throw a second egg
downward. Which curves in Fig. 2-21

 

Figure 2-21 Question 7.
