H A P T CE

Vectors

3-1 VECTORS AND THEIR COMPONENTS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

3.01 Add vectors by drawing them in head-to-tail arrange-
ments, applying the commutative and associative laws.

3.02 Subtract a vector from a second one.

3.03 Calculate the components of a vector on a given coordi-
nate system, showing them in a drawing.

Key Ideas

@ Scalars, such as temperature, have magnitude only. They
are specified by a number with a unit (10°C) and obey the
tules of arithmetic and ordinary algebra. Vectors, such as dis-
placement, have both magnitude and direction (5 m, north)

3.04 Given the components of a vector, draw the vector
and determine its magnitude and orientation.
3.05 Convert angle measures between degrees and radians.

@ The (scalar) components a, and a, of any two-dimensional
vector @ along the coordinate axes are found by dropping
perpendicular lines from the ends of @ onto the coordinate
axes. The components are given by

and obey the rules of vector algebra. a,=acos@ and a,=asiné,

@ Two vectors @ and b may be added geometrically by draw-
ing them to acommon scale and placing them head to tail.
The vector connecting the tail of the first to the head of the
second is the vector sum 3”. To subtract b from @, reverse the
direction of b to get —D; then add —DB to @. Vector addition is
commutative and obeys the associative law.

where Gis the angle between the positive direction of the x
axis and the direction of @. The algebraic sign of a component
indicates its direction along the associated axis. Given its
components, we can find the magnitude and orientation of
the vector @ with

ay
a=Va+a and tang=—.

ay

 

What Is Physics?

Physics deals with a great many quantities that have both size and direction, and it
needs a special mathematical language—the language of vectors—to describe
those quantities. This language is also used in engineering, the other sciences, and
even in common speech. If you have ever given directions such as “Go five blocks
down this street and then hang a left,” you have used the language of vectors. In
fact, navigation of any sort is based on vectors, but physics and engineering also
need vectors in special ways to explain phenomena involving rotation and mag-
netic forces, which we get to in later chapters. In this chapter, we focus on the basic
language of vectors.

Vectors and Scalars

A particle moving along a straight line can move in only two directions. We can
take its motion to be positive in one of these directions and negative in the other.
For a particle moving in three dimensions, however, a plus sign or minus sign is no
longer enough to indicate a direction. Instead, we must use a vector.

4o
