H A P T CE

Force and Motion-I

5-1 NEWTON'S FIRST AND SECOND LAWS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

5.01 Identify that a force is a vector quantity and thus has
both magnitude and direction and also components.

5.02 Given two or more forces acting on the same particle,
add the forces as vectors to get the net force.

5.03 Identify Newton's first and second laws of motion.

5.04 Identify inertial reference frames.

5.05 Sketch a free-body diagram for an object, showing the

Key Ideas

@ The velocity of an object can change (the object can accel-
erate) when the object is acted on by one or more forces
(pushes or pulls) from other objects. Newtonian mechanics
relates accelerations and forces.

@ Forces are vector quantities. Their magnitudes are defined
in terms of the acceleration they would give the standard kilo-
gram. A force that accelerates that standard body by exactly
1 m/s? is defined to have a magnitude of 1 N. The direction of
a force is the direction of the acceleration it causes. Forces
are combined according to the rules of vector algebra. The
net force on a body is the vector sum of all the forces acting
on the body.

@ If there is no net force on a body, the body remains at rest if
it is initially at rest or moves in a straight line at constant

speed if it is in motion.

@ Reference frames in which Newtonian mechanics holds are
called inertial reference frames or inertial frames. Reference
frames in which Newtonian mechanics does not hold are
called noninertial reference frames or noninertial frames.

object as a particle and drawing the forces acting on it as
vectors with their tails anchored on the particle.

5.06 Apply the relationship (Newton's second law) between
the net force on an object, the mass of the object, and the
acceleration produced by the net force.

5.07 Identify that only external forces on an object can cause
the object to accelerate.

@ The mass of a body is the characteristic of that body that
relates the body's acceleration to the net force causing the
acceleration. Masses are scalar quantities.

@ The net force Fux on a body with mass mis related to the
body's acceleration @ by

Fre = 4

which may be written in the component versions

Fete = May Frey = may and Fogz = maz.

The second law indicates that in SI units
1N=1kg-ms’.

@ A free-body diagram is a stripped-down diagram in which
only one body is considered. That body is represented by
either a sketch or a dot. The external forces on the body are
drawn, and a coordinate system is superimposed, oriented
so as to simplify the solution.

 

What Is Physics?

We have seen that part of physics is a study of motion, including accelerations,
which are changes in velocities. Physics is also a study of what can cause an object
to accelerate. That cause is a force, which is, loosely speaking, a push or pull on the
object. The force is said to act on the object to change its velocity. For example,
when a dragster accelerates, a force from the track acts on the rear tires to cause
the dragster’s acceleration. When a defensive guard knocks down a quarterback, a
force from the guard acts on the quarterback to cause the quarterback’s backward
acceleration. When a car slams into a telephone pole, a force on the car from the

94
