98

CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

and thus

1.0 m/s?
my = my = (LOK8) 955

iy 0.25 misy ~ 10 Re

Defining the mass of X in this way is useful only if the procedure is consis-
tent. Suppose we apply an 8.0 N force first to the standard body (getting an accel-
eration of 8.0 m/s?) and then to body X (getting an acceleration of 2.0 m/s”). We
would then calculate the mass of X as

8.0 m/s?
my = mo = (1.0 kg) So

ay 20 mis 40kg,

which means that our procedure is consistent and thus usable.

The results also suggest that mass is an intrinsic characteristic of a body—it
automatically comes with the existence of the body. Also, it is a scalar quantity.
However, the nagging question remains: What, exactly, is mass?

Since the word mass is used in everyday English, we should have some intu-
itive understanding of it, maybe something that we can physically sense. Is it
a body’s size, weight, or density? The answer is no, although those characteristics
are sometimes confused with mass. We can say only that the mass of a body is
the characteristic that relates a force on the body to the resulting acceleration. Mass
has no more familiar definition; you can have a physical sensation of mass only
when you try to accelerate a body, as in the kicking of a baseball or a bowling ball.

Newton’s Second Law

All the definitions, experiments, and observations we have discussed so far can be
summarized in one neat statement:

Oo Newton’s Second Law: The net force on a body is equal to the product of the
body’s mass and its acceleration.

In equation form,
F4. = md (Newton's second law). G-1)

Identify the Body. This simple equation is the key idea for nearly all the
homework problems in this chapter, but we must use it cautiously. First, we must
be certain about which body we are applying it to. Then F',.; must be the vector
sum of all the forces that act on that body. Only forces that act on that body are to
be included in the vector sum, not forces acting on other bodies that might be
involved in the given situation. For example, if you are in a rugby scrum, the net
force on you is the vector sum of all the pushes and pulls on your body. It does
not include any push or pull on another player from you or from anyone else.
Every time you work a force problem, your first step is to clearly state the body
to which you are applying Newton’s law.

Separate Axes. Like other vector equations, Eq. 5-1 is equivalent to three
component equations, one for each axis of an xyz coordinate system:

Fact = May Faey = May, and Fye,2 = ma. (5-2)

Each of these equations relates the net force component along an axis to the
acceleration along that same axis. For example, the first equation tells us that
the sum of all the force components along the x axis causes the x component a,
of the body’s acceleration, but causes no acceleration in the y and z directions.
Turned around, the acceleration component a, is caused only by the sum of the
