12.1

Discovery of Reduction Division

Only a few years after Walther Fleming’s discovery of
chromosomes in 1882, Belgian cytologist Pierre-Joseph van
Beneden was surprised to find different numbers of chro-
mosomes in different types of cells in the roundworm As-
caris. Specifically, he observed that the gametes (eggs and
sperm) each contained two chromosomes, while the so-
matic (nonreproductive) cells of embryos and mature indi-
viduals each contained four.

Fertilization

From his observations, van Beneden proposed in 1887 that
an egg and a sperm, each containing half the complement
of chromosomes found in other cells, fuse to produce a sin-
gle cell called a zygote. The zygote, like all of the somatic
cells ultimately derived from it, contains two copies of each
chromosome. The fusion of gametes to form a new cell is

called fertilization, or syngamy.

  

Reduction Division

It was clear even to early investigators that gamete forma-
tion must involve some mechanism that reduces the num-
ber of chromosomes to half the number found in other
cells. If it did not, the chromosome number would double

with each fertilization, and after only a few generations, the

Haploid sperm

&

Qi
ws
So

>>
x»

Diploid zygote

Haploid egg

226 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

Meiosis produces haploid cells from diploid cells.

number of chromosomes in each cell would become impos-
sibly large. For example, in just 10 generations, the 46
chromosomes present in human cells would increase to
over 47,000 (46 x 29),

The number of chromosomes does not explode in this
way because of a special reduction division that occurs
during gamete formation, producing cells with half the
normal number of chromosomes. The subsequent fusion
of two of these cells ensures a consistent chromosome
number from one generation to the next. This reduction
division process, known as meiosis, is the subject of this
chapter.

The Sexual Life Cycle

Meiosis and fertilization together constitute a cycle of re-
production. Two sets of chromosomes are present in the
somatic cells of adult individuals, making them diploid
cells (Greek diploos, “double” + eidos, “form”), but only one
set is present in the gametes, which are thus haploid
(Greek haploos, “single” + ploion, “vessel”). Reproduction
that involves this alternation of meiosis and fertilization is
called sexual reproduction. Its outstanding characteristic
is that offspring inherit chromosomes from two parents
(figure 12.2). You, for example, inherited 23 chromosomes
from your mother, contributed by the egg fertilized at your
conception, and 23 from your father, contributed by the
sperm that fertilized that egg.

FIGURE 12.2

Diploid cells carry chromosomes from two
parents. A diploid cell contains two versions of
each chromosome, one contributed by the haploid
egg of the mother, the other by the haploid sperm
of the father.
