Se CONT

 

Chapter 11 V

Summary

VE]

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

http://www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

11.1 Bacteria divide far more simply than do eukaryotes.

 

* Bacterial cells divide by simple binary fission.

¢ The two replicated circular DNA molecules attach to
the plasma membrane at different points, and fission
is initiated between those points.

11.2 Chromosomes are highly ordered structures.

1. How is the genome
replicated prior to binary fission
ina bacterial cell?

@

* Cell Division
Introduction

Prokaryotes
Scientists on Science:
Ribozymes

 

¢ Eukaryotic DNA forms a complex with histones and
other proteins and is packaged into chromosomes.

* In eukaryotic cells, DNA replication is completed
during the $ phase of the cell cycle, and during the
G phase the cell makes its final preparation for
mitosis.

¢ Along with G!, these two phases constitute the
portion of the cell cycle called interphase, which
alternates with mitosis and cytokinesis.

11.3 Mitosis is a key phase of the cell cycle.

2. What are nucleosomes
composed of, and how do they
participate in the coiling of
DNA?

3. What are the differences
between heterochromatin and
euchromatin?

4, What is a karyotype? How
are chromosomes distinguished
from one another in a
karyotype?

Chromosomes

 

¢ The first stage of mitosis is prophase, during which
the mitotic spindle apparatus forms.

5. Which phases of the cell
cycle is generally the longest in
the cells of a mature eukaryote?

* Art Activity: Mitosis
Overview
© Art Activity: Plant

 

* In the second stage of mitosis, metaphase, the Cell Mitosis
chromosomes are arranged in a circle around the 6. What happens tothe aM
‘ohery of the cell chromosomes during $ phase? Mitosis
periphery of the cell. 1, h k y
er) : : . . What changes with respect
* Atthe beginning of the third stage of mitosis, 8 P \¢
rd sti sis; to ribosomal RNA occur during
anaphase, the centromeres joining each pair of sister prophase?
chromatids separate, freeing the sister chromatids * Mitosis
from each other 8. What event signals the
. initiation of metaphase?
. ; .
After the chromatids physically separate, they are 9. What molecular mechanism
pulled to opposite poles of the cell by the seems to be responsible for the
microtubules attached to their centromeres. movement of the poles during . Student Research:
_ > iuclear Division in
¢ In the fourth and final stage of mitosis, telophase, the anaphase? Drosophila
mitotic apparatus is disassembled, the nuclear 10. Describe three events that
envelope re-forms, and the chromosomes uncoil. occur during telophase.
* When mitosis is complete, the cell divides in two, so 11. How is cytokinesis in animal
that the two sets of chromosomes separated by cells different from that in plant
mitosis end up in different daughter cells. cells?
11.4 The cell cycle is carefully controlled.
¢ The cell cycle is regulated by two types of proteins, 12. What aspects of the cell * Exploration:

cyclins and cyclin-dependent protein kinases, which
permit progress past key “checkpoints” in the cell
cycle only if the cell is ready to proceed further.

* Failures of cell cycle regulation can lead to
uncontrolled cell growth and lie at the root of cancer.

224 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

cycle are controlled by the Gy,
G, and M checkpoints? How
are cyclins and cyclin-dependent
protein kinases involved in cell
cycle regulation at checkpoints?

 

Regulating the cell
cycle
