 

108 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

Applying Newton’s Laws

The rest of this chapter consists of sample problems. You should pore over
them, learning their procedures for attacking a problem. Especially important is
knowing how to translate a sketch of a situation into a free-body diagram with
appropriate axes, so that Newton’s laws can be applied.

Sample Problem 5.03 Block on table, block hanging

Figure 5-12 shows a block S (the sliding block) with mass
M = 3.3 kg. The block is free to move along a horizontal
frictionless surface and connected, by a cord that wraps over
a frictionless pulley, to a second block H (the hanging
block), with mass m = 2.1 kg. The cord and pulley have neg-
ligible masses compared to the blocks (they are “massless”).
The hanging block H falls as the sliding block S accelerates
to the right. Find (a) the acceleration of block S, (b) the ac-
celeration of block H, and (c) the tension in the cord.

Q > Whatis this problem all about?

You are given two bodies—sliding block and hanging
block—but must also consider Earth, which pulls on both
bodies. (Without Earth, nothing would happen here.) A to-
tal of five forces act on the blocks, as shown in Fig. 5-13:

1. The cord pulls to the right on sliding block S with a force
of magnitude T.

2. The cord pulls upward on hanging block H with a force
of the same magnitude T. This upward force keeps block
A from falling freely.

3. Earth pulls down on block S with the gravitational force
Es, which has a magnitude equal to Mg.

4. Earth pulls down on block H with the gravitational force
Fun, which has a magnitude equal to mg.

5. The table pushes up on block S with a normal force Fy.

There is another thing you should note. We assume that
the cord does not stretch, so that if block H falls 1 mm in a

Sliding
block S

 

   
 

Frictionless
surface

 

Hanging
block

 

 

 

Figure 5-12 A block S of mass M is connected to a block H of mass
m bya cord that wraps over a pulley.

 

 

Block H

 

 

 

 

Figure 5-18 The forces acting on the two blocks of Fig. 5-12.

certain time, block S moves 1 mm to the right in that same
time. This means that the blocks move together and their
accelerations have the same magnitude a.

Q How do I classify this problem? Should it suggest a par-
ticular law of physics to me?
Yes. Forces, masses, and accelerations are involved, and
they should suggest Newton’s second law of motion, Fe. =
ma. Thatis our starting key idea.

Q If lapply Newton’s second law to this problem, to which
body should I apply it?

‘We focus on two bodies, the sliding block and the hanging
block. Although they are extended objects (they are not
points), we can still treat each block as a particle because
every part of it moves in exactly the same way. A second key
idea is to apply Newton’s second law separately to each block.

Q > What about the pulley?

‘We cannot represent the pulley as a particle because
different parts of it move in different ways. When we dis-
cuss rotation, we shall deal with pulleys in detail.
Meanwhile, we eliminate the pulley from consideration by
assuming its mass to be negligible compared with the
masses of the two blocks. Its only function is to change the
cord’s orientation.

Q OK. Now how do I apply F yet = m@ to the sliding block?
Represent block S as a particle of mass M and draw all

the forces that act on it, as in Fig. 5-14a. This is the block’s
free-body diagram. Next, draw a set of axes. It makes sense
