18 CHAPTER 2 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE

2-2 INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY AND SPEED

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to . . . 2.08 Given a graph of a particle's position versus time, deter-
mine the instantaneous velocity for any particular time.

2.09 Identify speed as the magnitude of the instantaneous

2.07 Given a particle's position as a function of time,
calculate the instantaneous velocity for any particular time.

velocity.
Key Ideas
@ The instantaneous velocity (or simply velocity) v ofamoving _ @ The instantaneous velocity (at a particular time) may be
particle is Ax ax found as the slope (at that particular time) of the graph of x

v= lim =—, versus f.
Ar>o At dt

where Ax = x) — xy and At =f — th. @ Speed is the magnitude of instantaneous velocity.

 

Instantaneous Velocity and Speed

You have now seen two ways to describe how fast something moves: average
velocity and average speed, both of which are measured over a time interval Af.
However, the phrase “how fast” more commonly refers to how fast a particle is
moving at a given instant—its instantaneous velocity (or simply velocity) v.

The velocity at any instant is obtained from the average velocity by shrinking
the time interval At closer and closer to 0. As At dwindles, the average velocity
approaches a limiting value, which is the velocity at that instant:

Ax dx
= lim —~=—. 2-4
v= ao At dt C4)

Note that v is the rate at which position x is changing with time at a given instant;
that is, v is the derivative of x with respect to t. Also note that v at any instant is
the slope of the position—time curve at the point representing that instant.
Velocity is another vector quantity and thus has an associated direction.

Speed is the magnitude of velocity; that is, speed is velocity that has been
stripped of any indication of direction, either in words or via an algebraic sign.
(Caution: Speed and average speed can be quite different.) A velocity of +5 m/s
and one of —5 m/s both have an associated speed of 5 m/s. The speedometer in a
car measures speed, not velocity (it cannot determine the direction).

[Vv] Checkpoint 2

The following equations give the position x(#) of a particle in four situations (in each
equation, x is in meters, is in seconds, and t > 0):(1).x = 3¢ — 2;(2)x = 4 — 2;

(3) x = 2/?and (4) x = —2. (a) In which situation is the velocity v of the particle con-
stant? (b) In whichis vin the negative x direction?

Sample Problem 2.02 Velocity and slope of x versus ¢, elevator cab

Figure 2-6a is an x(¢) plot for an elevator cab that is initially
stationary, then moves upward (which we take to be the pos-
itive direction of x), and then stops. Plot v(t).

KEY IDEA

‘We can find the velocity at any time from the slope of the
X(t) curve at that time.

Calculations: The slope of x(t), and so also the velocity, is
zero in the intervals from 0 to 1s and from 9 s on, so then
the cab is stationary. During the interval bc, the slope is con-
stant and nonzero, so then the cab moves with constant ve-
locity. We calculate the slope of x(t) then as

Ax _ 24m—4.0m

At 8.08 — 3.0

 

= +4.0 mis. (2-5)
