3-1 VECTORS AND THEIR COMPONENTS 45

Problem-Solving Tactics Angles, trig functions, and inverse trig functions

Tactic 1: Angles—Degrees and Radians Angles that are
measured relative to the positive direction of the x axis are
positive if they are measured in the counterclockwise direc-
tion and negative if measured clockwise. For example, 210°
and —150° are the same angle.

Angles may be measured in degrees or radians (rad). To
relate the two measures, recall that a full circle is 360° and
2zrad. To convert, say, 40° to radians, write

40° 2arad

360° 0.70 rad.

Tactic 2: Trig Functions You need to know the definitions
of the common trigonometric functions—sine, cosine, and
tangent— because they are part of the language of science
and engineering. They are given in Fig. 3-11 in a form that
does not depend on how the triangle is labeled.

You should also be able to sketch how the trig functions
vary with angle, as in Fig. 3-12, in order to be able to judge
whether a calculator result is reasonable. Even knowing
the signs of the functions in the various quadrants can be
of help.

Tactic 3: Inverse Trig Functions When the inverse trig
functions sin~!, cos~!, and tan“! are taken on a calculator,
you must consider the reasonableness of the answer you
get, because there is usually another possible answer that
the calculator does not give. The range of operation for a
calculator in taking each inverse trig function is indicated
in Fig. 3-12. As an example, sin“! 0.5 has associated angles
of 30° (which is displayed by the calculator, since 30° falls
within its range of operation) and 150°. To see both values,
draw a horizontal line through 0.5 in Fig. 3-12a and note
where it cuts the sine curve. How do you distinguish a cor-
rect answer? It is the one that seems more reasonable for
the given situation.

Tactic 4: Measuring Vector Angles The equations for
cos @and sin @in Eq. 3-5 and for tan @ in Eq. 3-6 are valid
only if the angle is measured from the positive direction of

5 leg opposite @
sin 6 = hypotenuse
Hypotenuse, Leg
a0= seven acenl to re
yypotenuse
AN
ERO nrortee) Leg adjacent to @

tan =e 5 adjacent to

Figure 3-11 A triangle used to define the trigonometric
functions. See also Appendix E.

Quadrants
IL

Iv e

m1 IV

 

()

 

 

(

Figure 3-12 Three useful curves to remember. A calculator’s range
of operation for taking inverse trig functions is indicated by the
darker portions of the colored curves.

the x axis. If it is measured relative to some other direc-
tion, then the trig functions in Eq. 3-5 may have to be in-
terchanged and the ratio in Eq. 3-6 may have to be
inverted. A safer method is to convert the angle to one
measured from the positive direction of the x axis. In
WileyPLUS, the system expects you to report an angle of
direction like this (and positive if counterclockwise and
negative if clockwise).

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 
