 

Chiasmata hold

homologues together.

The kinetochores of
sister chromatids fuse
and function as one.
Microtubules can
attach to only one side
of each centromere.

Meiosis |

Metaphase |

 

Microtubules pull the
homologous chromosomes
apart, but sister
chromatids are
held together.

 
 
 
 
  

=

 

 

Mitosis Kinetochores of sister
chromatids remain
separate; microtubules
attach to both
kinetochores on
‘opposite sides of the
centromere.

Metaphase

Microtubules pull sister
chromatids apart.

Anaphase

 

 

 

FIGURE 12.11

Chiasmata created by crossing over have a key impact on how chromosomes align in metaphase I. In the first meiotic division, the
chiasmata hold one sister chromatid to the other sister chromatid; consequently, the spindle microtubules can bind to only one side of each
centromere, and the homologous chromosomes are drawn to opposite poles. In mitosis, microtubules attach to both sides of each
centromere; when the microtubules shorten, the sister chromatids are split and drawn to opposite poles.

Metaphase I

By metaphase I, the second stage of meiosis I, the nuclear
envelope has dispersed and the microtubules form a spin-
dle, just as in mitosis. During diakinesis of prophase I,
the chiasmata move down the paired chromosomes from
their original points of crossing over, eventually reaching
the ends of the chromosomes. At this point, they are
called terminal chiasmata. Terminal chiasmata hold the
homologous chromosomes together in metaphase I, so
that only one side of each centromere faces outward from
the complex; the other side is turned inward toward the
other homologue (figure 12.11). Consequently, spindle
microtubules are able to attach to kinetochore proteins
only on the outside of each centromere, and the cen-
tromeres of the two homologues attach to microtubules
originating from opposite poles. This one-sided attach-
ment is in marked contrast to the attachment in mitosis,
when kinetochores on both sides of a centromere bind to
microtubules.

Each joined pair of homologues then lines up on the
metaphase plate. The orientation of each pair on the spin-
dle axis is random: either the maternal or the paternal ho-
mologue may orient toward a given pole (figure 12.12).
Figure 12.13 illustrates the alignment of chromosomes dur-
ing metaphase I.

 

Chiasmata play an important role in aligning the
chromosomes on the metaphase plate.

 

232 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

FIGURE 12.12

Random orientation of chromosomes on the metaphase
plate. The number of possible chromosome orientations equals
2 raised to the power of the number of chromosome pairs. In this
hypothetical cell with three chromosome pairs, eight (23)
possible orientations exist, four of them illustrated here. Each
orientation produces gametes with different combinations of
parental chromosomes.
