188

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

go the other way; that is, we know the potential energy function U(x) and want

to find the force.

For one-dimensional motion, the work W done by a force that acts on a parti-
cle as the particle moves through a distance Ax is F(x) Ax. We can then write

Egq.8-Las

AU(x) = —W = —F(x) Ax.
Solving for F(x) and passing to the differential limit yield

dU

F(x) = UC) (one-dimensional motion),
x

a

which is the relation we sought.

We can check this result by putting U(x) = kx, which is the elastic poten-
tial energy function for a spring force. Equation 8-22 then yields, as expected,
F(x) = —kx, which is Hooke’s law. Similarly, we can substitute U(x) = mgx,
which is the gravitational potential energy function for a particle-Earth system,
with a particle of mass m at height x above Earth’s surface. Equation 8-22 then
yields F = —mg, which is the gravitational force on the particle.

The Potential Energy Curve

Figure 8-9a is a plot of a potential energy function U(x) for a system in which a
particle is in one-dimensional motion while a conservative force F(x) does work
on it. We can easily find F(x) by (graphically) taking the slope of the U(x) curve at
various points. (Equation 8-22 tells us that F(x) is the negative of the slope of the
U(x) curve.) Figure 8-9b is a plot of F(x) found in this way.

Turning Points

In the absence of a nonconservative force, the mechanical energy E of a system

has a constant value given by

U(x) + K(x) = Ennec:

Here K(x) is the kinetic energy function of a particle in the system (this K(x)
gives the kinetic energy as a function of the particle’s location x). We may

rewrite Eq. 8-23 as
K(x) = Emec — U(x).

Suppose that E,,.. (which has a constant value, remember) happens to be 5.0 J. It
would be represented in Fig. 8-9c by a horizontal line that runs through the value

5.0 J on the energy axis. (It is,in fact, shown there.)

Equation 8-24 and Fig. 8-9d tell us how to determine the kinetic energy K for
any location x of the particle: On the U(x) curve, find U for that location x and
then subtract U from Ej)... In Fig. 8-9e for example, if the particle is at any point
to the right of x, then K = 1.0 J. The value of K is greatest (5.0 J) when the parti-

cle is at x. and least (0 J) when the particle is at x).

Since K can never be negative (because v” is always positive), the particle can
never move to the left of x,, where E,,.. — U is negative. Instead, as the particle
moves toward x; from x2, K decreases (the particle slows) until K = 0 at x; (the

particle stops there).

Note that when the particle reaches x, the force on the particle, given by
Eq. 8-22, is positive (because the slope dU/dx is negative). This means that the
particle does not remain at x, but instead begins to move to the right, opposite its
earlier motion. Hence x; is a turning point, a place where K = 0 (because U = E)
and the particle changes direction. There is no turning point (where K = 0) on
the right side of the graph. When the particle heads to the right, it will continue

indefinitely.
