spring sends it sliding across a tabletop. It stops 75 cm from where
you released it. The spring constant is 200 N/m. What is the
block-table coefficient of kinetic friction?

57 © In Fig. 8-54, a block slides along a track from one level to a
higher level after passing through an intermediate valley. The track
is frictionless until the block reaches the higher level. There a fric-
tional force stops the block in a distance d. The block’s initial speed
vo is 6.0 mvs, the height difference / is 1.1 m,and jy, is 0.60. Find d.

i!

Yo HON rN

Figure 8-54 Problem 57.

“58 A cookie jar is moving up a 40° incline. At a point 55 cm
from the bottom of the incline (measured along the incline), the jar
has a speed of 1.4 m/s. The coefficient of kinetic friction between
jar and incline is 0.15. (a) How much farther up the incline will the
jar move? (b) How fast will it be going when it has slid back to the
bottom of the incline? (c) Do the answers to (a) and (b) increase,
decrease, or remain the same if we decrease the coefficient of ki-
netic friction (but do not change the given speed or location)?

“59 A stone with a weight of 5.29 N is launched vertically from
ground level with an initial speed of 20.0 m/s, and the air drag on it
is 0.265 N throughout the flight. What are (a) the maximum height
reached by the stone and (b) its speed just before it hits the ground?

°60 A 4.0kg bundle starts up a 30° incline with 128 J of kinetic
energy. How far will it slide up the incline if the coefficient of ki-
netic friction between bundle and incline is 0.30?

61 <8 When a click beetle is upside down on its back, it jumps
upward by suddenly arching its back, transferring energy stored in a
muscle to mechanical energy. This launching mechanism produces an
audible click, giving the beetle its name. Videotape of a certain click-
beetle jump shows that a beetle of mass m = 4.0 X 10-® kg moved di-
rectly upward by 0.77 mm during the launch and then to a maximum
height of A = 0.30 m. During the launch, what are the average mag-
nitudes of (a) the external force on the beetle’s back from the floor
and (b) the acceleration of the beetle in terms of g?

+62 © In Fig. 8-55,a block slides along a path that is without fric-
tion until the block reaches the section of length L = 0.75 m, which
begins at height / = 2.0 m on a ramp of angle @ = 30°. In that sec-
tion, the coefficient of kinetic friction is 0.40. The block passes
through point A with a speed of 8.0 m/s. If the block can reach point
B (where the friction ends), what is its speed there, and if it cannot,
what is its greatest height above A?

 

Figure 8-55 Problem 62.

PROBLEMS

207

“63 The cable of the 1800 kg elevator
cab in Fig. 8-56 snaps when the cab is at
rest at the first floor, where the cab bottom
is a distance d = 3.7 m above a spring of
spring constant k = 0.15 MN/m. A safety
device clamps the cab against guide rails so
that a constant frictional force of 4.4 kN
opposes the cab’s motion. (a) Find the
speed of the cab just before it hits the
spring, (b) Find the maximum distance x
that the spring is compressed (the fric-
tional force still acts during this compres-
sion). (c) Find the distance that the cab
will bounce back up the shaft. (d) Using
conservation of energy, find the approxi-
mate total distance that the cab will move before coming to rest.
(Assume that the frictional force on the cab is negligible when the
cab is stationary.)

64 © In Fig. 8-57, a block is released from rest at height d = 40
cm and slides down a frictionless ramp and onto a first plateau,
which has length d and where the coefficient of kinetic friction is
0.50. If the block is still moving, it then slides down a second fric-
tionless ramp through height d/2 and onto a lower plateau, which
has length d/2 and where the coefficient of kinetic friction is
again 0.50. If the block is still moving, it then slides up a friction-
less ramp until it (momentarily) stops. Where does the block
stop? If its final stop is on a plateau, state which one and give the
distance L from the left edge of that plateau. If the block reaches
the ramp, give the height H above the lower plateau where it
momentarily stops.

 

Figure 8-56
Problem 63.

 

Figure 8-57 Problem 64.

+65 @ A particle canslidealonga |
track with elevated ends and a flat t

central part, as shown in Fig. 8-58. i

The flat part has length L = 40 cm.

The curved portions of the track are -—1.—|
frictionless, but for the flat part the Figure 8-58 Problem 65.
coefficient of kinetic friction is ju, =

0.20. The particle is released from rest at point A, which is at height
h = L/2. How far from the left edge of the flat part does the particle
finally stop?

Additional Problems

66 A 3.2kg sloth hangs 3.0 m above the ground. (a) What is the
gravitational potential energy of the sloth—Earth system if we take
the reference point y = 0 to be at the ground? If the sloth drops
to the ground and air drag on it is assumed to be negligible, what
are the (b) kinetic energy and (c) speed of the sloth just before it
reaches the ground?
