12.3
Why Sex?

Not all reproduction is sexual. In asexual reproduction,
an individual inherits all of its chromosomes from a sin-
gle parent and is, therefore, genetically identical to its
parent. Bacterial cells reproduce asexually, undergoing
binary fission to produce two daughter cells containing
the same genetic information. Most protists reproduce
asexually except under conditions of stress; then they
switch to sexual reproduction. Among plants, asexual re-
production is common, and many other multicellular or-
ganisms are also capable of reproducing asexually. In ani-
mals, asexual reproduction often involves the budding off
of a localized mass of cells, which grows by mitosis to
form a new individual.

Even when meiosis and the production of gametes
occur, there may still be reproduction without sex. The
development of an adult from an unfertilized egg, called
parthenogenesis, is a common form of reproduction in
arthropods. Among bees, for example, fertilized eggs de-
velop into diploid females, but unfertilized eggs develop
into haploid males. Parthenogenesis even occurs among
the vertebrates. Some lizards, fishes, and amphibians are
capable of reproducing in this way; their unfertilized eggs
undergo a mitotic nuclear division without cell cleavage
to produce a diploid cell, which then develops into an
adult.

Recombination Can Be Destructive

If reproduction can occur without sex, why does sex occur
at all? This question has generated considerable discussion,
particularly among evolutionary biologists. Sex is of great
evolutionary advantage for populations or species, which
benefit from the variability generated in meiosis by random
orientation of chromosomes and by crossing over. How-
ever, evolution occurs because of changes at the level of in-
dividual survival and reproduction, rather than at the popu-
lation level, and no obvious advantage accrues to the
progeny of an individual that engages in sexual reproduc-
tion. In fact, recombination is a destructive as well as a con-
structive process in evolution. The segregation of chromo-
somes during meiosis tends to disrupt advantageous
combinations of genes more often than it creates new, bet-
ter adapted combinations; as a result, some of the diverse
progeny produced by sexual reproduction will not be as
well adapted as their parents were. In fact, the more com-
plex the adaptation of an individual organism, the less likely
that recombination will improve it, and the more likely that
recombination will disrupt it. It is, therefore, a puzzle to
know what a well-adapted individual gains from participat-
ing in sexual reproduction, as all of its progeny could main-
tain its successful gene combinations if that individual sim-
ply reproduced asexually.

236 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

The evolutionary origin of sex is a puzzle.

The Origin and Maintenance of Sex

There is no consensus among evolutionary biologists re-
garding the evolutionary origin or maintenance of sex.
Conflicting hypotheses abound. Alternative hypotheses
seem to be correct to varying degrees in different
organisms.

The DNA Repair Hypothesis. If recombination is often
detrimental to an individual’s progeny, then what benefit
promoted the evolution of sexual reproduction? Although
the answer to this question is unknown, we can gain some
insight by examining the protists. Meiotic recombination is
often absent among the protists, which typically undergo
sexual reproduction only occasionally. Often the fusion of
two haploid cells occurs only under stress, creating a
diploid zygote.

Why do some protists form a diploid cell in response
to stress? Several geneticists have suggested that this oc-
curs because only a diploid cell can effectively repair cer-
tain kinds of chromosome damage, particularly double-
strand breaks in DNA. Both radiation and chemical
events within cells can induce such breaks. As organisms
became larger and longer-lived, it must have become in-
creasingly important for them to be able to repair such
damage. The synaptonemal complex, which in early stages
of meiosis precisely aligns pairs of homologous chromo-
somes, may well have evolved originally as a mechanism
for repairing double-strand damage to DNA, using the
undamaged homologous chromosome as a template to re-
pair the damaged chromosome. A transient diploid phase
would have provided an opportunity for such repair. In
yeast, mutations that inactivate the repair system for dou-
ble-strand breaks of the chromosomes also prevent cross-
ing over, suggesting a common mechanism for both
synapsis and repair processes.

The Contagion Hypothesis. An unusual and interesting
alternative hypothesis for the origin of sex is that it arose as
a secondary consequence of the infection of eukaryotes by
mobile genetic elements. Suppose a replicating transpos-
able clement were to infect a eukaryotic lineage. If it pos-
sessed genes promoting fusion with uninfected cells and
synapsis, the transposable element could readily copy itself
onto homologous chromosomes. It would rapidly spread by
infection through the population, until all members con-
tained it. The bizarre mating type “alleles” found in many
fungi are very nicely explained by this hypothesis. Each of
several mating types is in fact not an allele but an “id-
iomorph.” Idiomorphs are genes occupying homologous
positions on the chromosome but having such dissimilar
sequences that they cannot be of homologous origin. These
idiomorph genes may simply be the relics of several ancient
infections by transposable elements.
