156

Tw

The force does negative
work, decreasing speed
and kinetic energy.

*,
of i ‘
Yo

Figure 7-6 Because the gravitational force F,
acts on it, a particle-like tomato of mass m
thrown upward slows from velocity ¥) to
velocity ¥ during displacement @.A kinetic
energy gauge indicates the resulting change
in the kinetic energy of the tomato, from
K,(= 3 mvs) to Ky (= ymv’).

AL

 

7 Upward
displacement
Does
F positive
work
Object 7) Does
F, negative
work
(a
Does
. negative
F
Object, wets
7 Does
* fa
positive
work

| Downward
7 displacement

)

Figure 7-7 (a) An applied force F lifts an
object. The object’s displacement d makes
an angle ¢ = 180° with the gravitational
force F, on the object. The applied force
does positive work on the object. (b) An
applied force F lowers an object. The dis-
placement d of the object makes an angle
= 0° with the gravitational force F,. The
applied force does negative work on the
object.

CHAPTER 7 KINETIC ENERGY AND WORK

Work Done by the Gravitational Force

We next examine the work done on an object by the gravitational force acting on
it. Figure 7-6 shows a particle-like tomato of mass m that is thrown upward with
initial speed vo and thus with initial kinetic energy Kj = zmvp. As the tomato
rises, it is slowed by a gravitational force Fy that is, the tomato’s kinetic energy
decreases because F, does work on the tomato as it rises. Because we can treat
the tomato as a particle, we can use Eq. 7-7 (W = Fd cos ¢) to express the work
done during a displacement d. For the force magnitude F, we use mg as the mag-
nitude of F,. Thus, the work W, done by the gravitational force Fi is

W, = mgd cos 6 (7-12)

(work done by gravitational force).

For a rising object, force E is directed opposite the displacement d, as indi-
cated in Fig. 7-6. Thus, ¢ = 180° and

W, = mgd cos 180° = mgd(—1) = —mgd. (7-13)

The minus sign tells us that during the object’s rise, the gravitational force acting
on the object transfers energy in the amount mgd from the kinetic energy of the
object. This is consistent with the slowing of the object as it rises.

After the object has reached its maximum height and is falling back down,
the angle ¢ between force F, and displacement dis zero. Thus,

W, = mgd cos 0° = mgd(+1) = +megd. (7-14)

The plus sign tells us that the gravitational force now transfers energy in the amount
mgd to the kinetic energy of the falling object (it speeds up, of course).

Work Done in Lifting and Lowering an Object

Now suppose we lift a particle-like object by applying a vertical force F to it.
During the upward displacement, our applied force does positive work W, on the
object while the gravitational force does negative work W, on it. Our applied
force tends to transfer energy to the object while the gravitational force tends to
transfer energy from it. By Eq. 7-10, the change AK in the kinetic energy of the
object due to these two energy transfers is
AK = K;— K;=W, + W,, (7-15)

in which K;is the kinetic energy at the end of the displacement and K; is that at
the start of the displacement. This equation also applies if we lower the object,
but then the gravitational force tends to transfer energy to the object while our
force tends to transfer energy from it.

If an object is stationary before and after a lift (as when you lift a book from
the floor toa shelf), then Kyand K; are both zero, and Eq. 7-15 reduces to

W, + W,=0

or W, = —W,. (7-16)

Note that we get the same result if K; and K; are not zero but are still equal.
Either way, the result means that the work done by the applied force is the nega-
tive of the work done by the gravitational force; that is, the applied force transfers
the same amount of energy to the object as the gravitational force transfers from
the object. Using Eq. 7-12, we can rewrite Eq. 7-16 as

W, = —mgd cos (work done in lifting and lowering: K; = K,), (7-17)
with ¢ being the angle between F, and d.If the displacement is vertically upward

(Fig. 7-7a), then ¢ = 180° and the work done by the applied force equals mgd.
