Completing Meiosis

After the long duration of prophase and metaphase, which
together make up 90% or more of the time meiosis I takes,
meiosis I rapidly concludes. Anaphase I and telophase I
proceed quickly, followed—without an intervening period
of DNA synthesis—by the second meiotic division.

Anaphase I

In anaphase I, the microtubules of the spindle fibers
begin to shorten. As they shorten, they break the chias-
mata and pull the centromeres toward the poles, drag-
ging the chromosomes along with them. Because the mi-
crotubules are attached to kinetochores on only one side
of each centromere, the individual centromeres are not
pulled apart to form two daughter centromeres, as they
are in mitosis. Instead, the entire centromere moves to
one pole, taking both sister chromatids with it. When the
spindle fibers have fully contracted, each pole has a com-
plete haploid set of chromosomes consisting of one mem-
ber of each homologous pair. Because of the random ori-
entation of homologous chromosomes on the metaphase
plate, a pole may receive either the maternal or the pater-
nal homologue from each chromosome pair. As a result,
the genes on different chromosomes assort indepen-
dently; that is, meiosis I results in the independent as-
sortment of maternal and paternal chromosomes into
the gametes.

Telophase I

By the beginning of telophase I, the chromosomes have
segregated into two clusters, one at each pole of the cell.
Now the nuclear membrane re-forms around each daugh-
ter nucleus. Because each chromosome within a daughter
nucleus replicated before meiosis I began, each now con-
tains two sister chromatids attached by a common cen-
tromere. Importantly, the sister chromatids are no longer iden-
tical, because of the crossing over that occurred in prophase
I (figure 12.14). Cytokinesis may or may not occur after
telophase I. The second meiotic division, meiosis II, occurs
after an interval of variable length.

The Second Meiotic Division

After a typically brief interphase, in which no DNA synthe-
sis occurs, the second meiotic division begins

Meiosis II resembles a normal mitotic division. Prophase
II, metaphase II, anaphase II, and telophase II follow in
quick succession.

Prophase II. At the two poles of the cell the clusters
of chromosomes enter a brief prophase II, each nuclear
envelope breaking down as a new spindle forms.

Metaphase II. In metaphase II, spindle fibers bind to
both sides of the centromeres.

234 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

*

ye.
e)
y

FIGURE 12.14

After meiosis I, sister chromatids are not identical. So-called
“harlequin” chromosomes, each containing one fluorescent DNA.
strand, illustrate the reciprocal exchange of genetic material
during meiosis I between sister chromatids.

Anaphase II. The spindle fibers contract, splitting the
centromeres and moving the sister chromatids to oppo-
site poles.

Telophase II. Finally, the nuclear envelope re-forms
around the four sets of daughter chromosomes.

The final result of this division is four cells containing
haploid sets of chromosomes (figure 12.15). No two are
alike, because of the crossing over in prophase I. Nuclear
envelopes then form around each haploid set of chromo-
somes. The cells that contain these haploid nuclei may de-
velop directly into gametes, as they do in animals. Alterna-
tively, they may themselves divide mitotically, as they do in
plants, fungi, and many protists, eventually producing
greater numbers of gametes or, as in the case of some
plants and insects, adult individuals of varying ploidy.

 

During meiosis I, homologous chromosomes move
toward opposite poles in anaphase I, and individual
chromosomes cluster at the two poles in telophase I. At
the end of meiosis II, each of the four haploid cells
contains one copy of every chromosome in the set,
rather than two. Because of crossing over, no two cells
are the same. These haploid cells may develop directly
into gametes, as in animals, or they may divide by
mitosis, as in plants, fungi, and many protists.

 
