126

Figure 6-1 (Continued) (e) Once f, reaches
its maximum value, the block “breaks
away,” accelerating suddenly in the direc-
tion of F. (f) If the block is now to move
with constant velocity, F must be reduced
from the maximum value it had just
before the block broke away. (g) Some
experimental results for the sequence

(a) through (f). In WileyPLUS, this
figure is available as an animation with
voiceover.

CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

Finally, the applied force
has overwhelmed the
static frictional force.
Block slides and
accelerates.

Weak kinetic
frictional force

To maintain the speed,
weaken force F to match
the weak frictional force.

Same weak kinetic
frictional force

 

 

[Maximum value of f,

f.is approximately
constant Kinetic frictional force
has only one value

Static frictional force \
1
(no matching).
1
\

can only match growing
applied force.

 

Breakaway

 

 

 

(o Time

Figures 6-lc and 6-ld show that as you increase the magnitude of your
applied force, the magnitude of the static frictional force f, also increases and
the block remains at rest. When the applied force reaches a certain magnitude,
however, the block “breaks away” from its intimate contact with the tabletop and
accelerates leftward (Fig. 6-1e). The frictional force that then opposes the motion
is called the kinetic frictional force /;,.

Usually, the magnitude of the kinetic frictional force, which acts when there is
motion, is less than the maximum magnitude of the static frictional force, which
acts when there is no motion. Thus, if you wish the block to move across the sur-
face with a constant speed, you must usually decrease the magnitude of the
applied force once the block begins to move, as in Fig. 6-If. As an example,
Fig. 6-1g shows the results of an experiment in which the force on a block was
slowly increased until breakaway occurred. Note the reduced force needed to
keep the block moving at constant speed after breakaway.

Microscopic View. A frictional force is, in essence, the vector sum of many
forces acting between the surface atoms of one body and those of another body. If
two highly polished and carefully cleaned metal surfaces are brought together in
a very good vacuum (to keep them clean), they cannot be made to slide over each
other. Because the surfaces are so smooth, many atoms of one surface contact
many atoms of the other surface, and the surfaces cold-weld together instantly,
forming a single piece of metal. If a machinist’s specially polished gage blocks are
brought together in air, there is less atom-to-atom contact, but the blocks stick
firmly to each other and can be separated only by means of a wrenching motion.
Usually, however, this much atom-to-atom contact is not possible. Even a highly
polished metal surface is far from being flat on the atomic scale. Moreover, the
surfaces of everyday objects have layers of oxides and other contaminants that
reduce cold-welding.

When two ordinary surfaces are placed together, only the high points touch
each other. (It is like having the Alps of Switzerland turned over and placed down
on the Alps of Austria.) The actual microscopic area of contact is much less than
the apparent macroscopic contact area, perhaps by a factor of 10*. Nonetheless,
