 

112 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

Sample Problem 5.06 Forces within an elevator cab

Although people would surely avoid getting into the ele-
vator with you, suppose that you weigh yourself while on
an elevator that is moving. Would you weigh more than,
less than, or the same as when the scale is on a stationary
floor?

In Fig. 5-17a, a passenger of mass m = 72.2 kg stands on
a platform scale in an elevator cab. We are concerned with
the scale readings when the cab is stationary and when it is
moving up or down.

(a) Find a general solution for the scale reading, whatever
the vertical motion of the cab.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The reading is equal to the magnitude of the normal force
Fy on the passenger from the scale. The only other force act-
ing on the passenger is the gravitational force Fy as shown in
the free-body diagram of Fig. 5-17b. (2) We can relate the
forces on the passenger to his acceleration @ by using
Newton’s second law (Feet = ma). However, recall that we
can use this law only in an inertial frame. If the cab acceler-
ates, then it is not an inertial frame. So we choose the ground
to be our inertial frame and make any measure of the passen-
ger’s acceleration relative to it.

Calculations: Because the two forces on the passenger and
his acceleration are all directed vertically, along the y axis in
Fig. 5-17b, we can use Newton’s second law written for y
components (Fer, = May) to get

Fy — F,=ma

or Fy = F, + ma. (5-27)

RRR
4

SS

=

SS

KS

oS

\_ Passenger

These forces
— compete.
* Their net force
causes a vertical
(a) (6) acceleration.

 

Figure 5-17 (a) A passenger stands on a platform scale that indi-
cates either his weight or his apparent weight. (b) The free-body
diagram for the passenger, showing the normal force Fy on him
from the scale and the gravitational force F..

This tells us that the scale reading, which is equal to normal
force magnitude Fy, depends on the vertical acceleration.
Substituting mg for F, gives us

Fy=m(g+a) (Answer) (5-28)

for any choice of acceleration a. If the acceleration is up-
ward, a is positive; if it is downward, a is negative.

(b) What does the scale read if the cab is stationary or
moving upward at aconstant 0.50 m/s?

KEY IDEA

 

For any constant velocity (zero or otherwise), the accelera-
tion a of the passenger is zero.

Calculation: Substituting this and other known values into
Eq. 5-28, we find

Fy = (72.2 kg)(9.8 m/s? + 0) = 708 N.
(Answer)

This is the weight of the passenger and is equal to the mag-
nitude F, of the gravitational force on him.

(c) What does the scale read if the cab accelerates upward at
3.20 m/s? and downward at 3.20 m/s”?

Calculations: For a = 3.20 m/s”, Eq. 5-28 gives
Fy = (72.2 kg)(9.8 m/s? + 3.20 m/s?)

= 939 N, (Answer)
and for a = —3.20 m/s’, it gives
Fy = (72.2 kg)(9.8 m/s? — 3.20 m/s?)
=47I1N. (Answer)

For an upward acceleration (either the cab’s upward
speed is increasing or its downward speed is decreasing),
the scale reading is greater than the passenger’s weight.
That reading is a measurement of an apparent weight, be-
cause it is made in a noninertial frame. For a downward
acceleration (either decreasing upward speed or increas-
ing downward speed), the scale reading is less than the
passenger’s weight.

(d) During the upward acceleration in part (c), what is the
magnitude F,., of the net force on the passenger, and what is
the magnitude a,.q, of his acceleration as measured in the
frame of the cab? Does Fye, = MA pcav?

Calculation: The magnitude F, of the gravitational force on
the passenger does not depend on the motion of the passen-
ger or the cab; so, from part (b), F, is 708 N. From part (c), the
magnitude Fy of the normal force on the passenger during
