196 CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

Scientists and engineers have never found an exception to it. Energy simply can-
not magically appear or disappear.

Isolated System

If a system is isolated from its environment, there can be no energy transfers to or
from it. For that case, the law of conservation of energy states:

Oo The total energy E of an isolated system cannot change.

Many energy transfers may be going on within an isolated system— between,
say, kinetic energy and a potential energy or between kinetic energy and ther-
mal energy. However, the total of all the types of energy in the system cannot
change. Here again, energy cannot magically appear or disappear.

‘We can use the rock climber in Fig. 8-14 as an example, approximating
him, his gear, and Earth as an isolated system. As he rappels down the rock
face, changing the configuration of the system, he needs to control the transfer
of energy from the gravitational potential energy of the system. (That energy
cannot just disappear.) Some of it is transferred to his kinetic energy.
However, he obviously does not want very much transferred to that type or he
will be moving too quickly, so he has wrapped the rope around metal rings to
produce friction between the rope and the rings as he moves down. The sliding
of the rings on the rope then transfers the gravitational potential energy of the
system to thermal energy of the rings and rope in a way that he can control.
The total energy of the climber—gear—Earth system (the total of its gravita-
tional potential energy, kinetic energy, and thermal energy) does not change
during his descent.

For an isolated system, the law of conservation of energy can be written in
two ways. First, by setting W = 0 in Eq. 8-35, we get

   

Tyler Stableford/The Image Bank/Getty Images

Figure 8-14 To descend, the rock climber
must transfer energy from the gravitational
potential energy of a system consisting of
him, his gear, and Earth. He has wrapped
the rope around metal rings so that the
rope rubs against the rings. This allows

most of the transferred energy to go to the AE nec + AE + AE in = 0 (isolated system). (8-36)
thermal energy of the rope and rings
rather than to his kinetic energy. We can also let AE nec = Emec2 — Emec, Where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to two

different instants —say, before and after a certain process has occurred. Then Eq.
8-36 becomes
Ennec2 = Emeca ~ AEw — AEint- (8-37)

Equation 8-37 tells us:

Oo In an isolated system, we can relate the total energy at one instant to the total
energy at another instant without considering the energies at intermediate times.

This fact can be a very powerful tool in solving problems about isolated systems
when you need to relate energies of a system before and after a certain process
occurs in the system.

In Module 8-2, we discussed a special situation for isolated systems —namely,
the situation in which nonconservative forces (such as a kinetic frictional force)
do not act within them. In that special situation, AE,, and AE; are both zero, and
so Eg. 8-37 reduces to Eq. 8-18. In other words, the mechanical energy of an
isolated system is conserved when nonconservative forces do not act in it.

External Forces and Internal Energy Transfers

An external force can change the kinetic energy or potential energy of an object
without doing work on the object—that is, without transferring energy to the
object. Instead, the force is responsible for transfers of energy from one type to
another inside the object.
