134

CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

In both car and shuttle you are in uniform circular motion, acted on by a cen-
tripetal force—yet your sensations in the two situations are quite different. In
the car, jammed up against the wall, you are aware of being compressed by the
wall. In the orbiting shuttle, however, you are floating around with no sensation
of any force acting on you. Why this difference?

The difference is due to the nature of the two centripetal forces. In the
car, the centripetal force is the push on the part of your body touching the car
wall. You can sense the compression on that part of your body. In the shuttle,
the centripetal force is Earth’s gravitational pull on every atom of your body.
Thus, there is no compression (or pull) on any one part of your body and no
sensation of a force acting on you. (The sensation is said to be one of “weight-
lessness,” but that description is tricky. The pull on you by Earth has certainly
not disappeared and, in fact, is only a little less than it would be with you on
the ground.)

Another example of a centripetal force is shown in Fig. 6-8. There a hockey
puck moves around in a circle at constant speed v while tied to a string looped
around a central peg. This time the centripetal force is the radially inward pull on
the puck from the string. Without that force, the puck would slide off in a straight
line instead of moving in a circle.

Note again that a centripetal force is not a new kind of force. The name merely
indicates the direction of the force. It can, in fact, be a frictional force, a gravitational
force, the force from a car wall or a string, or any other force. For any situation:

Oo A centripetal force accelerates a body by changing the direction of the body's
velocity without changing the body’s speed.

From Newton’s second law and Eq. 6-17 (a = v?/R), we can write the magnitude
F of acentripetal force (or a net centripetal force) as

2

Vv
F=m ai (magnitude of centripetal force). (6-18)

Because the speed v here is constant, the magnitudes of the acceleration and the
force are also constant.

However, the directions of the centripetal acceleration and force are not con-
stant; they vary continuously so as to always point toward the center of the circle.
For this reason, the force and acceleration vectors are sometimes drawn along a
radial axis r that moves with the body and always extends from the center of the
circle to the body, as in Fig. 6-8. The positive direction of the axis is radially out-
ward, but the acceleration and force vectors point radially inward.

The puck moves
in uniform
circular motion
only because

of a toward-the-
center force.

 

Figure 6-8 An overhead view of a hockey puck moving with constant speed v in a
circular path of radius R on a horizontal frictionless surface. The centripetal force on the
puck is 7, the pull from the string, directed inward along the radial axis r extending
through the puck.
