the ball-Earth system? (c) If the gravita-
tional potential energy is taken to be zero
at the lowest point, what is its value just as
the ball is released? (d) Do the magnitudes
of the answers to (a) through (c) increase,
decrease, or remain the same if angle @ is
increased?

**8 A 1.50 kg snowball is fired from a cliff
12.5 m high. The snowball’s initial velocity is
14.0 m/s, directed 41.0° above the horizontal.
(a) How much work is done on the snowball
by the gravitational force during its flight to %
the flat ground below the cliff? (b) What is

 

. ar Figure 8-34
the change in the gravitational potential en-
° ~ . Problems 7, 18,
ergy of the snowball—Earth system during and 21

the flight? (c) If that gravitational potential
energy is taken to be zero at the height of the cliff, what is its value
when the snowball reaches the ground?

Module 8-2 Conservation of Mechanical Energy

°9 © In Problem 2, what is the speed of the car at (a) point A,
(b) point B, and (c) point C? (d) How high will the car go on the
last hill, which is too high for it to cross? (e) If we substitute a sec-
ond car with twice the mass, what then are the answers to (a)
through (d)?

+10 (a) In Problem 3, what is the speed of the book when it
reaches the hands? (b) If we substituted a second book with twice
the mass, what would its speed be? (c) If, instead, the book were
thrown down, would the answer to (a) increase, decrease, or
remain the same?

*11 SSM www (a) In Problem 5, what is the speed of the flake
when it reaches the bottom of the bowl? (b) If we substituted a sec-
ond flake with twice the mass, what would its speed be? (c) If,
instead, we gave the flake an initial downward speed along the
bowl, would the answer to (a) increase, decrease, or remain the
same?

*12 (a) In Problem 8, using energy techniques rather than the
techniques of Chapter 4, find the speed of the snowball as it
reaches the ground below the cliff. What is that speed (b) if the
launch angle is changed to 41.0° below the horizontal and (c) if the
mass is changed to 2.50 kg?

*13 SSM A5.0g marble is fired vertically upward using a spring
gun. The spring must be compressed 8.0 cm if the marble is to just
reach a target 20 m above the marble’s position on the compressed
spring. (a) What is the change AU, in the gravitational potential en-
ergy of the marble—Earth system during the 20m ascent?
(b) What is the change AU, in the elastic potential energy of the
spring during its launch of the marble? (c) What is the spring con-
stant of the spring?

°14 (a) In Problem 4, what initial speed must be given the ball so
that it reaches the vertically upward position with zero speed? What
then is its speed at (b) the lowest point and (c) the point on the right
at which the ball is level with the initial point? (d) If the ball’s mass
were doubled, would the answers to (a) through (c) increase, de-
crease, or remain the same?

+15 SSM In Fig. 8-35, a runaway truck with failed brakes is mov-
ing downgrade at 130 km/h just before the driver steers the truck
up a frictionless emergency escape ramp with an inclination of
6 = 15°. The truck’s mass is 1.2 X 10* kg, (a) What minimum length

PROBLEMS 203

L must the ramp have if the truck is to stop (momentarily) along
it? (Assume the truck is a particle, and justify that assumption.)
Does the minimum length L increase, decrease, or remain the same
if (b) the truck’s mass is decreased and (c) its speed is decreased?

 

Figure 8-35 Problem 15.

“16 A 700g block is released from rest at height /y above a ver-
tical spring with spring constant k = 400 N/m and negligible mass.
The block sticks to the spring and momentarily stops after com-
pressing the spring 19.0 cm. How much work is done (a) by the
block on the spring and (b) by the spring on the block? (c) What is
the value of /o? (d) If the block were released from height 2.00h9
above the spring, what would be the maximum compression of the
spring?

17 In Problem 6, what are the magnitudes of (a) the horizontal
component and (b) the vertical component of the net force acting
on the block at point Q? (c) At what height / should the block be
released from rest so that it is on the verge of losing contact with
the track at the top of the loop? (On the verge of losing contact
means that the normal force on the block from the track has just
then become zero.) (d) Graph the magnitude of the normal force on
the block at the top of the loop versus initial height A, for the range
h=O0toh=6R.

18 (a) In Problem 7, what is the speed of the ball at the lowest

point? (b) Does the speed increase, decrease, or remain the same if
the mass is increased?

19 © Figure 8-36 shows an 8.00 kg stone
at rest on a spring. The spring is compressed
10.0 cm by the stone. (a) What is the spring

constant? (b) The stone is pushed down an k
additional 30.0 cm and released. What is the

elastic potential energy of the compressed

spring just before that release? (c) What is Figure 8-36
the change in the gravitational potential en- Problem 19.

ergy of the stone—Earth system when the
stone moves from the release point to its maximum height? (d) What
is that maximum height, measured from the release point?

20 @ A pendulum consists of a 2.0 kg stone swinging on a
4.0 m string of negligible mass. The stone has a speed of 8.0 m/s
when it passes its lowest point. (a) What is the speed when the
string is at 60° to the vertical? (b) What is the greatest angle with
the vertical that the string will reach during the stone’s motion?
(c) If the potential energy of the pendulum—Earth system is taken
to be zero at the stone’s lowest point, what is the total mechanical
energy of the system?

21 Figure 8-34 shows a pendulum of length L = 1.25 m. Its bob
(which effectively has all the mass) has speed vp when the cord makes
an angle @ = 40.0° with the vertical. (a) What is the speed of the bob
when it is in its lowest position if vy = 8.00 m/s? What is the least
value that vy can have if the pendulum is to swing down and then up
(b) to a horizontal position, and (c) to a vertical position with the
cord remaining straight? (d) Do the answers to (b) and (c) increase,
decrease, orremain the same if @ is increased by a few degrees?
