 

194

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

changes, and the thermal energies of the block and floor also change. Therefore, the
work done by force F is done on the block—floor system. That work is

W = AE nec + AEw

(8-33)

(work done onsystem, friction involved).

This equation, which is represented in Fig. 8-13b, is the energy statement for the
work done on a system by an external force when friction is involved.

VI Checkpoint 5

In three trials, a block is pushed
bya horizontal applied force
across a floor that is not friction-
less, as in Fig, 8-13a.The magni- 4,
tudes F of the applied force and

the results of the pushing on the

Trial F Result on Block’s Speed
a 5.0N decreases
70N remains constant
c 8.0N increases

block’s speed are given in the
table. Inall three trials, the block is pushed through the same distance d. Rank the
three trials according to the change in the thermal energy of the block and floor that
occurs in that distance d, greatest first.

Sample Problem 8.05 Work, friction, change in thermal energy, cabbage heads

A food shipper pushes a wood crate of cabbage heads (total
mass m = 14kg) across a concrete floor with a constant
horizontal force F of magnitude 40 N. In a straight-line dis-
placement of magnitude d = 0.50 m, the speed of the crate
decreases from vy = 0.60 m/s tov = 0.20 m/s.

(a) How much work is done by force F, and on what system
does it do the work?

KEY IDEA

 

Because the applied force F is constant, we can calculate
the work it does by using Eq. 7-7 (W = Fd cos ¢).

Calculation: Substituting given data, including the fact that
force F and displacement d are in the same direction, we
find

W = Fd cos ¢ = (40 N)(0.50 m) cos 0°

= 20). (Answer)

Reasoning: To determine the system on which the work is
done, let’s check which energies change. Because the crate’s
speed changes, there is certainly a change AK in the crate’s
kinetic energy. Is there friction between the floor and the
crate, and thus a change in thermal energy? Note that Fand
the crate’s velocity have the same direction. Thus, if there is
no friction, then F should be accelerating the crate to a
greater speed. However, the crate is slowing, so there must

RwiLeY

be friction and a change A£,, in thermal energy of the crate
and the floor. Therefore, the system on which the work is
done is the crate—-floor system, because both energy
changes occur in that system.

(b) What is the increase AEZ,, in the thermal energy of the
crate and floor?

KEY IDEA

 

‘We can relate AE, to the work W done by F with the energy
statement of Eq. 8-33 for a system that involves friction:
W = AE nec + AE. (8-34)
Calculations: We know the value of W from (a). The
change AE,,., in the crate’s mechanical energy is just the
change in its kinetic energy because no potential energy
changes occur, so we have
AE nec = AK = }mv? — 3mvj.
Substituting this into Eq. 8-34 and solving for AE;,, we find
AEn = W — Gmv? — 3mv3) = W — 3m(v? — vi)
= 20J — 5(14kg)[(0.20 m/s)? — (0.60 m/s)?]
= 22.25 = 225. (Answer)
Without further experiments, we cannot say how much of

this thermal energy ends up in the crate and how much in
the floor. We simply know the total amount.

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
