6-2 THE DRAG FORCE AND TERMINAL SPEED 131

Table 6-1 Some Terminal Speeds in Air

Object Terminal Speed (m/s) 95% Distance’ (m)
Shot (from shot put) 145 2500
Sky diver (typical) 60 430
Baseball 42 210
Tennis ball 31 115
Basketball 20 47
Ping-Pong ball 9 10
Raindrop (radius = 1.5 mm) 7 6
Parachutist (typical) 5 3

“This is the distance through which the body must fall from rest to reach 95% of its terminal speed.
Based on Peter J. Brancazio, Sport Science, 1984, Simon & Schuster, New York.

where pis the air density (mass per volume) and A is the effective cross-sectional
area of the body (the area of a cross section taken perpendicular to the
velocity V). The drag coefficient C (typical values range from 0.4 to 1.0) is not
truly a constant for a given body because if v varies significantly, the value of C
can vary as well. Here, we ignore such complications.

Downhill speed skiers know well that drag depends on A and v?. To reach
high speeds a skier must reduce D as much as possible by, for example, riding the
skis in the “egg position” (Fig. 6-5) to minimize A.

Falling. When a blunt body falls from rest through air, the drag force Dis
directed upward; its magnitude gradually increases from zero as the speed of the
body increases. This upward force D opposes the downward gravitational force E,
on the body. We can relate these forces to the body’s acceleration by writing
Newton’s second law for a vertical y axis (Fyer, = may) as

D—~F,=ma, (6-15)

where m is the mass of the body. As suggested in Fig. 6-6, if the body falls long
enough, D eventually equals F,. From Eq. 6-15, this means that a = 0, and so the
body’s speed no longer increases. The body then falls at a constant speed, called
the terminal speed v,.

To find v,, we set a = 0in Eq. 6-15 and substitute for D from Eq. 6-14, obtaining

3CpAv? — F, = 0,

<2
t CpA

Table 6-1 gives values of v, for some common objects.

According to calculations* based on Eq. 6-14, a cat must fall about six
floors to reach terminal speed. Until it does so, F, > D and the cat accelerates
downward because of the net downward force. Recall from Chapter 2
that your body is an accelerometer, not a speedometer. Because the cat also
senses the acceleration, it is frightened and keeps its feet underneath its body,
its head tucked in, and its spine bent upward, making A small, v, large, and in-
jury likely.

However, if the cat does reach v, during a longer fall, the acceleration vanishes
and the cat relaxes somewhat, stretching its legs and neck horizontally outward and

which gives (6-16)

*W. O. Whitney and C. J. Mehlhaff, “High-Rise Syndrome in Cats.” The Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association, 1987.

 

Karl-Josef Hildenbrand/dpa/Landov LLC

Figure 6-5 This skier crouches in an “egg
position” so as to minimize her effective
cross-sectional area and thus minimize the
air drag acting on her.

As the cat's speed
increases, the upward
drag force increases
until it balances the
gravitational force.

Falling |—
body D

 

(a) (d) (0
Figure 6-6 The forces that act on a body
falling through air: (a) the body when it
has just begun to fall and (b) the free-
body diagram a little later, after a drag
force has developed. (c) The drag force
has increased until it balances the
gravitational force on the body. The body
now falls at its constant terminal speed.
