top is (c) the centripetal acceleration of the block greatest and (d) the
normal force on the block least?

 

Figure 8-21 Question 4.

5 In Fig, 8-22,a block slides from A to C along a frictionless ramp,
and then it passes through horizontal region CD, where a frictional
force acts on it. Is the block’s kinetic energy increasing, decreasing,
or constant in (a) region AB, (b) region BC, and (c) region CD?
(d) Is the block’s mechanical energy increasing, decreasing, or
constant in those regions?

_
~\
\

LS

B
Figure 8-22 Question 5.

 

6 In Rig. 8-23a, you pull upward on a rope that is attached to a
cylinder on a vertical rod. Because the cylinder fits tightly on the
rod, the cylinder slides along the rod with considerable friction.
Your force does work W= +100J on the cylinder-rod—Earth
system (Fig. 8-23b). An “energy statement” for the system is shown
in Fig, 8-23c: the kinetic energy K increases by 50 J,and the gravita-
tional potential energy U, increases by 20 J. The only other change
in energy within the system is for the thermal energy E,,. What is
the change AEy,?

   

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Rod Work W
Rope W= +1003
[ \ System's energies:
fl \system =
Cylinder! ! aio
: I AU, = +20
= =, =
\ Earth / Abn =?
(a () ()

Figure 8-23 Question 6.

7 The arrangement shown in Fig. 8-24 is similar to that in
Question 6. Here you pull downward on the rope that is attached
to the cylinder, which fits tightly on the rod. Also, as the cylinder

QUESTIONS 201

Block

descends, it pulls on a block via a
second rope, and the block slides
over a lab table. Again consider the
cylinder—rod—Earth system, similar
to that shown in Fig. 8-23b. Your
work on the system is 200 J. The sys-
tem does work of 60 J on the block.
Within the system, the kinetic
energy increases by 130J and
the gravitational potential energy
decreases by 20 J. (a) Draw an “en-
ergy statement” for the system, as in
Fig, 8-23c. (b) What is the change in
the thermal energy within the system?

8 In Fig. 8-25, a block slides along a track that descends through
distance h. The track is frictionless except for the lower section.
There the block slides to a stop in a certain distance D because of
friction. (a) If we decrease h, will the block now slide to a stop in a
distance that is greater than, less than, or equal to D? (b) If, instead,
we increase the mass of the block, will the stopping distance now be
greater than, less than, or equal to D?

   
  

Rod
Cylinder

 

 

 

 

Figure 8-24 Question 7.

h |/}-—p—
1

Figure 8-25 Question 8.

9 Figure 8-26 shows three situations involving a plane that is not
frictionless and a block sliding along the plane. The block begins with
the same speed in all three situations and slides until the kinetic fric-
tional force has stopped it. Rank the situations according to the in-
crease in thermal energy due to the sliding, greatest first.

=.
ma
a ©
(dl) (2) (3)

Figure 8-26 Question 9.

10 Figure 8-27 shows three plums
that are launched from the same level
with the same speed. One moves
straight upward, one is launched at a
small angle to the vertical, and one is
launched along a frictionless incline.
Rank the plums according to their
speed when they reach the level of
the dashed line, greatest first.

 

(1) (2) (3)
Figure 8-27 Question 10.

11 When a particle moves from f
to i and from j to i along the paths

shown in Fig. 8-28, and in the indi- 29 f

cated directions, a conservative j
force F does the indicated amounts

of work on it. How much work is

done on the particle by F when the 205

particle moves directly from f to j? Figure 8-28 Question 11.
