8-2 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY 185

when the system is isolated and only conservative forces act on the objects in the
system. In other words:

Ok] In an isolated system where only conservative forces cause energy changes, the
kinetic energy and potential energy can change, but their sum, the mechanical
energy Emec of the system, cannot change.

This result is called the principle of conservation of mechanical energy. (Now you
can see where conservative forces got their name.) With the aid of Eq. 8-15, we
can write this principle in one more form, as

AE nec = AK + AU=0. (8-18)
The principle of conservation of mechanical energy allows us to solve
problems that would be quite difficult to solve using only Newton’s laws:

oO When the mechanical energy of a system is conserved, we can relate the sum of kinetic
energy and potential energy at one instant to that at another instant without consider-
ing the intermediate motion and without finding the work done by the forces involved.

Figure 8-7 shows an example in which the principle of conservation of
mechanical energy can be applied: As a pendulum swings, the energy of the

V=Hnas

All kinetic energy

Figure 8-7 A pendulum, with its mass
concentrated in a bob at the lower end,
swings back and forth. One full cycle of

 

the motion is shown. During the cycle the All potential The total energy All potential

values of the potential and kinetic ener- energy does not change energy

gies of the pendulum-—Earth system vary (itis conserved).

as the bob rises and falls, but the mechani- UK UK
cal energy E,,., of the system remains (Q

constant. The energy E,,., can be

described as continuously shifting between \

the kinetic and potential forms. In stages

(@ and (e), all the energy is kinetic energy.
The bob then has its greatest speed and is
at its lowest point. In stages (c) and (g), all
the energy is potential energy. The bob
then has zero speed and is at its highest
point. In stages (b), (d), (f),and (h), half
the energy is kinetic energy and half is
potential energy. If the swinging involved
a frictional force at the point where the
pendulum is attached to the ceiling, or a All kinetic energy
drag force due to the air, then Ey... would

not be conserved, and eventually the UK

pendulum would stop. ©

V= Vmax.

_

  
