Potential Energy and

Conservation of Energy

8-1 POTENTIAL ENERGY

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

8.01 Distinguish a conservative force from a nonconservative
force.

8.02 For a particle moving between two points, identify that
the work done by a conservative force does not depend on
which path the particle takes.

Key Ideas

8.03 Calculate the gravitational potential energy of a particle
(or, more properly, a particle—Earth system).

8.04 Calculate the elastic potential energy of a block—spring
system.

 

@ A force is a conservative force if the net work it does on
a particle moving around any closed path, from an initial
point and then back to that point, is zero. Equivalently, a force
is conservative if the net work it does on a particle moving
between two points does not depend on the path taken by
the particle. The gravitational force and the spring force are
conservative forces; the kinetic frictional force is a noncon-
servative force.
@ Potential energy is energy that is associated with the con-
figuration of a system in which a conservative force acts.
When the conservative force does work W on a particle
within the system, the change AU in the potential energy of
the system is

AU=-—W.

If the particle moves from point x; to point x, the change in
the potential energy of the system is

AU= [xo dx.

 

@ The potential energy associated with a system consisting of
Earth and a nearby particle is gravitational potential energy. If
the particle moves from height y; to height y,, the change in the
gravitational potential energy of the particle-Earth system is

AU = mg(yp— yi) = mg Ay.
@ If the reference point of the particle is set as y; = 0 and the
corresponding gravitational potential energy of the system is
set as U; = 0, then the gravitational potential energy U when
the particle is at any height y is

U(y) = mey.

@ Elastic potential energy is the energy associated with the
state of compression or extension of an elastic object. For a
spring that exerts a spring force F = —kx when its free end
has displacement x, the elastic potential energy is

U(x) = 5kx?.

@ The reference configuration has the spring at its relaxed
length, at which x = 0 and U= 0.

 

What Is Physics?

One job of physics is to identify the different types of energy in the world,
especially those that are of common importance. One general type of energy is
potential energy U. Technically, potential energy is energy that can be associated
with the configuration (arrangement) of a system of objects that exert forces on

one another.

177
