190

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

Equilibrium Points

Figure 8-9f shows three different values for Ey. superposed on the plot of the
potential energy function U(x) of Fig. 8-9a. Let us see how they change the situa-
tion. If Eqec = 4.0J (purple line), the turning point shifts from x, to a point
between x; and x2. Also, at any point to the right of x5, the system’s mechanical
energy is equal to its potential energy; thus, the particle has no kinetic energy and
(by Eq. 8-22) no force acts on it, and so it must be stationary. A particle at such a
position is said to be in neutral equilibrium. (A marble placed on a horizontal
tabletop is in that state.)

Tf Enec = 3.0J (pink line), there are two turning points: One is between
xX, and x, and the other is between x, and x5. In addition, x; is a point at which
K = 0. If the particle is located exactly there, the force on it is also zero, and the
particle remains stationary. However, if it is displaced even slightly in either
direction, a nonzero force pushes it farther in the same direction, and the particle
continues to move. A particle at such a position is said to be in unstable equilib-
rium. (A marble balanced on top of a bowling ball is an example.)

Next consider the particle’s behavior if E,,.. = 1.0 J (green line). If we place it
at x,, it is stuck there. It cannot move left or right on its own because to do so would
require a negative kinetic energy. If we push it slightly left or right, a restoring force
appears that moves it back to x4. A particle at such a position is said to be in stable
equilibrium. (A marble placed at the bottom of a hemispherical bowl is an example.)
If we place the particle in the cup-like potential well centered at x, itis between two

turning points. It can still move somewhat, but only partway to x, or x3.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

The figure gives the potential energy function

U(.) for a system in which a particle is in one-
dimensional motion. (a) Rank regions AB, BC,and
CD according to the magnitude of the force on the
particle, greatest first. (b) What is the direction of
the force when the particle is in region AB?

U(x) (I)

 

Sample Problem 8.04 Reading a potential energy graph

A 2.00 kg particle moves along an x axis in one-dimensional
motion while a conservative force along that axis acts on it.
The potential energy U(x) associated with the force is plot-
ted in Fig. 8-10a. That is, if the particle were placed at any
position between x = 0 and x = 7.00 m, it would have the
plotted value of U. At x = 6.5m, the particle has velocity
Vo = (—4.00 mis)i.

(a) From Fig. 8-10a, determine the particle’s speed at
x,=45m.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The particle’s kinetic energy is given by Eq. 7-1
(K = 4m’). (2) Because only a conservative force acts on
the particle, the mechanical energy Emec(= K + U) is con-
served as the particle moves. (3) Therefore, on a plot of U(x)
such as Fig. 8-10a, the kinetic energy is equal to the differ-
ence between E,,., and U.

Calculations: Atx = 6.5 m, the particle has kinetic energy
Ky = gv} = (2.00 kg) (4.00 m/s)?
= 160J.

Because the potential energy there is U = 0, the mechanical
energy is

Enec = Ky + Uy = 16.03 + 0 = 16.05.

This value for E,,., is plotted as a horizontal line in Fig. 8-10a.
From that figure we see that at x = 4.5m, the potential
energy is U, = 7.0 J. The kinetic energy K, is the difference
between E,,,, and U;:

K, = Egec — U; = 16.03 — 7.03 = 9.0J.
Because K, = ;mv7, we find
vy, = 3.0 ms. (Answer)
(b) Where is the particle’s turning point located?
