Diploid offspring {

 

8

Homologous pairs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1) a> a UD) UD a a aD

Potential gametes

FIGURE 12.16

Independent assortment increases genetic variability. Independent assortment contributes new gene combinations to the next
generation because the orientation of chromosomes on the metaphase plate is random. In the cells shown above with three chromosome
pairs, eight different gametes can result, each with different combinations of parental chromosomes.

The Red Queen Hypothesis. One evolutionary ad-
vantage of sex may be that it allows populations to
“store” recessive alleles that are currently bad but have
promise for reuse at some time in the future. Because
populations are constrained by a changing physical and
biological environment, selection is constantly acting
against such alleles, but in sexual species can never get rid
of those sheltered in heterozygotes. The evolution of
most sexual species, most of the time, thus manages to
keep pace with ever-changing physical and biological
constraints. This “treadmill evolution” is sometimes
called the “Red Queen hypothesis,” after the Queen of
Hearts in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass, who
tells Alice, “Now, here, you see, it takes all the running
you can do, to keep in the same place.”

Miller’s Ratchet. The geneticist Herman Miller pointed
out in 1965 that asexual populations incorporate a kind of
mutational ratchet mechanism—once harmful mutations
arise, asexual populations have no way of eliminating them,
and they accumulate over time, like turning a ratchet. Sex-
ual populations, on the other hand, can employ recombina-
tion to generate individuals carrying fewer mutations,
which selection can then favor. Sex may just be a way to
keep the mutational load down.

The Evolutionary Consequences of Sex

While our knowledge of how sex evolved is sketchy, it is
abundantly clear that sexual reproduction has an enormous
impact on how species evolve today, because of its ability to
rapidly generate new genetic combinations. Independent
assortment (figure 12.16), crossing over, and random fertil-
ization each help generate genetic diversity.

Whatever the forces that led to sexual reproduction, its
evolutionary consequences have been profound. No genetic

process generates diversity more quickly; and, as you will
see in later chapters, genetic diversity is the raw material of
evolution, the fuel that drives it and determines its poten-
tial directions. In many cases, the pace of evolution appears
to increase as the level of genetic diversity increases. Pro-
grams for selecting larger stature in domesticated animals
such as cattle and sheep, for example, proceed rapidly at
first, but then slow as the existing genetic combinations are
exhausted; further progress must then await the generation
of new gene combinations. Racehorse breeding provides a
graphic example: thoroughbred racehorses are all descen-
dants of a small initial number of individuals, and selection
for speed has accomplished all it can with this limited
amount of genetic variability—the winning times in major
races ceased to improve decades ago.

Paradoxically, the evolutionary process is thus both
revolutionary and conservative. It is revolutionary in that
the pace of evolutionary change is quickened by genetic
recombination, much of which results from sexual repro-
duction. It is conservative in that evolutionary change is
not always favored by selection, which may instead pre-
serve existing combinations of genes. These conservative
pressures appear to be greatest in some asexually repro-
ducing organisms that do not move around freely and
that live in especially demanding habitats. In vertebrates,
on the other hand, the evolutionary premium appears to
have been on versatility, and sexual reproduction is the
predominant mode of reproduction by an overwhelming
margin.

 

 

The close association between homologous
chromosomes that occurs during meiosis may have
evolved as mechanisms to repair chromosomal damage,
although several alternative mechanisms have also been
proposed.

 

Chapter 12 Sexual Reproduction and Meiosis 237
