the upward acceleration is the 939 N reading on the scale. Thus,
the net force on the passenger is

F yet = Fy ~ Fy = 939 N — 708N =231N, (Answer)

5-3 APPLYING NEWTON'S LAWS 113

during the upward acceleration. However, his acceleration
4p cap Telative to the frame of the cab is zero. Thus, in the non-
inertial frame of the accelerating cab, F,.; is not equal to
MAp¢ap, and Newton’s second law does not hold.

Sample Problem 5.07 Acceleration of block pushing on block

Some homework problems involve objects that move to-
gether, because they are either shoved together or tied to-
gether. Here is an example in which you apply Newton’s
second law to the composite of two blocks and then to the
individual blocks.

In Fig. 5-18a, a constant horizontal force Fogp of magni-
tude 20 N is applied to block A of mass m4 = 4.0 kg, which
pushes against block B of mass mg = 6.0 kg. The blocks slide
over a frictionless surface, along an x axis.

(a) What is the acceleration of the blocks?

Serious Error: Because force o is applied directly
to block A, we use Newton’s second law to relate that
force to the acceleration @ of block A. Because the motion
is along the x axis, we use that law for x components
(Fret, = dy), writing it as

Fapp = Maa.

However, this is seriously wrong because Foy is not the
only horizontal force acting on block A. There is also the
force F,, from block B (Fig. 5-18b).

This force causes the
Fepp| acceleration of the full
*  two-block system.
(@

S = These are the two forces
E Fan acting on just block A.

‘pp
Their net force causes
% its acceleration.

Fa A
fe

(

x

This is the only force
causing the acceleration
of block B.

Figure 5-18 (a) A constant horizontal force F ypp is applied to block
A, which pushes against block B. (b) Two horizontal forces act on
block A. (c) Only one horizontal force acts on block B.

RwiLey

Dead-End Solution: Let us now include force F,, by writ-
ing, again for the x axis,

Fapp — Fag = maa.

(We use the minus sign to include the direction of Fig.)
Because Fz is a second unknown, we cannot solve this
equation for a.

Successful Solution: Because of the direction in which force
ce is applied, the two blocks form a rigidly connected system.
‘We can relate the net force on the system to the acceleration of
the system with Newton’s second law. Here, once again for the
X axis, we can write that law as

Fapp = (m4 + mp)a,

where now we properly apply Fog to the system with
total mass m,4 + mg. Solving for a and substituting known
values, we find

re
“img tm, 40K +60kg
(Answer)

Thus, the acceleration of the system and of each block is in the
positive direction of the x axis and has the magnitude 2.0 m/s”.

(b) What is the (horizontal) force Fy, on block B from
block A (Fig. 5-18c)?

KEY IDEA

 

We can relate the net force on block B to the block’s accel-
eration with Newton’s second law.

Calculation: Here we can write that law, still for compo-
nents along the x axis, as
Fp = mga,
which, with known values, gives
Fp = (6.0kg)(2.0 m/s?) =12N. (Answer)

Thus, force Ta is in the positive direction of the x axis and
has a magnitude of 12 N.

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
