 

136 CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

Sample Problem 6.05 Car in flat circular turn

Upside-down racing: A modern race car is designed so that
the passing air pushes down on it, allowing the car to travel
much faster through a flat turn in a Grand Prix without fric-
tion failing. This downward push is called negative lift. Can a
race car have so much negative lift that it could be driven up-
side down on a long ceiling, as done fictionally by a sedan in
the first Men in Black movie?

Figure 6-10a represents a Grand Prix race car of mass
m = 600 kg as it travels on a flat track in a circular are of
radius R = 100 m. Because of the shape of the car and the
wings on it, the passing air exerts a negative lift F, down-
ward on the car. The coefficient of static friction between
the tires and the track is 0.75. (Assume that the forces on the
four tires are identical.) a

(a) If the car is on the verge of sliding out of the turn when

its speed is 28.6 m/s, what is the magnitude of the negative
lift F;, acting downward on the car?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. A centripetal force must act on the car because the car
is moving around a circular arc; that force must be
directed toward the center of curvature of the arc (here,
that is horizontally).

2. The only horizontal force acting on the car is a frictional
force on the tires from the road. So the required cen-
tripetal force is a frictional force.

3. Because the car is not sliding, the frictional force must
be a static frictional force f, (Fig. 6-10a).

4. Because the car is on the verge of sliding, the magnitude
f, is equal to the maximum value fy, max = sy, where Fy
is the magnitude of the normal force Fy acting on the
car from the track.

Friction: toward the

center

The toward-the-
center force is (a)
the frictional force.

Center-

Track-level view (4)
of the forces

Radial calculations: The frictional force is is shown in the
free-body diagram of Fig. 6-10b. It is in the negative direc-
tion of a radial axis r that always extends from the center of
curvature through the car as the car moves. The force pro-
duces a centripetal acceleration of magnitude v7/R. We can
relate the force and acceleration by writing Newton’s sec-
ond law for components along the r axis (Fye.,, = md,) as

2
—f=m Ri} (6-20)
Substituting fimax = @sFy for f, leads us to
2
MsEy =m (= ) (6-21)

Vertical calculations: Next, let’s consider the vertical forces
on the car. The normal force Fy is directed up, in the posi-
tive direction of the y axis in Fig. 6-10b. The gravitational
force E = mg and the negative lift F;, are directed down.
The acceleration of the car along the y axis is zero. Thus we
can write Newton’s second law for components along the
y axis (Fhety = may) as

Fy — mg — F, = 0,

or Fy = mg + F,. (6-22)

Combining results: Now we can combine our results along
the two axes by substituting Eq. 6-22 for Fyin Eq. 6-21. Doing
so and then solving for F;, lead to

y2
r= m (2 - )

_ (286 mis? 2)
= (600 ke) ( 75(100m) mS
= 663.7 N ~ 660N. (Answer)

  

Normal force:
helps support car

Car

Gravitational force:
pulls car downward

Negative lift: presses
car downward

Figure 6-10 (a) A race car moves around a flat curved track at constant speed v. The frictional
force f, provides the necessary centripetal force along a radial axis: (b) A free-body diagram
(not to scale) for the car, in the vertical plane containing r.
