course) and has magnitude mg = (5.00 kg)(9.80 m/s’) = 49.0N.
That direction means that only a component of the force is
along the plane, and only that component (not the full force)
affects the box’s acceleration along the plane. Thus, before we
can write Newton’s second law for motion along the x axis, we
need to find an expression for that important component.

Figures 5-15c to h indicate the steps that lead to the ex-
pression. We start with the given angle of the plane and
work our way to a triangle of the force components (they
are the legs of the triangle and the full force is the hy-
potenuse). Figure 5-15c shows that the angle between the
ramp and F, is 90° — 6. (Do you see a right triangle there?)
Next, Figs 5-15d to f show F, and its components: One com-
ponent is parallel to the plane (that is the one we want) and
the other is perpendicular to the plane.

Because the perpendicular component is perpendicular,
the angle between it and F, must be 6 (Fig. 5-15d). The com-
ponent we want is the far leg of the component right trian-
gle. The magnitude of the hypotenuse is mg (the magnitude
of the gravitational force). Thus, the component we want has
magnitude mg sin 6 (Fig. 5-15g).

‘We have one more force to consider, the normal force
Fy shown in Fig. 5-15b. However, it is perpendicular to the

Sample Problem 5.05 Reading a force graph

Here is an example of where you must dig information out
of a graph, not just read off a number. In Fig. 5-16a, two
forces are applied to a 4.00 kg block on a frictionless floor,
but only force F, is indicated. That force has a fixed magni-
tude but can be applied at an adjustable angle 6 to the posi-
tive direction of the x axis. Force EB is horizontal and fixed in
both magnitude and angle. Figure 5-16b gives the horizontal
acceleration a, of the block for any given value of @ from 0°
to 90°. What is the value of a, for @ = 180°?

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The horizontal acceleration a, depends on the net hori-
zontal force Fye1, ,, aS given by Newton’s second law. (2) The
net horizontal force is the sum of the horizontal compo-
nents of forces F, and EB.

Calculations: The x component of BR is F, because the vector
is horizontal. The x component of F, is F, cos 6. Using these
expressions and a mass m of 4.00 kg, we can write Newton’s

second law (Fy. = ma) for motion along the x axis as
F, cos 9+ Fy = 4.00a,. (5-25)

From this equation we see that when angle @ = 90°, F, cos 0
is zero and F, = 4.00a,. From the graph we see that the

LEY

 

5-3 APPLYING NEWTON'S LAWS 111

plane and thus cannot affect the motion along the plane. (It
has no component along the plane to accelerate the box.)

‘We are now ready to write Newton’s second law for mo-
tion along the tilted x axis:

Fete = May.

The component a, is the only component of the acceleration
(the box is not leaping up from the plane, which would be
strange, or descending into the plane, which would be even
stranger). So, let’s simply write a for the acceleration along the
plane. Because T is in the positive x direction and the compo-
nent mg sin Gis in the negative x direction, we next write

T — mg sin 0= ma. (5-24)
Substituting data and solving for a, we find
a= 0.100 m/s?. (Answer)

The result is positive, indicating that the box accelerates up the
inclined plane, in the positive direction of the tilted x axis. If
we decreased the magnitude of i enough to make a = 0, the
box would move up the plane at constant speed. And if we de-
crease the magnitude of T even more, the acceleration would
be negative in spite of the cord’s pull.

When F, is horizontal,
the acceleration is
3.0 m/s.

 
     
 

 

Oo 90°

‘When F, is vertical,
the acceleration is
0.50 m/s?.

(b)

Figure 5-18 (a) One of the two forces applied to a block is shown.
Its angle @can be varied. (b) The block’s acceleration component
a, versus 6.

corresponding acceleration is 0.50 m/s*. Thus, F, = 2.00 N
and FE, must be in the positive direction of the x axis.

From Eq. 5-25, we find that when @ = 0°,

F, cos 0° + 2.00 = 4.00a,. (5-26)

From the graph we see that the corresponding acceleration
is 3.0 m/s’. From Eq. 5-26, we then find that F; = 10 N.

Substituting F, = 10N, F, = 2.00 N, and @ = 180° into
Eg. 5-25 leads to

a, = —2.00 m/s”. (Answer)

wi
PLUS additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
