178 CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

Rough GuidevGreg Roden/Getty Images, Inc.

Figure 8-1 The kinetic energy of a bungee-

cord jumper increases during the free fall,

and then the cord begins to stretch, slow-
ing the jumper.

   

This is a pretty formal definition of something that is actually familiar to you.
An example might help better than the definition: A bungee-cord jumper plunges
from a staging platform (Fig. 8-1). The system of objects consists of Earth and the
jumper. The force between the objects is the gravitational force. The configuration
of the system changes (the separation between the jumper and Earth decreases—
that is, of course, the thrill of the jump). We can account for the jumper’s motion
and increase in kinetic energy by defining a gravitational potential energy U. This
is the energy associated with the state of separation between two objects that at-
tract each other by the gravitational force, here the jumper and Earth.

‘When the jumper begins to stretch the bungee cord near the end of the
plunge, the system of objects consists of the cord and the jumper. The force
between the objects is an elastic (spring-like) force. The configuration of the sys-
tem changes (the cord stretches). We can account for the jumper’s decrease in
kinetic energy and the cord’s increase in length by defining an elastic potential
energy U. This is the energy associated with the state of compression or extension
of an elastic object, here the bungee cord.

Physics determines how the potential energy of a system can be calculated so
that energy might be stored or put to use. For example, before any particular
bungee-cord jumper takes the plunge, someone (probably a mechanical engi-
neer) must determine the correct cord to be used by calculating the gravitational
and elastic potential energies that can be expected. Then the jump is only thrilling
and not fatal.

Work and Potential Energy

In Chapter 7 we discussed the relation between work and a change in kinetic energy.
Here we discuss the relation between work and a change in potential energy.

Let us throw a tomato upward (Fig. 8-2). We already know that as the tomato
rises, the work W, done on the tomato by the gravitational force is negative
because the force transfers energy from the kinetic energy of the tomato. We can
now finish the story by saying that this energy is transferred by the gravitational
force to the gravitational potential energy of the tomato—Earth system.

The tomato slows, stops, and then begins to fall back down because of the
gravitational force. During the fall, the transfer is reversed: The work W, done on
the tomato by the gravitational force is now positive —that force transfers energy
from the gravitational potential energy of the tomato—Earth system to the
kinetic energy of the tomato.

For either rise or fall, the change AU in gravitational potential energy is
defined as being equal to the negative of the work done on the tomato by the
gravitational force. Using the general symbol W for work, we write this as

AU =—-W. (8-1)
Negative Positive
work done | | work done
by the by the
gravitational | } gravitational
force force

2
Figure 8-2 A tomato is thrown upward. As it rises, the
gravitational force does negative work on it, decreasing — ie
its kinetic energy. As the tomato descends, the ay
gravitational force does positive work on it, increasing
its kinetic energy.
