8-5 CONSERVATION OF ENERGY 197

Her push on the rail causes
a transfer of internal energy
to kinetic energy.

=I
~

  

(a) 0) ©

Figure 8-15 (a) As a skater pushes herself away from a railing, the force on her from

the railing is F. (b) After the skater leaves the railing, she has velocity V . (c) External
force F acts on the skater, at angle ¢ with a horizontal x axis. When the skater goes
through displacement dher velocity is changed from Vj (= 0) to ¥ by the horizontal
component of F.

Figure 8-15 shows an example. An initially stationary ice-skater pushes away
from a railing and then slides over the ice (Figs. 8-15a and b). Her kinetic energy
increases because of an external force F on her from the rail. However, that force
does not transfer energy from the rail to her. Thus, the force does no work on
her. Rather, her kinetic energy increases as a result of internal transfers from the
biochemical energy in her muscles.

Figure 8-16 shows another example. An engine increases the speed of a car
with four-wheel drive (all four wheels are made to turn by the engine). During
the acceleration, the engine causes the tires to push backward on the road sur-
face. This push produces frictional forces f that act on each tire in the forward
direction. The net external force F from the road, which is the sum of these fric-
tional forces, accelerates the car, increasing its kinetic energy. However, F does
not transfer energy from the road to the car and so does no work on the car.
Rather, the car’s kinetic energy increases as a result of internal transfers from the
energy stored in the fuel.

In situations like these two, we can sometimes relate the external force Fon
an object to the change in the object’s mechanical energy if we can simplify the
situation. Consider the ice-skater example. During her push through distance din
Fig. 8-15c, we can simplify by assuming that the acceleration is constant, her
speed changing from vp = 0 to v. (That is, we assume F has constant magnitude F
and angle ¢.) After the push, we can simplify the skater as being a particle and
neglect the fact that the exertions of her muscles have increased the thermal
energy in her muscles and changed other physiological features. Then we can
apply Eq. 7-5 (mv? — 3mv} = F,d) to write

K — Ky = (Fcos 4)d,
or AK = Fd cos ¢. (8-38)

If the situation also involves a change in the elevation of an object, we can
include the change AU in gravitational potential energy by writing

AU + AK = Fd cos ¢. (8-39)
The force on the right side of this equation does no work on the object but is still

responsible for the changes in energy shown on the left side.

Power

Now that you have seen how energy can be transferred from one type to another,
we can expand the definition of power given in Module 7-6. There power is

 

Figure 8-16 A vehicle accelerates to the

right using four-wheel drive. The road
exerts four frictional forces (two of them
shown) on the bottom surfaces of the tires.
Taken together, these four forces make up
the net external force F acting on the car.
