148 CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

93 A 15 kg box is initially at rest on a horizontal surface when at
t = Oa horizontal force F = (1.8/)i N (with r in seconds) is applied
to the box. The acceleration of the box as a function of time t is
given by @ = 0 forO=t=2.8s and @ = (1.2 — 2.4)i m/s? for >
2.8 s. (a) What is the coefficient of static friction between the box
and the surface? (b) What is the coefficient of kinetic friction be-
tween the box and the surface?

94 A child weighing 140 N sits at rest at the top of a playground
slide that makes an angle of 25° with the horizontal. The child keeps
from sliding by holding onto the sides of the slide. After letting go
of the sides, the child has a constant acceleration of 0.86 m/s” (down
the slide, of course). (a) What is the coefficient of kinetic friction be-
tween the child and the slide? (b) What maximum and minimum
values for the coefficient of static friction between the child and the
slide are consistent with the information given here?

95 In Fig. 6-61 a fastidious worker
pushes directly along the handle of
a mop with a force F’. The handle is
at an angle @ with the vertical, and
m, and y, are the coefficients of
static and kinetic friction between
the head of the mop and the floor.
Ignore the mass of the handle and
assume that all the mop’s mass m is
in its head. (a) If the mop head
moves along the floor with a con-
stant velocity, then what is F? (b) Show that if @ is less than a cer-
tain value 6, then F (still directed along the handle) is unable to
move the mop head. Find 6.

Figure 6-61 Problem 95.

96 A child places a picnic basket on the outer rim of a merry-
go-round that has a radius of 4.6 m and revolves once every 30s.
(a) What is the speed of a point on that rim? (b) What is the lowest
value of the coefficient of static friction between basket and
merry-go-round that allows the basket to stay on the ride?

97 SSM A warehouse worker exerts a constant horizontal force
of magnitude 85 N on a 40 kg box thats initially at rest on the hor-
izontal floor of the warehouse. When the box has moved a distance
of 1.4m, its speed is 1.0 m/s. What is the coefficient of kinetic fric-
tion between the box and the floor?

98 In Fig. 6-62,a5.0 kg block is sent sliding up a plane inclined at
6 = 37° while a horizontal force F of magnitude 50 N acts on it.
The coefficient of kinetic friction between block and plane is 0.30.
What are the (a) magnitude and (b) direction (up or down the
plane) of the block’s acceleration? The block’s initial speed is 4.0
m/s. (c) How far up the plane does the block go? (d) When it
reaches its highest point, does it remain at rest or slide back down
the plane?

Figure 6-62 Problem 98.

99 An11kg block of steel is at rest on a horizontal table. The
coefficient of static friction between block and table is 0.52. (a)
What is the magnitude of the horizontal force that will put the
block on the verge of moving? (b) What is the magnitude of a
force acting upward 60° from the horizontal that will put the
block on the verge of moving? (c) If the force acts downward at
60° from the horizontal, how large can its magnitude be without
causing the block to move?

100 Aski thatis placed on snow will stick to the snow. However,
when the ski is moved along the snow, the rubbing warms and par-
tially melts the snow, reducing the coefficient of kinetic friction
and promoting sliding. Waxing the ski makes it water repellent and
reduces friction with the resulting layer of water. A magazine
reports that a new type of plastic ski is especially water repellent
and that, on a gentle 200 m slope in the Alps, a skier reduced his
top-to-bottom time from 61 s with standard skis to 42 s with the
new skis. Determine the magnitude of his average acceleration
with (a) the standard skis and (b) the new skis. Assuming a 3.0°
slope, compute the coefficient of kinetic friction for (c) the stan-
dard skis and (d) the new skis.

101 Playing near a road construction site, a child falls over a
barrier and down onto a dirt slope that is angled downward at 35°
to the horizontal. As the child slides down the slope, he has an
acceleration that has a magnitude of 0.50 m/s? and that is directed
up the slope. What is the coefficient of kinetic friction between the
child and the slope?

102 A 100 N force, directed at an angle @ above a horizontal
floor, is applied to a 25.0 kg chair sitting on the floor. If @= 0°, what
are (a) the horizontal component Fj), of the applied force and
(b) the magnitude Fy of the normal force of the floor on the chair?
If @ = 30.0°, what are (c) F;, and (d) Fy? If @ = 60.0°, what are (e) F,
and (f) Fy? Now assume that the coefficient of static friction be-
tween chair and floor is 0.420. Does the chair slide or remain at rest
if Bis (g) 0°, (h) 30.0°, and (i) 60.0°2

103 A certain string can withstand a maximum tension of 40 N
without breaking. A child ties a 0.37 kg stone to one end and, hold-
ing the other end, whirls the stone in a vertical circle of radius 0.91
m, slowly increasing the speed until the string breaks. (a) Where is
the stone on its path when the string breaks? (b) What is the speed
of the stone as the string breaks?

104 <%= A four-person bobsled (total mass = 630 kg) comes
down a straightaway at the start of a bobsled run. The straightaway
is 80.0 m long and is inclined at a constant angle of 10.2° with the
horizontal. Assume that the combined effects of friction and air
drag produce on the bobsled a constant force of 62.0 N that acts
parallel to the incline and up the incline. Answer the following
questions to three significant digits. (a) If the speed of the bobsled
at the start of the run is 6.20 m/s, how long does the bobsled take to
come down the straightaway? (b) Suppose the crew is able to re-
duce the effects of friction and air drag to 42.0 N. For the same ini-
tial velocity, how long does the bobsled now take to come down the
straightaway?

105 Asa 40N block slides down a plane that is inclined at 25° to
the horizontal, its acceleration is 0.80 m/s’, directed up the plane.
What is the coefficient of kinetic friction between the block and
the plane?
