8-4 WORK DONE ON A SYSTEM BY AN EXTERNAL FORCE

KEY IDEA

 

The turning point is where the force momentarily stops and
then reverses the particle’s motion. That is, it is where the
particle momentarily has v = 0 and thus K = 0.
Calculations: Because K is the difference between
Enec and U,we want the point in Fig. 8-10a where the plot of
Urises to meet the horizontal line of E,,.., as shown in Fig.
8-10b. Because the plot of U is a straight line in Fig. 8-10b,
we can draw nested right triangles as shown and then write
the proportionality of distances

16=70 _ 2) = 70)

d 40-10’

which gives us d = 2.08 m. Thus, the turning point is at

x=40m-—d=19m. (Answer)

(c) Evaluate the force acting on the particle when it is in the
region 1.9m < x < 4.0 m.

KEY IDEA

The force is given by Eq. 8-22 (F(x) = —dU(x)/dx): The force
is equal to the negative of the slope on a graph of U(x).

Calculations: For the graph of Fig. 8-10b, we see that for
the range 1.0 m < x < 4.0 m the force is

205 — 7.05

meat eZ

=43N. (Answer)

feats

 

191

Kinetic energy is the difference
between the total energy and
the potential energy.

ud)
20
‘Turning point

16-
The kinetic energy is zero
at the turning point (the
particle speed is zero).

me 72)

ha

()
Figure 8-10 (a) A plot of potential energy U versus position x.
(b) A section of the plot used to find where the particle turns
around.

Thus, the force has magnitude 4.3 N and is in the positive
direction of the x axis. This result is consistent with the fact
that the initially leftward-moving particle is stopped by the
force and then sent rightward.

LUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

8-4 work DONE ON A SYSTEM BY AN EXTERNAL FORCE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

8.13 When work is done on a system by an external force
with no friction involved, determine the changes in kinetic
energy and potential energy.

Key Ideas
@ Work W is energy transferred to or from a system by means
ofan external force acting on the system.
@ When more than one force acts ona system, their net work
is the transferred energy.
@ When friction is not involved, the work done on the system
and the change AE,,., in the mechanical energy of the system
are equal:

W = AE nec = AK + AU.

8.14 When work is done ona system by an external force
with friction involved, relate that work to the changes in
kinetic energy, potential energy, and thermal energy.

@ Whena Kinetic frictional force acts within the system, then
the thermal energy Ey, of the system changes. (This energy is
associated with the random motion of atoms and molecules
in the system.) The work done on the system is then

W = AE nec + AE.
@ The change AEF;y is related to the magnitude f;, of the frictional
force and the magnitude d of the displacement caused by the
external force by

AEw = fi

 
