8-1 POTENTIAL ENERGY 181

Sample Problem 8.01 Equivalent paths for calculating work, slippery cheese

 

The main lesson of this sample problem is this: It is perfectly

all right to choose an easy path instead of a hard path.

Figure 8-5a shows a 2.0kg block of slippery cheese that

slides along a frictionless track from point a to point b. The

cheese travels through a total distance of 2.0m along the \
a

The gravitational force is conservative.
Any choice of path between the points
gives the same amount of work.

track, and a net vertical distance of 0.80 m. How much work is
done on the cheese by the gravitational force during the slide?

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) We cannot calculate the work by using Eq. 7-12 (W, = Y
mgd cos ¢). The reason is that the angle # between the

directions of the gravitational force F,and the displacement (@)

d varies along the track in an unknown way. (Even if we did Figure 8-5 (a) A block of cheese slides along a frictionless track
know the shape of the track and could calculate ¢ along it, _ from point a to point b. (b) Finding the work done on the cheese by
the calculation could be very difficult.) (2) Because F, isa the gravitational force is easier along the dashed path than along
conservative force, we can find the work by choosing some the actual path taken by the cheese; the result is the same for
other path between a and b—one that makes the calcula- DoE

tion easy.

 

Calculations: Let us choose the dashed path in Fig. 8-Sb; it vertical part of the dashed path,

consists of two straight segments. Along the horizontal seg- W, = mgd cos 0°

ment, the angle ¢ is a constant 90°. Even though we do not 65

know the displacement along that horizontal segment, Eq. 7-12 = (2.0 kg)(9.8 m/s*)(0.80 m)(1) = 15.7 J.

tellsus that the work W;, done there is The total work done on the cheese by BE as the cheese
W,, = mgd cos 90° = 0. moves from point a to point b along the dashed path is then

Along the vertical segment, the displacement d is 0.80 m W=W,+W,=0+15.7J~16J. (Answer)
and, with F, and d both downward, the angle ¢isaconstant This is also the work done as the cheese slides along the
0°. Thus, Eq. 7-12 gives us, for the work W, done along the __ track froma to b.

$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Determining Potential Energy Values

Here we find equations that give the value of the two types of potential energy
discussed in this chapter: gravitational potential energy and elastic potential
energy. However, first we must find a general relation between a conservative
force and the associated potential energy.

Consider a particle-like object that is part of a system in which a conservative
force F acts. When that force does work W on the object, the change AU in
the potential energy associated with the system is the negative of the work done.
We wrote this fact as Eq. 8-1 (AU = —W). For the most general case, in which the
force may vary with position, we may write the work W as in Eq. 7-32:

Wwe [ro dx. (8-5)

This equation gives the work done by the force when the object moves from
point x; to point x,, changing the configuration of the system. (Because the
force is conservative, the work is the same for all paths between those two
points.)
