13.1

Early Ideas about Heredity:
The Road to Mendel

As far back as written records go, patterns of resemblance
among the members of particular families have been
noted and commented on (figure 13.2). Some familial
features are unusual, such as the protruding lower lip of
the European royal family Hapsburg, evident in pictures
and descriptions of family members from the thirteenth
century onward. Other characteristics, like the occur-
rence of redheaded children within families of redheaded
parents, are more common (figure 13.3). Inherited fea-
tures, the building blocks of evolution, will be our con-
cern in this chapter.

Classical Assumption 1: Constancy of Species

Two concepts provided the basis for most of the thinking
about heredity before the twentieth century. The first is
that heredity occurs within species. For a very long time peo-
ple believed that it was possible to obtain bizarre compos-
ite animals by breeding (crossing) widely different species.
The minotaur of Cretan mythology, a creature with the
body of a bull and the torso and head of a man, is one ex-
ample. The giraffe was thought to be another; its scien-
tific name, Giraffa camelopardalis, suggests the belief that it
was the result of a cross between a camel and a leopard.
From the Middle Ages onward, however, people discov-
ered that such extreme crosses were not possible and that
variation and heredity occur mainly within the boundaries
of a particular species. Species were thought to have been
maintained without significant change from the time of
their creation.

Classical Assumption 2: Direct Transmission
of Traits

The second early concept related to heredity is that traits
are transmitted directly. When variation is inherited by off-
spring from their parents, what is transmitted? The ancient
Greeks suggested that the parents’ body parts were trans-
mitted directly to their offspring. Hippocrates called this
type of reproductive material gonos, meaning “seed.”
Hence, a characteristic such as a misshapen limb was the
result of material that came from the misshapen limb of a
parent. Information from each part of the body was sup-
posedly passed along independently of the information
from the other parts, and the child was formed after the
hereditary material from all parts of the parents’ bodies had
come together.

This idea was predominant until fairly recently. For ex-
ample, in 1868, Charles Darwin proposed that all cells and
tissues excrete microscopic granules, or “gemmules,” that

240 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

Mendel solved the mystery of heredity.

 

FIGURE 13.2

Heredity is responsible for family resemblance. Family
resemblances are often strong—a visual manifestation of the
mechanism of heredity. This is the Johnson family, the wife and
daughters of one of the authors. While each daughter is different,
all clearly resemble their mother.

 

FIGURE 13.3

Red hair is inherited. Many different traits are inherited in
human families. This redhead is exhibiting one of these traits.
