144 CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

*°49 © In Fig. 6-39, a car is driven at constant speed over a circu-
lar hill and then into a circular valley with the same radius. At the
top of the hill, the normal force on the driver from the car seat is 0.
The driver's mass is 70.0 kg. What is the magnitude of the normal
force on the driver from the seat when the car passes through the
bottom of the valley?

 

Figure 6-39 Problem 49.

50 An 85.0 kg passenger is made to move along a circular path
of radius r = 3.50 m in uniform circular motion. (a) Figure 6-40a is
a plot of the required magnitude F of the net centripetal force for a
range of possible values of the passenger's speed v. What is the
plot’s slope at v = 8.30 m/s? (b) Figure 6-40b is a plot of F for a
range of possible values of T, the period of the motion. What is the
plot’s slope at T= 2.50 s?

F F

(a (d)
Figure 6-40 Problem 50.

51 ssM www Anairplaneisfly-
ing in a horizontal circle at aspeed of
480 knvh (Fig, 6-41). If its wings are
tilted at angle @ = 40° to the horizon-

tal, what is the radius of the circle in
which the plane is flying? Assume

that the required force is provided
entirely by an “aerodynamic lift” that

is perpendicular to the wing surface. aS
°°52 <8 An amusement park
ride consists of a car moving ina ver-
tical circle on the end of a rigid boom
of negligible mass. The combined weight of the car and riders is 5.0
KN, and the circle’s radius is 10 m. At the top of the circle, what
are the (a) magnitude F, and (b) direction (up or down) of
the force on the car from the boom if the car’s speed is v = 5.0 m/s?
What are (c) Fy and (d) the direction if v = 12 m/s?

°e53 An old streetcar rounds a flat corner of radius 9.1 m, at
16 km/h. What angle with the vertical will be made by the loosely
hanging hand straps?

Figure 6-41 Problem 51.

 

54 OME In designing circular rides for amusement parks,
mechanical engineers must consider how small variations in cer-
tain parameters can alter the net force on a passenger. Consider a
passenger of mass m riding around a horizontal circle of radius r at
speed v. What is the variation dF in the net force magnitude for
(a) a variation dr in the radius with v held constant, (b) a variation

dv in the speed with r held constant, and (c) a variation dT in the

period with r held constant? :
Bolt
55 A bolt is threaded onto one g

end of a thin horizontal rod, and
the rod is then rotated horizontally

about its other end. An engineer

monitors the motion by flashing a dD strobed
strobe lamp onto the rod and bolt, positions
adjusting the strobe rate until the
bolt appears to be in the same
eight places during each full rota-
tion of the rod (Fig. 6-42). The strobe rate is 2000 flashes per sec-
ond; the bolt has mass 30 g and is at radius 3.5 cm. What is the
magnitude of the force on the bolt from the rod?

Figure 6-42 Problem 55.

56 @ A banked circular highway curve is designed for traffic
moving at 60 km/h. The radius of the curve is 200m. Traffic is
moving along the highway at 40 km/h on a rainy day. What is the
minimum coefficient of friction between tires and road that will
allow cars to take the turn without sliding off the road? (Assume
the cars do not have negative lift.)

57 © A puck of mass m = 1.50 kg slides in a circle of radius
r= 20.0cm on a frictionless table while attached to a hanging
cylinder of mass M = 2.50 kg by means of a cord that extends
through a hole in the table (Fig. 6-43). What speed keeps the cylin-
der at rest?

 

 

Figure 6-43 Problem 57.

58 <8 Brake or turn? Figure 6-

44 depicts an overhead view of a car’s

path as the car travels toward a wall.

Assume that the driver begins to /
brake the car when the distance to
the wall is d = 107 m, and take the
car’s mass as m = 1400 kg, its initial
speed as vj = 35 m/s, and the coeffi-
cient of static friction as wu, = 0.50.
Assume that the car’s weight is dis-
tributed evenly on the four wheels,
even during braking, (a) What magni-
tude of static friction is needed (between tires and road) to stop
the car just as it reaches the wall? (b) What is the maximum pos-
sible static friction fimax? (c) If the coefficient of kinetic friction
between the (sliding) tires and the road is wu, = 0.40, at what
speed will the car hit the wall? To avoid the crash, a driver could
elect to turn the car so that it just barely misses the wall, as
shown in the figure. (d) What magnitude of frictional force would
be required to keep the car in a circular path of radius d and at
the given speed vp, so that the car moves in a quarter circle and
then parallel to the wall? (e) Is the required force less than fymax
so that a circular path is possible?

Car path

 

Figure 6-44
Problem 58.
