192

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

Positive W

  

i
Negative W \,
\

 

(d)

Figure 8-11 (a) Positive work W done on an
arbitrary system means a transfer of
energy to the system. (b) Negative work
W means a transfer of energy from the
system.

      

Your lifting force
transfers energy to
kinetic energy and
potential energy.

 

=AK+AU j

AE nec

Figure 8-12 Positive work W is done on a
system of a bowling ball and Earth, caus-
ing a change AEjec in the mechanical
energy of the system, a change AK in the
ball’s kinetic energy, and a change AU in
the system’s gravitational potential energy.

Work Done on a System by an External Force

In Chapter 7, we defined work as being energy transferred to or from an object
by means of a force acting on the object. We can now extend that definition to an
external force acting on a system of objects.

Oo Work is energy transferred to or from a system by means of an external force
acting on that system.

Figure 8-1la represents positive work (a transfer of energy to a system), and
Fig. 8-11b represents negative work (a transfer of energy from a system). When
more than one force acts on a system, their net work is the energy transferred to
or from the system.

These transfers are like transfers of money to and from a bank account. If a
system consists of a single particle or particle-like object, as in Chapter 7, the
work done on the system by a force can change only the kinetic energy of the
system. The energy statement for such transfers is the work—kinetic energy theo-
rem of Eq. 7-10 (AK = W),; that is, a single particle has only one energy account,
called kinetic energy. External forces can transfer energy into or out of that
account. If a system is more complicated, however, an external force can change
other forms of energy (such as potential energy); that is, a more complicated
system can have multiple energy accounts.

Let us find energy statements for such systems by examining two basic situa-
tions, one that does not involve friction and one that does.

No Friction Involved

To compete in a bowling-ball-hurling contest, you first squat and cup your hands
under the ball on the floor. Then you rapidly straighten up while also pulling your
hands up sharply, launching the ball upward at about face level. During your
upward motion, your applied force on the ball obviously does work; that is, it is an
external force that transfers energy, but to what system?

To answer, we check to see which energies change. There is a change AK in
the ball’s kinetic energy and, because the ball and Earth become more sepa-
rated, there is a change AU in the gravitational potential energy of the
ball—Earth system. To include both changes, we need to consider the ball—-Earth
system. Then your force is an external force doing work on that system, and the
work is

W=AK +AU, (8-25)

or W = AE nec (work done onsystem, no friction involved), (8-26)
where AE, ., is the change in the mechanical energy of the system. These two
equations, which are represented in Fig. 8-12, are equivalent energy statements

for work done on a system by an external force when friction is not involved.

Friction Involved

We next consider the example in Fig. 8-13a. A constant horizontal force F pulls a
block along an x axis and through a displacement of magnitude d, increasing the
block’s velocity from Vj to ¥. During the motion, a constant kinetic frictional
force Fe from the floor acts on the block. Let us first choose the block as our
system and apply Newton’s second law to it. We can write that law for compo-
nents along the x axis (Fyer,. = dy) as

Ff, = ma. (8-27)
