152 CHAPTER 7 KINETIC ENERGY AND WORK

Work and Kinetic Energy

Finding an Expression for Work

Let us find an expression for work by considering a bead that can slide along
a frictionless wire that is stretched along a horizontal x axis (Fig. 7-2). A constant
force F, directed at an angle ¢ to the wire, accelerates the bead along the wire.
We can relate the force and the acceleration with Newton’s second law, written
for components along the x axis:

F, = may, (7-3)
where m is the bead’s mass. As the bead moves through a displacement d, the
force changes the bead’s velocity from an initial value Vp to some other value V.
Because the force is constant, we know that the acceleration is also constant.
Thus, we can use Eq. 2-16 to write, for components along the x axis,

v= vp + 2a,d. (7-4)
Solving this equation for a,, substituting into Eq. 7-3, and rearranging then give us
dmv —5mvi, = Fd. (7-5)

The first term is the kinetic energy K; of the bead at the end of the displacement
d, and the second term is the kinetic energy K; of the bead at the start. Thus, the
left side of Eq. 7-5 tells us the kinetic energy has been changed by the force, and
the right side tells us the change is equal to F,d. Therefore, the work W done on
the bead by the force (the energy transfer due to the force) is

W= Fd. (7-6)
If we know values for F, and d, we can use this equation to calculate the work W.

oO To calculate the work a force does on an object as the object moves through some
displacement, we use only the force component along the object’s displacement.
The force component perpendicular to the displacement does zero work.

From Fig. 7-2, we see that we can write F, as F cos ¢, where ¢ is the angle
between the directions of the displacement dand the force F. Thus,

W = Fdcos @ (work done bya constant force). (7-7)

 

   

G ,
4) shy ue Small initial This force does positive work
loes no work. kinetic energy on the bead, increasing speed
=e F and kinetic energy.
Wire | K; a 9 . a
Bead %y

This component

Figure 7-2 A constant force F directed at_ does work. f
angle ¢ to the displacement d of a bead 4
on a wire accelerates the bead along the

wire, changing the velocity of the bead

from ¥, to ¥. A “kinetic energy gauge” Larger final F
indicates the resulting change in the kinet- kinetic energy I Ky

ic energy of the bead, from the value K; to Kinetooneray I ee
the value Kj. —

In WileyPLUS, this figure is available as _
an animation with voiceover. Displacement d
