7-4 work DONE BY A SPRING FORCE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

7.09 Apply the relationship (Hooke’s law) between the force
on an object due to a spring, the stretch or compression
of the spring, and the spring constant of the spring.

7.10 Identify that a spring force is a variable force.

7.11 Calculate the work done on an object by a spring force
by integrating the force from the initial position to the final

Key Ideas
@ The force F, from a spring is

F.=—-kd

where d is the displacement of the spring's free end from
its position when the spring is in its relaxed state (neither

(Hooke’s law),

7-4 WORK DONE BY A SPRING FORCE 159

position of the object or by using the known generic result
of that integration.

7.12 Calculate work by graphically integrating on a graph of
force versus position of the object.

7.13 Apply the work-kinetic energy theorem to situations in
which an object is moved by a spring force.

@ A spring force is thus a variable force: It varies with the
displacement of the spring's free end.

@ If an object is attached to the spring's free end, the work W,
done on the object by the spring force when the object is
moved from an initial position x; to a final position x;is

compressed nor extended), and k is the spring constant

(a measure of the spring's stiffness). If an x axis lies along the
spring, with the origin at the location of the spring's free end
when the spring is in its relaxed state, we can write

F, = —kx — (Hooke’s law).

Work Done by a Spring Force

‘We next want to examine the work done on a particle-like object by a particular
type of variable force—namely, a spring force, the force from a spring. Many
forces in nature have the same mathematical form as the spring force. Thus, by
examining this one force, you can gain an understanding of many others.

The Spring Force
Figure 7-10a shows a spring in its relaxed state —that is, neither compressed nor
extended. One end is fixed, and a particle-like object —a block, say—is attached
to the other, free end. If we stretch the spring by pulling the block to the right as
in Fig. 7-10b, the spring pulls on the block toward the left. (Because a spring
force acts to restore the relaxed state, it is sometimes said to be a restoring force.)
If we compress the spring by pushing the block to the left as in Fig. 7-10c, the
spring now pushes on the block toward the right.

To a good approximation for many springs, the force F, from a spring is pro-
portional to the displacement d of the free end from its position when the spring
is in the relaxed state. The spring force is given by

F,=-kd

(Hooke’s law), (7-20)

which is known as Hooke’s law after Robert Hooke, an English scientist of the
late 1600s. The minus sign in Eq. 7-20 indicates that the direction of the spring
force is always opposite the direction of the displacement of the spring’s free end.
The constant k is called the spring constant (or force constant) and is a measure
of the stiffness of the spring. The larger k is, the stiffer the spring; that is, the larger
kis, the stronger the spring’s pull or push for a given displacement. The SI unit for
k is the newton per meter.

In Fig. 7-10 an x axis has been placed parallel to the length of the spring, with
the origin (x = 0) at the position of the free end when the spring is in its relaxed

W, = phx? — 3kap.

If x; = 0 and x;= x, then the equation becomes

W, = —$ke?.

 

x positive
E, negative

 

    

(

Figure 7-10 (a) A spring in its relaxed state.
The origin of an x axis has been placed at
the end of the spring that is attached to a
block. (b) The block is displaced by d, and
the spring is stretched by a positive amount
x. Note the restoring force F, exerted by

the spring. (c) The spring is compressed by
a negative amount x. Again, note the
restoring force.
