210

86 © In Fig. 8-67, a small block is sent through point A with a
speed of 7.0 m/s. Its path is without friction until it reaches the sec-
tion of length L = 12 m, where the coefficient of kinetic friction is
0.70. The indicated heights are h, = 6.0m and h) = 2.0m. What
are the speeds of the block at (a) point B and (b) point C? (c) Does
the block reach point D? If so, what is its speed there; if not, how far
through the section of friction does it travel?

 

Figure 8-67 Problem 86.

87 SSM A massless rigid rod of D
length L has a ball of mass m
attached to one end (Fig. 8-68). The
other end is pivoted in such a way
that the ball will move in a vertical A
circle. First, assume that there is no
friction at the pivot. The system is
launched downward from the hori- "0"
zontal position A with initial speed
vp. The ball just barely reaches point %

D and then stops. (a) Derive an ex-

pression for vp in terms of L,m,and Figure 868 Problem 87.
g.(b) What is the tension in the rod
when the ball passes through B? (c) A little grit is placed on the
pivot to increase the friction there. Then the ball just barely
reaches C when launched from A with the same speed as before.
‘What is the decrease in the mechanical energy during this motion?
(d) What is the decrease in the mechanical energy by the time the
ball finally comes to rest at B after several oscillations?

  
     

  

Pivot
point

88 A150 kg water balloon is shot straight up with an initial speed
of 3.00 m/s. (a) What is the kinetic energy of the balloon just as it is
launched? (b) How much work does the gravitational force do on
the balloon during the balloon’s full ascent? (c) What is the change
in the gravitational potential energy of the balloon—Earth system
during the full ascent? (d) If the gravitational potential energy is
taken to be zero at the launch point, what is its value when the bal-
loon reaches its maximum height? (e) If, instead, the gravitational
potential energy is taken to be zero at the maximum height, what is
its value at the launch point? (f) What is the maximum height?

89 A 2.50kg beverage can is thrown directly downward from a
height of 4.00 m, with an initial speed of 3.00 m/s. The air drag on
the can is negligible. What is the kinetic energy of the can (a) as it
reaches the ground at the end of its fall and (b) when it is halfway
to the ground? What are (c) the kinetic energy of the can and (d)
the gravitational potential energy of the can—Earth system 0.200 s
before the can reaches the ground? For the latter, take the refer-
ence point y = 0 to be at the ground.

90 A constant horizontal force moves a 50 kg trunk 6.0m up a
30° incline at constant speed. The coefficient of kinetic friction is
0.20. What are (a) the work done by the applied force and (b) the
increase in the thermal energy of the trunk and incline?

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

91 @ Two blocks, of masses M =2.0 kg and 2M, are connected to
a spring of spring constant k = 200 N/m that has one end fixed, as
shown in Fig. 8-69. The horizontal
surface and the pulley are friction-
less, and the pulley has negligible
mass. The blocks are released from
rest with the spring relaxed.
(a) What is the combined kinetic
energy of the two blocks when the
hanging block has fallen 0.090 m?
(b) What is the kinetic energy of
the hanging block when it has
fallen that 0.090 m? (c) What maxi-
mum distance does the hanging block fall before momentarily
stopping?

 

Figure 8-69 Problem 91.

92 A volcanic ash flow is moving across horizontal ground when
it encounters a 10° upslope. The front of the flow then travels 920
m up the slope before stopping. Assume that the gases entrapped
in the flow lift the flow and thus make the frictional force from the
ground negligible; assume also that the mechanical energy of
the front of the flow is conserved. What was the initial speed of the
front of the flow?

93 A playground slide is in the form of an are of a circle that has
aradius of 12 m. The maximum height of the slide is h = 4.0 m,and
the ground is tangent to the circle (Fig. 8-70). A 25 kg child starts
from rest at the top of the slide and has a speed of 6.2 m/s at the
bottom. (a) What is the length of the slide? (b) What average fric-
tional force acts on the child over this distance? If, instead of the
ground, a vertical line through the sop of the slide is tangent to the
circle, what are (c) the length of the slide and (d) the average fric-
tional force on the child?

Figure 8-70 Problem 93.

94 The luxury liner Queen Elizabeth 2 has a diesel-electric
power plant with a maximum power of 92 MW at a cruising speed
of 32.5 knots. What forward force is exerted on the ship at this
speed? (1 knot = 1.852 km/h.)

95 A factory worker accidentally releases a 180 kg crate that was
being held at rest at the top of a ramp that is 3.7 m long and in-
clined at 39° to the horizontal. The coefficient of kinetic friction be-
tween the crate and the ramp, and between the crate and the hori-
zontal factory floor, is 0.28. (a) How fast is the crate moving as it
reaches the bottom of the ramp? (b) How far will it subsequently
slide across the floor? (Assume that the crate’s kinetic energy does
not change as it moves from the ramp onto the floor.) (c) Do the
answers to (a) and (b) increase, decrease, or remain the same if we
halve the mass of the crate?

96 Ifa 70 kg baseball player steals home by sliding into the plate
with an initial speed of 10 m/s just as he hits the ground, (a) what
