168 CHAPTER 7 KINETIC ENERGY AND WORK

Sample Problem 7.09 Power, force, and velocity

Here we calculate an instantaneous work—that is, the rate at
which work is being done at any given instant rather than av-
eraged over a time interval. Figure 7-15 shows constant forces
F, and F) acting on a box as the box slides rightward across a
frictionless floor. Force F; ; is horizontal, with magnitude 2.0 N;
force Fis angled upward by 60° to the floor and has magni-
tude 4.0 N. The speed v of the box at a certain instant is 3.0 m/s.
What is the power due to each force acting on the box at that
instant, and what is the net power? Is the net power changing
at that instant?

KEY IDEA

 

‘We want an instantaneous power, not an average power
over a time period. Also, we know the box’s velocity (rather
than the work done on it).

Negative power. Positive power.

 
  
   

(This force is = (This force is
removing energy.) supplying energy.)
a 60° oF

   

Frictionless A a

    

Figure 7-15 Two forces F, and F, act on a box that slides
rightward across a frictionless floor. The velocity of the box is ¥.

Review & Summary

Kinetic Energy The kinetic energy K associated with the mo-
tion of a particle of mass m and speed v, where v is well below the
speed of light, is

K =3me

(kinetic energy). (7-1)

Work Work W is energy transferred to or from an object via a
force acting on the object. Energy transferred to the object is posi-
tive work, and from the object negative work.

Work Done by a Constant Force The work done on a par-
ticle by a constant force F during displacement d is

W = Fdcos $= Fed (7-7,7-8)

(work, constant force),

in which ¢ is the constant angle between the directions of F and d.
Only the component of F that is along the displacement d can do
work on the object. When two or more forces act on an object,
their net work is the sum of the individual works done by the
forces, which is also equal to the work that would be done on the
object by the net force F,,,, of those forces.

Work and Kinetic Energy For a particle,a change AK in the
kinetic energy equals the net work W done on the particle:

AK = K,— K,=W_ (work-kinetic energy theorem), (7-10)

Calculation: We use Eq. 7-47 for each force. For force F,, at
angle ¢ = 180° to velocity V, we have

P, = Fv cos ¢; = (2.0N)(3.0 mis) cos 180°
= -6.0W. (Answer)

This negative result tells us that force Fis transferring en-
ergy from the boxat the rate of 6.0 J/s.
For force F',,at angle d) = 60° to velocity V’, we have

P, = Fy cos $5 = (4.0 N)(3.0 m/s) cos 60°
= 6.0 W. (Answer)

This positive result tells us that force Fyis transferring en-
ergy to the box at the rate of 6.0 J/s.

The net power is the sum of the individual powers
(complete with their algebraic signs):

Poet = Py + Po

=-—6.0W + 6.0W=0, (Answer)

which tells us that the net rate of transfer of energy to
or from the box is zero. Thus, the kinetic energy (K = $mv?)
of the box is not changing, and so the speed of the box will
remain at 3.0 m/s. With neither the forces F, and F, nor the
velocity V changing, we see from Eq. 7-48 that P; and P, are
constant and thus so is Py.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

in which K; is the initial kinetic energy of the particle and Kis the ki-
netic energy after the work is done. Equation 7-10 rearranged gives us

K,=K,+W. (7-11)
Work Done by the Gravitational Force The work W,
done by the gravitational force F, on a particle-like object of mass

mas the object moves through a displacement d is given by
W, = mgd cos (7-12)

in which dis the angle between F, and d.

Work Done in Lifting and Lowering an Object The work
W, done by an applied force as a particle-like object is either lifted
or lowered is related to the work W, done by the gravitational
force and the change AK in the object's kinetic energy by

AK = K,— K,= W, + We. (7-15)
If Ky= Kj, then Eq.7-15 reduces to
W, = —W,, (7-16)

which tells us that the applied force transfers as much energy to the
object as the gravitational force transfers from it.
