lv] Checkpoint 2

6-3 UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION 135

As every amusement park fan knows, a Ferris wheel is a ride consisting of seats
mounted on a tall ring that rotates around a horizontal axis. When you ride in a
Ferris wheel at constant speed, what are the directions of your acceleration @ and the
normal force Fy on you (from the always upright seat) as you pass through (a) the
highest point and (b) the lowest point of the ride? (c) How does the magnitude of

the acceleration at the highest point compare with that at the lowest point? (d) How

do the magnitudes of the normal force compare at those two points?

Sample Problem 6.04 Vertical circular loop, Diavolo

Largely because of riding in cars, you are used to horizon-
tal circular motion. Vertical circular motion would be a
novelty. In this sample problem, such motion seems to
defy the gravitational force.

In a 1901 circus performance, Allo “Dare Devil”
Diavolo introduced the stunt of riding a bicycle in a loop-
the-loop (Fig. 6-9a). Assuming that the loop is a circle with
radius R = 2.7 m, what is the least speed v that Diavolo and
his bicycle could have at the top of the loop to remain in
contact with it there?

Photograph reproduced with permission of

Circus World Museum

 

  
  
 

Diavolo.
and bicycle

@_ The net force
provides the
toward-the-center
acceleration.

The normal force 7
. in
is from the

overhead loop.

F,

(d)

Figure 6-9 (a) Contemporary advertisement for Diavolo and
(b) free-body diagram for the performer at the top of the
loop.

a

KEY IDEA

 

‘We can assume that Diavolo and his bicycle travel through
the top of the loop as a single particle in uniform circular
motion. Thus, at the top, the acceleration @ of this particle
must have the magnitude a = v?/R given by Eq. 6-17 and be
directed downward, toward the center of the circular loop.

Calculations: The forces on the particle when it is at the top
of the loop are shown in the free-body diagram of Fig 6-9b.
The gravitational force i is downward along a y axis; so is the
normal force Fy on the particle from the loop (the loop can
push down, not pull up); so also is the centripetal acceleration
of the particle. Thus, Newton’s second law for y components
(Frety = May) gives us

—Fy — F, = m(—a)

p

and —Fy— mg = n(- >) (6-19)

If the particle has the /east speed v needed to remain in
contact, then it is on the verge of losing contact with the loop
(falling away from the loop), which means that Fy = 0 at the
top of the loop (the particle and loop touch but without any
normal force). Substituting 0 for Fy in Eq. 6-19, solving for v,
and then substituting known values give us

v = VgR = V8 mis2)(2.7 m)

=5.1m/s. (Answer)

Comments: Diavolo made certain that his speed at the
top of the loop was greater than 5.1 m/s so that he did not
lose contact with the loop and fall away from it. Note that
this speed requirement is independent of the mass of
Diavolo and his bicycle. Had he feasted on, say, pierogies
before his performance, he still would have had to exceed

only 5.1 m/s to maintain contact as he passed through the
top of the loop.

US Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
