8-4 WORK DONE ON A SYSTEM BY AN EXTERNAL FORCE 193

The applied force supplies energy. So, the work done by the applied

 

 

  

 

 

 

The frictional force transfers some force goes into kinetic energy
of it to thermal energy. and also thermal energy.
en an
i ; « adh |
—. =e
d wasn ne

 

(a) (d)
Figure 8-18 (a) A block is pulled across a floor by force F while a kinetic frictional _
force f; opposes the motion. The block has velocity Vo at the start of a displacement d
and velocity ¥ at the end of the displacement. (b) Positive work W is done on the
block—floor system by force F, resulting in a change AE,,.. in the block’s mechanical
energy and a change AE,, in the thermal energy of the block and floor.

Because the forces are constant, the acceleration @ is also constant. Thus, we can
use Eq. 2-16 to write

v? = vi + 2ad.

Solving this equation for a, substituting the result into Eq. 8-27, and rearranging
then give us

Fd = $mv> — $mvi,+ fyd (8-28)

or, because zmv? = dmv} = AK for the block,
Fd = AK + fd. (8-29)

Ina more general situation (say, one in which the block is moving up a ramp), there
can be a change in potential energy. To include such a possible change, we general-
ize Eq. 8-29 by writing

Fd = ME mec + fed (8-30)

By experiment we find that the block and the portion of the floor along
which it slides become warmer as the block slides. As we shall discuss in
Chapter 18, the temperature of an object is related to the object’s thermal energy
Ey, (the energy associated with the random motion of the atoms and molecules in
the object). Here, the thermal energy of the block and floor increases because
(1) there is friction between them and (2) there is sliding. Recall that friction is
due to the cold-welding between two surfaces. As the block slides over the floor,
the sliding causes repeated tearing and re-forming of the welds between the
block and the floor, which makes the block and floor warmer. Thus, the sliding
increases their thermal energy Ej.

Through experiment, we find that the increase AE,, in thermal energy is
equal to the product of the magnitudes f;, and d:

AE, = fed (increase in thermal energy by sliding). (8-31)

Thus, we can rewrite Eq. 8-30 as
Fd = AE nec + AE. (8-32)

Fa is the work W done by the external force F (the energy transferred by the
force), but on which system is the work done (where are the energy transfers made)?
To answer, we check to see which energies change. The block’s mechanical energy
