This equation also applies to a block—spring system, as in Fig. 8-3. If we
abruptly shove the block to send it moving rightward, the spring force acts leftward
and thus does negative work on the block, transferring energy from the kinetic
energy of the block to the elastic potential energy of the spring—block system. The
block slows and eventually stops, and then begins to move leftward because the
spring force is still leftward. The transfer of energy is then reversed—it is from
potential energy of the spring—block system to kinetic energy of the block.

Conservative and Nonconservative Forces
Let us list the key elements of the two situations we just discussed:

1. The system consists of two or more objects.

2. A force acts between a particle-like object (tomato or block) in the system and
the rest of the system.

3. When the system configuration changes, the force does work (call it W,) on
the particle-like object, transferring energy between the kinetic energy K of
the object and some other type of energy of the system.

4, When the configuration change is reversed, the force reverses the energy
transfer, doing work W) in the process.

In a situation in which W, = —W, is always true, the other type of energy is
a potential energy and the force is said to be a conservative force. As you might
suspect, the gravitational force and the spring force are both conservative (since
otherwise we could not have spoken of gravitational potential energy and elastic
potential energy, as we did previously).

A force that is not conservative is called a nonconservative force. The kinetic
frictional force and drag force are nonconservative. For an example, let us send
a block sliding across a floor that is not frictionless. During the sliding, a kinetic
frictional force from the floor slows the block by transferring energy from its
kinetic energy to a type of energy called thermal energy (which has to do with the
random motions of atoms and molecules). We know from experiment that this
energy transfer cannot be reversed (thermal energy cannot be transferred back
to kinetic energy of the block by the kinetic frictional force). Thus, although we
have a system (made up of the block and the floor), a force that acts between
parts of the system, and a transfer of energy by the force, the force is not conser-
vative. Therefore, thermal energy is not a potential energy.

When only conservative forces act on a particle-like object, we can greatly
simplify otherwise difficult problems involving motion of the object. Let’s next
develop a test for identifying conservative forces, which will provide one means
for simplifying such problems.

Path Independence of Conservative Forces

The primary test for determining whether a force is conservative or nonconserva-
tive is this: Let the force act ona particle that moves along any closed path, begin-
ning at some initial position and eventually returning to that position (so that the
particle makes a round trip beginning and ending at the initial position). The
force is conservative only if the total energy it transfers to and from the particle
during the round trip along this and any other closed path is zero. In other words:

] The net work done by a conservative force on a particle moving around any
closed path is zero.

‘We know from experiment that the gravitational force passes this closed-
path test. An example is the tossed tomato of Fig. 8-2. The tomato leaves the
launch point with speed vp and kinetic energy 3 mv}. The gravitational force acting

8-1 POTENTIAL ENERGY 179

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

oO
Figure 8-3 A block, attached to a spring and
initially at rest at x = 0, is set in motion
toward the right. (a) As the block moves
rightward (as indicated by the arrow), the
spring force does negative work on it.
(b) Then, as the block moves back toward
x = 0, the spring force does positive work
on it.

 
