Chapter 12

Summary

12.1 Meiosis produces haploid cells from diploid cells.

Vz]

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

 

http://www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

* Meiosis is a special form of nuclear division that
produces the gametes of the sexual cycle. It involves
two chromosome separations but only one
chromosome replication.

12.2 Meiosis has three unique features.

1, What are the cellular products
of meiosis called, and are they
haploid or diploid? What is the
cellular product of syngamy
called, and is it haploid or
diploid?

 

¢ The three unique features of meiosis are synapsis,
homologous recombination, and reduction division.

2. What three unique features
distinguish meiosis from mitosis?

12.3. The sequence of events during meiosis involves two nuclear divisions.

 

¢ The crossing over that occurs between homologues
during synapsis is an essential element of meiosis.

* Because crossing over binds the homologues
together, only one side of each homologue is
accessible to the spindle fibers. Hence, the spindle
fibers separate the paired homologues rather than the
sister chromatids.

* At the end of meiosis I, one homologue of each
chromosome type is present at each of the two poles of
the dividing nucleus. The homologues still consist of
two chromatids, which may differ from each other as a
result of crossing over that occurred during synapsis.

 

* No further DNA replication occurs before the second
nuclear division, which is essentially a mitotic division
occurring at each of the two poles.

* The sister chromatids of each chromosome are
separated, resulting in the formation of four daughter
nuclei, each with half the number of chromosomes
that were present before meiosis.

* Cytokinesis typically but not always occurs at this
point. When it does, each daughter nucleus has one
copy of every chromosome.

12.4 The evolutionary origin of sex is a puzzle.

3. What are synaptonemal
complexes? How do they
participate in crossing over? At
what stage during meiosis are
they formed?

4. How many chromatids are
present for each type of
chromosome at the completion
of crossing over? What two
structures hold the chromatids
together at this stage?

5. How is the attachment of
spindle microtubules to
centromeres in metaphase I of
meiosis different from that
which occurs in metaphase of
mitosis? What effect does this
difference have on the
movement of chromosomes
during anaphase I?

6. What mechanism is

responsible for the independent
assortment of chromosomes?

 

* Art Activity: Meiosis I

a

* Meiosis

 

¢ Inasexual reproduction, mitosis produces offspring
genetically identical to the parent.

* Meiosis is thought to have evolved initially as a
mechanism to repair double-strand breaks in DNA,
in which the broken chromosome is paired with its
homologue while it is being repaired.

¢ The evolutionary significance of meiosis is that it
generates large amounts of recombination, rapidly
reshuffling gene combinations, producing variability
upon which evolutionary processes can act.

238 © PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

7, What is one of the current
scientific explanations for the
evolution of synapsis?

8. By what three mechanisms
does sexual reproduction
increase genetic variability? How
does this increase in genetic
variability affect the evolution of
species?

@

* Evolution of Sex
* Review of Cell
Division
