184 CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

8-2 CONSERVATION OF MECHANICAL ENERGY

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

8.05 After first clearly defining which objects form a system,
identify that the mechanical energy of the system is the
sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies of those
objects.

Key Ideas

@ The mechanical energy Emec of a system is the sum of its
kinetic energy K and potential energy U:

Enoc = K + U.

@ Anisolated system is one in which no external force causes

8.06 For an isolated system in which only conservative forces
act, apply the conservation of mechanical energy to relate
the initial potential and kinetic energies to the potential and
kinetic energies at a later instant.

system cannot change. This principle of conservation of
mechanical energy is written as

K,+ U,=K,+ U,,
in which the subscripts refer to different instants during an
energy transfer process. This conservation principle can also

energy changes. If only conservative forces do work within

an isolated system, then the mechanical energy Ene: of the be written as

 

AE moc= AK + AU=0.

Conservation of Mechanical Energy

The mechanical energy E,,.. of a system is the sum of its potential energy U and
the kinetic energy K of the objects within it:

Enoc = K +U (8-12)

(mechanical energy).

In this module, we examine what happens to this mechanical energy when only
conservative forces cause energy transfers within the system—that is, when
frictional and drag forces do not act on the objects in the system. Also, we shall
assume that the system is isolated from its environment; that is, no external force
from an object outside the system causes energy changes inside the system.

When a conservative force does work W on an object within the system, that
force transfers energy between kinetic energy K of the object and potential
energy U of the system. From Eq. 7-10, the change AK in kinetic energy is

AK=W (8-13)
and from Eq. 8-1, the change AU in potential energy is
AU=—W. (8-14)
Combining Eqs. 8-13 and 8-14, we find that
AK =—AU. (8-15)

In words, one of these energies increases exactly as much as the other decreases.
We can rewrite Eq. 8-15 as

Ky — Ki = —(U) — Ui), (8-16)

where the subscripts refer to two different instants and thus to two different
arrangements of the objects in the system. Rearranging Eq. 8-16 yields

 

@AP/Wide World Photos

In olden days, a person would be tossed
via a blanket to be able to see farther

over the flat terrain. Nowadays, it is

done just for fun. During the ascent of
the person in the photograph, energy is
transferred from kinetic energy to gravita-
tional potential energy. The maximum
height is reached when that transfer is
complete. Then the transfer is reversed
during the fall.

Ky, + U,=K,+U, (8-17)

(conservation of mechanical energy).

In words, this equation says:

the sum of K and U for
any state of a system

the sum of K and U for
any other state of the system /”
