Mendel and the Garden Pea

The first quantitative studies of inheritance were carried
out by Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk (figure 13.5).
Born in 1822 to peasant parents, Mendel was educated in a
monastery and went on to study science and mathematics
at the University of Vienna, where he failed his examina-
tions for a teaching certificate. He returned to the
monastery and spent the rest of his life there, eventually
becoming abbot. In the garden of the monastery (figure
13.6), Mendel initiated a series of experiments on plant hy-
bridization. The results of these experiments would ulti-
mately change our views of heredity irrevocably.

Why Mendel Chose the Garden Pea

For his experiments, Mendel chose the garden pea, the
same plant Knight and many others had studied earlier.
The choice was a good one for several reasons. First, many
earlier investigators had produced hybrid peas by crossing
different varieties. Mendel knew that he could expect to
observe segregation of traits among the offspring. Second,
a large number of true-breeding varieties of peas were
available. Mendel initially examined 32. Then, for further
study, he selected lines that differed with respect to seven
easily distinguishable traits, such as round versus wrinkled
seeds and purple versus white flowers, a character that
Knight had studied. Third, pea plants are small and easy to
grow, and they have a relatively short generation time.
Thus, one can conduct experiments involving numerous
plants, grow several generations in a single year, and obtain
results relatively quickly.

A fourth advantage of studying peas is that the sexual or-
gans of the pea are enclosed within the flower (figure 13.7).
The flowers of peas, like those of many flowering plants,
contain both male and female sex organs. Furthermore, the
gametes produced by the male and female parts of the same
flower, unlike those of many flowering plants, can fuse to
form viable offspring. Fertilization takes place automati-
cally within an individual flower if it is
not disturbed, resulting in offspring
that are the progeny from a single indi-
vidual. Therefore, one can either let
individual flowers engage in self-
fertilization, or remove the flower’s
male parts before fertilization and intro-
duce pollen from a strain with a different
trait, thus performing cross-pollination
which results in cross-fertilization.

FIGURE 13.6

The garden where Mendel carried out
his plant-breeding experiments. Gregor
Mendel did his key scientific experiments
in this small garden in a monastery.

242 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

 

FIGURE 13.5

Gregor Johann Mendel. Cultivating his plants in the garden of a
monastery in Brunn, Austria (now Brno, Czech Republic), Mendel
studied how differences among varieties of peas were inherited
when the varieties were crossed. Similar experiments had been
done before, but Mendel was the first to quantify the results and
appreciate their significance.

m
