8-3 READING A POTENTIAL ENERGY CURVE

To show both kinds of mechanical energy, we have

K, + U, = K, + U,, (8-20)
or mv}, + mgy, = zmv? + mgy,.
Dividing by m and rearranging yield
v5 = vi + 28(y; — Yo).
Putting v, = 0 and y, — y, = h leads to
Vp = V2gh = V(2)(9.8 mis*)(8.5 m)
= 13 m/s. (Answer)

187

This is the same speed that the child would reach if she fell
8.5 m vertically. On an actual slide, some frictional forces
would act and the child would not be moving quite so fast.

Comments: Although this problem is hard to solve directly
with Newton’s laws, using conservation of mechanical en-
ergy makes the solution much easier. However, if we were
asked to find the time taken for the child to reach the bot-
tom of the slide, energy methods would be of no use; we
would need to know the shape of the slide, and we would
have a difficult problem.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

8-3 READING A POTENTIAL ENERGY CURVE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

8.07 Given a particle's potential energy as a function of its
position x, determine the force on the particle.

8.08 Given a graph of potential energy versus x, determine
the force on a particle.

8.09 Ona graph of potential energy versus x, superimpose a
line for a particle's mechanical energy and determine the
particle's kinetic energy for any given value of x.

Key Ideas
@ If we know the potential energy function U(x) fora system
in which a one-dimensional force F(x) acts on a particle, we
can find the force as
dU(x)

dx ~

@ If U(x) is given on a graph, then at any value of x, the force
F(x) is the negative of the slope of the curve there and the

F(x) = -

Reading a Potential Energy Curve

8.10 If a particle moves along an x axis, use a potential-
energy graph for that axis and the conservation of mechan-
ical energy to relate the energy values at one position to
those at another position.

8.11 Ona potential-energy graph, identify any turning points
and any regions where the particle is not allowed because
of energy requirements.

8.12 Explain neutral equilibrium, stable equilibrium, and
unstable equilibrium.

kinetic energy of the particle is given by

K(x) = Emec — U(x),
where Exec is the mechanical energy of the system.
@ A tuming point is a point x at which the particle reverses its
motion (there, K = 0).
@ The particle is in equilibrium at points where the slope of
the U(x) curve is zero (there, F(x) = 0).

Once again we consider a particle that is part of a system in which a conservative
force acts. This time suppose that the particle is constrained to move along an
x axis while the conservative force does work on it. We want to plot the potential
energy U(x) that is associated with that force and the work that it does, and then
we want to consider how we can relate the plot back to the force and to the kinetic
energy of the particle. However, before we discuss such plots, we need one more
relationship between the force and the potential energy.

Finding the Force Analytically

Equation 8-6 tells us how to find the change AU in potential energy between two
points in a one-dimensional situation if we know the force F(x). Now we want to
