Force and Motion-Il

6-1 Friction

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

6.01 Distinguish between friction in a static situation and a
kinetic situation.

6.02 Determine direction and magnitude of a frictional force.

6.03 For objects on horizontal, vertical, or inclined planes in
situations involving friction, draw free-body diagrams and
apply Newton's second law.

 

Key Ideas

@ When a force F tends to slide a body along a surface, a fric-
tional force from the surface acts on the body. The frictional
force is parallel to the surface and directed so as to oppose the
sliding. It is due to bonding between the body and the surface.

If the body does not slide, the frictional force is a static
frictional force f., If there is sliding, the frictional force is a
kinetic frictional force Fee

@ Ifa body does not move, the static frictional force i and
the component of F parallel to the surface are equal in magni-
tude, and vA is directed opposite that component. If the com-
ponent increases, f, also increases.

@ The magnitude of f, has a maximum value f ,max given by
Komax = HsFy

where y, is the coefficient of static friction and Fy is the mag-
nitude of the normal force. Ifthe component of F parallel to
the surface exceeds f, max, the body slides on the surface.

@ If the body begins to slide on the surface, the magnitude of the
frictional force rapidly decreases to a constant value f;, given by

f= MnP.

where ju; is the coefficient of kinetic friction.

What Is Physics?

In this chapter we focus on the physics of three common types of force: frictional
force, drag force, and centripetal force. An engineer preparing a car for the
Indianapolis 500 must consider all three types. Frictional forces acting on the tires
are crucial to the car’s acceleration out of the pit and out of a curve (if the car hits
an oil slick, the friction is lost and so is the car). Drag forces acting on the car
from the passing air must be minimized or else the car will consume too much
fuel and have to pit too early (even one 14s pit stop can cost a driver the race).
Centripetal forces are crucial in the turns (if there is insufficient centripetal force,
the car slides into the wall). We start our discussion with frictional forces.

Friction

Frictional forces are unavoidable in our daily lives. If we were not able to coun-
teract them, they would stop every moving object and bring to a halt every
rotating shaft. About 20% of the gasoline used in an automobile is needed to
counteract friction in the engine and in the drive train. On the other hand, if fric-
tion were totally absent, we could not get an automobile to go anywhere, and we
could not walk or ride a bicycle. We could not hold a pencil, and, if we could, it
would not write. Nails and screws would be useless, woven cloth would fall apart,
and knots would untie.

124
