138 CHAPTER 6 FORCE AND MOTION-II

Radial calculation: As Fig. 6-11b shows (and as you
should verify), the angle that force Fy makes with the ver-
tical is equal to the bank angle 6 of the track. Thus, the ra-
dial component Fy, is equal to Fy sin @. We can now write
Newton’s second law for components along the r axis
(Footy = may) as

2

—Fy sin @ = m\ ——_]. (6-23)
R

We cannot solve this equation for the value of @ because it

also contains the unknowns Fy and m.

Vertical calculations: We next consider the forces and ac-
celeration along the y axis in Fig. 6-11b. The vertical com-
ponent of the normal force is Fy, = Fy cos @, the gravita-
tional force F, on the car has the magnitude mg, and the
acceleration of the car along the y axis is zero. Thus we can

Review & Summary

Friction When a force F tends to slide a body along a surface, a
frictional force from the surface acts on the body. The frictional force
is parallel to the surface and directed so as to oppose the sliding. It is
due to bonding between the atoms on the body and the atoms on the
surface, an effect called cold-welding.

If the body does not slide, the frictional force is a static
frictional force f,. If there is sliding, the frictional force is a kinetic
frictional force f,.

 

1. Ifa body does not move, the static frictional force f, and the
component of F parallel to the surface are equal in magnitude,
and f, is directed opposite that component. If the component
increases, f, also increases.

2. The magnitude of f,has a maximum value may given by
Pramas = MsFNs (6-1)

where yu, is the coefficient of static friction and Fy is the magni-
tude of the normal force. If the component of F parallel to the
surface exceeds f, »,.,, the static friction is overwhelmed and the
body slides on the surface.

»

If the body begins to slide on the surface, the magnitude of the
frictional force rapidly decreases to a constant value f, given
by

Sic = HeFn, (6-2)

where 4; is the coefficient of kinetic friction.

Drag Force When there is relative motion between air (or
some other fluid) and a body, the body experiences a drag force D
that opposes the relative motion and points in the direction in
which the fluid flows relative to the body. The magnitude of D is

write Newton’s second law for components along the y axis
(Foct.y = ay) as

Fy cos @ — mg = m(0),
from which

Fy cos 0 = mg. (6-24)

Combining results: Equation 6-24 also contains the
unknowns Fy and m, but note that dividing Eq. 6-23 by
Eg. 6-24 neatly eliminates both those unknowns. Doing so,
replacing (sin 6)/(cos 0) with tan 0, and solving for @ then
yield

am
O= tan
gR
_ (20 m/s)”
= tan? M4) __jy (ay
“0.8 m/s2)(190 m) Gaszay)

S$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

related to the relative speed v by an experimentally determined
drag coefficient C according to

D =5CpAv’, (6-14)

where pis the fluid density (mass per unit volume) and A is the
effective cross-sectional area of the body (the area of a cross sec-
tion taken perpendicular to the relative velocity V).

Terminal Speed When a blunt object has fallen far enough
through air, the magnitudes of the drag force D and the gravita-
tional force F, on the body become equal. The body then falls at a
constant terminal speed v, given by

[2
way CoA

 

(6-16)

Uniform Circular Motion If a particle moves in a circle or a
circular arc of radius R at constant speed v, the particle is said to be
in uniform circular motion. It then has a centripetal acceleration @
with magnitude given by
v2

ane
This acceleration is due to a net centripetal force on the particle,
with magnitude given by

(6-17)

(6-18)

 

where m is the particle’s mass. The vector quantities @ and F are
directed toward the center of curvature of the particle’s path. A
particle can move in circular motion only if a net centripetal
force acts on it.
