162 CHAPTER 7 KINETIC ENERGY AND WORK

It then runs into and compresses a spring of spring constant
k = 750 N/m. When the canister is momentarily stopped by
the spring, by what distance d is the spring compressed?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. The work W, done on the canister by the spring force is
related to the requested distance d by Eq. 7-26 (W, =
—$kx?), with d replacing x.

2. The work W, is also related to the kinetic energy of the
canister by Eq. 7-10 (K; — K; = W).

3. The canister’s kinetic energy has an initial value of K =
my? and a value of zero when the canister is momen-
tarily at rest.

Calculations: Putting the first two of these ideas together,
we write the work —kinetic energy theorem for the canister as

K,— K; = —$kd?.

Substituting according to the third key idea gives us this
expression:

0 — 3m? = —$ka.

Simplifying, solving for d, and substituting known data then

give us
0.40 kg
(0.50 m/s) 750 Nim

=12x10?m=12cm.

 

(Answer)

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

7-5 work DONE BY A GENERAL VARIABLE FORCE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

7.14 Given a variable force as a function of position, calculate
the work done by it on an object by integrating the function
from the initial to the final position of the object, in one or
more dimensions.

7.15 Given a graph of force versus position, calculate the
work done by graphically integrating from the initial
position to the final position of the object.

7.16 Convert a graph of acceleration versus position to a
graph of force versus position.

7.17 Apply the work-kinetic energy theorem to situations
where an object is moved by a variable force.

 

Key Ideas
@ When the force F on a particle-like object depends on
the position of the object, the work done by F on the ob-
ject while the object moves from an initial position r; with
coordinates (x;, yj, Z;) to a final position r; with coordinates
(Xp Yp Zp) must be found by integrating the force. If we as-
sume that component F, may depend on x but not on y or
Z, component F,, may depend on y but not on x or z, and
component F, may depend on z but not on x or y, then the

work is.
xy vy zy
we Fav [ Fay + { Fz dz.
%

@ If Fhas only an x component, then this reduces to

w= | Fo) ar.
[0

Work Done by a General Variable Force

One-Dimensional Analysis

Let us return to the situation of Fig. 7-2 but now consider the force to be in the
positive direction of the x axis and the force magnitude to vary with position x.
Thus, as the bead (particle) moves, the magnitude F(x) of the force doing work on
it changes. Only the magnitude of this variable force changes, not its direction,
and the magnitude at any position does not change with time.
