114 CHAPTER 5 FORCE AND MOTION-I

Review & Summary

Newtonian Mechanics The velocity of an object can change
(the object can accelerate) when the object is acted on by one or
more forces (pushes or pulls) from other objects. Newtonian me-
chanics relates accelerations and forces.

Force Forces are vector quantities. Their magnitudes are de-
fined in terms of the acceleration they would give the standard
kilogram. A force that accelerates that standard body by exactly
1 m/s’ is defined to have a magnitude of 1 N. The direction of a
force is the direction of the acceleration it causes. Forces are com-
bined according to the rules of vector algebra. The net force on a
body is the vector sum of all the forces acting on the body.

Newton’s First Law If there is no net force on a body, the
body remains at rest if it is initially at rest or moves in a straight
line at constant speed if it is in motion.

Inertial Reference Frames Reference frames in which
Newtonian mechanics holds are called inertial reference frames or
inertial frames. Reference frames in which Newtonian mechanics
does not hold are called noninertial reference frames or noniner-
tial frames.

Mass The mass of a body is the characteristic of that body that
relates the body’s acceleration to the net force causing the acceler-
ation. Masses are scalar quantities.

Newton’s Second Law The net force F,., on a body with
mass mis related to the body’s acceleration @ by

Fae = ma, (5-1)
which may be written in the component versions
Foes = ma, Fay = may, and — Fyg,: = maz. (5-2)
The second law indicates that in SI units
1N=1kg-m’s?. (5-3)

<Questions

1 Figure 5-19 gives the free-body diagram for four situations in
which an object is pulled by several forces across a frictionless
floor, as seen from overhead. In which situations does the accel-
eration @ of the object have (a) an x component and (b) a y com-

y y
7N
6N
3N 2N |] 3N
- x x
2N 5N 2N
4N 4N
dy (2)

A free-body diagram is a stripped-down diagram in which only
one body is considered. That body is represented by either a sketch or
a dot. The external forces on the body are drawn, and a coordinate
system is superimposed, oriented so as to simplify the solution.

Some Particular Forces A gravitational force F, on a body
is a pull by another body. In most situations in this book, the other
body is Earth or some other astronomical body. For Earth, the
force is directed down toward the ground, which is assumed to be
an inertial frame. With that assumption, the magnitude of F, is

F,= meg, (5-8)

where m is the body’s mass and g is the magnitude of the free-fall
acceleration.

The weight W of a body is the magnitude of the upward force
needed to balance the gravitational force on the body. A body’s
weight is related to the body’s mass by

W = me. (5-12)

A normal force Fy is the force on a body from a surface
against which the body presses. The normal force is always perpen-
dicular to the surface.

A frictional force 7 is the force on a body when the body
slides or attempts to slide along a surface. The force is always par-
allel to the surface and directed so as to oppose the sliding. On a
frictionless surface, the frictional force is negligible.

When a cord is under tension, each end of the cord pulls ona
body. The pull is directed along the cord, away from the point of at-
tachment to the body. For a massless cord (a cord with negligible
mass), the pulls at both ends of the cord have the same magnitude
T, even if the cord runs around a massless, frictionless pulley (a pul-
ley with negligible mass and negligible friction on its axle to op-
pose its rotation).

Newton's Third Law If a force Fyc acts on body B due to
body C,then there is a force Fes on body C due to body B:

Fao = —Fep-

ponent? (c) In each situation, give the direction of @ by naming
either a quadrant or a direction along an axis. (Don’t reach for
the calculator because this can be answered with a few mental
calculations.)

 

6N
5N
x
4N
3N
4N
(3)

Figure 5-19 Question 1.
