Patterns of Inheritance

 

Concept Outline

13.1 Mendel solved the mystery of heredity.

Early Ideas about Heredity: The Road to Mendel.

Before Mendel, the mechanism of inheritance was not known.
Mendel and the Garden Pea. Mendel experimented
with heredity in edible peas counted his results.

What Mendel Found. Mendel found that alternative
traits for a character segregated among second-generation
progeny in the ratio 3:1. Mendel proposed that information
for a trait rather than the trait itself is inherited.

How Mendel Interpreted His Results. Mendel found
that one alternative of a character could mask the other in
heterozygotes, but both could subsequently be expressed in
homozygotes of future generations.

Mendelian Inheritance Is Not Always Easy to Analyze.
A variety of factors can influence the Mendelian
segregation of alleles.

13.2 Human genetics follows Mendelian principles.

Most Gene Disorders Are Rare. Tay-Sachs disease is
due to a recessive allele.

Multiple Alleles: The ABO Blood Groups. The human
ABO blood groups are determined by three J gene alleles.
Patterns of Inheritance Can Be Deduced from
Pedigrees. Hemophilia is sex-linked.

Gene Disorders Can Be Due to Simple Alterations of
Proteins. Sickle cell anemia is caused by a single amino
acid change.

Some Defects May Soon Be Curable. Cystic fibrosis
may soon be cured by gene replacement therapy.

13.3 Genes are on chromosomes.

Chromosomes: The Vehicles of Mendelian
Inheritance. Mendelian segregation reflects the random
assortment of chromosomes in meiosis.

Genetic Recombination. Crossover frequency reflect
the physical distance between genes.

Human Chromosomes. Humans possess 23 pairs of
chromosomes, one of them determining the sex.

Human Abnormalities Due to Alterations in
Chromosome Number. Loss or addition of
chromosomes has serious consequences.

Genetic Counseling. Some gene defects can be detected
early in pregnancy.

 

FIGURE 13.1

Human beings are extremely diverse in appearance. The
differences between us are partly inherited and partly the result
of environmental factors we encounter in our lives.

Ke living creature is a product of the long evolu-
tionary history of life on earth. While all organisms
share this history, only humans wonder about the
processes that led to their origin. We are still far from
understanding everything about our origins, but we have
learned a great deal. Like a partially completed jigsaw
puzzle, the boundaries have fallen into place, and much
of the internal structure is becoming apparent. In this
chapter, we will discuss one piece of the puzzle—the
enigma of heredity. Why do groups of people from dif-
ferent parts of the world often differ in appearance (fig-
ure 13.1)? Why do the members of a family tend to re-
semble one another more than they resemble members of
other families?

239
