2.3 Chemical bonds hold molecules together.

Ionic Bonds Form Crystals

A group of atoms held together by energy in a stable associ-
ation is called a molecule. When a molecule contains atoms
of more than one element, it is called a compound. The
atoms in a molecule are joined by chemical bonds; these
bonds can result when atoms with opposite charges attract
(ionic bonds), when two atoms share one or more pairs of
electrons (covalent bonds), or when atoms interact in other
ways. We will start by examining ionic bonds, which form
when atoms with opposite electrical charges (ions) attract.

A Closer Look at Table Salt

Common table salt, sodium chloride (NaC)), is a lattice of
ions in which the atoms are held together by ionic bonds
(figure 2.9). Sodium has 11 electrons: 2 in the inner energy
level, 8 in the next level, and 1 in the outer (valence) level.
The valence electron is unpaired (free) and has a strong ten-
dency to join with another electron. A stable configuration
can be achieved if the valence electron is lost to another
atom that also has an unpaired electron. The loss of this
electron results in the formation of a positively charged
sodium ion, Na*.

 

+ Sodium ion _ Chloride ion
(a)
FIGURE 2.9

The chlorine atom has 17 electrons: 2 in the inner energy
level, 8 in the next level, and 7 in the outer level. Hence, one
of the orbitals in the outer energy level has an unpaired
electron. The addition of another electron to the outer level
fills that level and causes a negatively charged chloride ion,
CI, to form.

When placed together, metallic sodium and gaseous
chlorine react swiftly and explosively, as the sodium atoms
donate electrons to chlorine, forming Na* and Cl ions. Be-
cause opposite charges attract, the Na* and Cl- remain asso-
ciated in an ionic compound, NaCl, which is electrically
neutral. However, the electrical attractive force holding
NaCl together is not directed specifically between particular
Na* and Cl ions, and no discrete sodium chloride mole-
cules form. Instead, the force exists between any one ion and
all neighboring ions of the opposite charge, and the ions ag-
gregate in a crystal matrix with a precise geometry. Such ag-
gregations are what we know as salt crystals. If a salt such as
NaCl is placed in water, the electrical attraction of the water
molecules, for reasons we will point out later in this chapter,
disrupts the forces holding the ions in their crystal matrix,
causing the salt to dissolve into a roughly equal mixture of
free Na* and Cl ions.

 

An ionic bond is an attraction between ions of opposite
charge in an ionic compound. Such bonds are not
formed between particular ions in the compound;
rather, they exist between an ion and all of the
oppositely charged ions in its immediate vicinity.

 

 

(b) NaCl crystal

‘The formation of ionic bonds by sodium chloride. (a) When a sodium atom donates an electron to a chlorine atom, the sodium atom
becomes a positively charged sodium ion, and the chlorine atom becomes a negatively charged chloride ion. (6) Sodium chloride forms a

highly regular lattice of alternating sodium ions and chloride ions.

26 Part The Origin of Living Things
