202

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

<Problems

&

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM_ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
‘+--+ Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

WWW Worked-out solution is at

ILw

Interactive solution is at

“SEE Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 8-1 Potential Energy
*1 SSM What is the spring constant of a spring that stores 25 J of
elastic potential energy when compressed by 7.5 cm?

+2. In Fig. 8-29, a single frictionless roller-coaster car of mass
m = 825 kg tops the first hill with speed vp = 17.0 m/s at height
h = 42.0 m. How much work does the gravitational force do on the
car from that point to (a) point A, (b) point B,and (c) point C? If the
gravitational potential energy of the car—Earth system is taken to be
zero at C, what is its value when the car is at (d) B and (e) A? (f) If
mass m were doubled, would the change in the gravitational potential
energy of the system between points A and B increase, decrease, or
remain the same?

 

*3 You drop a 2.00 kg book to a friend
who stands on the ground at distance
D = 10.0 m below. If your friend’s out-
stretched hands are at distance d = 1.50 m
above the ground (Fig. 8-30), (a) how
much work W, does the gravitational
force do on the book as it drops to her
hands? (b) What is the change AU in the
gravitational potential energy of the
book-Earth system during the drop? If
the gravitational potential energy U of
that system is taken to be zero at ground
level, what is U (c) when the book is re-
leased and (d) when it reaches her
hands? Now take U to be 100J at
ground level and again find (e) W,.
(f) AU, (g) U at the release point, and
(h) U at her hands.

°4 Figure 8-31 shows a ball with mass
m = 0.341 kg attached to the end of a thin rod
with length L = 0.452 m and negligible mass.
The other end of the rod is pivoted so that the
ball can move in a vertical circle. The rod is
held horizontally as shown and then given
enough of a downward push to cause the
ball to swing down and around and just reach
the vertically up position, with zero speed
there. How much work is done on the ball by
the gravitational force from the initial point

 

 

Figure 8-30
Problems 3 and 10.

Figure 8-31
Problems 4
and 14.

 

to (a) the lowest point, (b) the highest point, and (c) the point on
the right level with the initial point? If the gravitational potential
energy of the ball—Earth system is taken to be zero at the initial
point, what is it when the ball reaches (d) the lowest point, (e) the
highest point, and (f) the point on the right level with the initial
point? (g) Suppose the rod were pushed harder so that the ball
passed through the highest point with a nonzero speed. Would AU,
from the lowest point to the highest point then be greater than, less
than, or the same as it was when the ball stopped at the highest
point?

*5 SSM In Fig. 8-32, a 2.00 ice
flake is released from the edge of a
hemispherical bowl whose radius r
is 22.0cm. The flake—bowl contact
is frictionless. (a) How much work is
done on the flake by the gravita-
tional force during the flake’s
descent to the bottom of the bowl?
(b) What is the change in the poten-
tial energy of the flake—Earth sys-
tem during that descent? (c) If that
potential energy is taken to be zero
at the bottom of the bowl, what is its
value when the flake is released? (d) If, instead, the potential en-
ergy is taken to be zero at the release point, what is its value when
the flake reaches the bottom of the bowl? (e) If the mass of the
flake were doubled, would the magnitudes of the answers to (a)
through (d) increase, decrease, or remain the same?

6 In Fig. 8-33, a small block of
mass m = 0.032 kg can slide along
the frictionless loop-the-loop, with
loop radius R = 12 cm. The block is
released from rest at point P, at
height h = 5.0R above the bottom
of the loop. How much work does
the gravitational force do on the
block as the block travels from point
P to (a) point Q and (b) the top of
the loop? If the gravitational poten-
tial energy of the block—Earth sys-
tem is taken to be zero at the bot-
tom of the loop, what is that potential energy when the block is (c)
at point P, (d) at point Q, and (e) at the top of the loop? (f) If, in-
stead of merely being released, the block is given some initial
speed downward along the track, do the answers to (a) through (e)
increase, decrease, or remain the same?

Ice
flake.

Figure 8-32 Problems 5
and 11.

uP

ay
R
{

Figure 8-33 Problems 6
and 17.

“7 Figure 8-34 shows a thin rod, of length L = 2.00 m and neg-
ligible mass, that can pivot about one end to rotate in a vertical
circle. A ball of mass m = 5.00 kg is attached to the other end.
The rod is pulled aside to angle @ = 30.0° and released with
initial velocity ¥) = 0. As the ball descends to its lowest point,
(a) how much work does the gravitational force do on it and
(b) what is the change in the gravitational potential energy of
