many contact points do cold-weld together. These welds produce static friction
when an applied force attempts to slide the surfaces relative to each other.

If the applied force is great enough to pull one surface across the other, there
is first a tearing of welds (at breakaway) and then a continuous re-forming and
tearing of welds as movement occurs and chance contacts are made (Fig. 6-2).
The kinetic frictional force i that opposes the motion is the vector sum of the
forces at those many chance contacts.

Tf the two surfaces are pressed together harder, many more points cold-weld.
Now getting the surfaces to slide relative to each other requires a greater applied
force: The static frictional force i has a greater maximum value. Once the sur-
faces are sliding, there are many more points of momentary cold-welding, so the
kinetic frictional force Fi also has a greater magnitude.

Often, the sliding motion of one surface over another is “jerky” because the two
surfaces alternately stick together and then slip. Such repetitive stick-and-slip can pro-
duce squeaking or squealing, as when tires skid on dry pavement, fingernails scratch
along a chalkboard, or a rusty hinge is opened. It can also produce beautiful and capti-
vating sounds, as in music when a bow is drawn properly across a violin string. = =

Properties of Friction

Experiment shows that when a dry and unlubricated body presses against a surface
in the same condition and a force F attempts to slide the body along the surface,
the resulting frictional force has three properties:

Property 1. If the body does not move, then the static frictional force f; and the
component of F that is parallel to the surface balance each other. They are
equal in magnitude, and f, is directed opposite that component of F.

Property 2. The magnitude of i has a maximum value f, max that is given by

Fomax = MsFy, (6-1)

where yu, is the coefficient of static friction and Fy is the magnitude of the
normal force on the body from the surface. If the magnitude of the compo-
nent of F that is parallel to the surface exceeds f, max, then the body begins to
slide along the surface.

Property 3. If the body begins to slide along the surface, the magnitude of the
frictional force rapidly decreases to a value f, given by

fi = baFy, (6-2)

where 4, is the coefficient of kinetic friction. Thereafter, during the sliding, a
kinetic frictional force te with magnitude given by Eq. 6-2 opposes the motion.

The magnitude Fy of the normal force appears in properties 2 and 3 as a
measure of how firmly the body presses against the surface. If the body presses
harder, then, by Newton’s third law, Fy is greater. Properties 1 and 2 are worded
in terms of a single applied force F , but they also hold for the net force of several
applied forces acting on the body. Equations 6-1 and 6-2 are not vector equations;
the direction of f or fi is always parallel to the surface and opposed to the at-
tempted sliding, and the normal force Fy is perpendicular to the surface.

The coefficients 44, and 4, are dimensionless and must be determined experi-
mentally. Their values depend on certain properties of both the body and the
surface; hence, they are usually referred to with the preposition “between,” as in
“the value of u, between an egg and a Teflon-coated skillet is 0.04, but that between
rock-climbing shoes and rock is as much as 1.2.” We assume that the value of pu,
does not depend on the speed at which the body slides along the surface.

6-1 FRICTION 127

(a)

\

(0)
Figure 6-2 The mechanism of sliding
friction. (a) The upper surface is sliding to
the right over the lower surface in this
enlarged view. (b) A detail, showing two
spots where cold-welding has occurred.
Force is required to break the welds and
maintain the motion.
