<Questions

1 In Fig, 6-12, if the box is station-
ary and the angle @ between the hor-
izontal and force F is increased
somewhat, do the following quanti-
ties increase, decrease, or remain the
same: (a) F,; (b) fi: (c) Fv; (4) femax? (€) If, instead, the box is sliding
and @is increased, does the magnitude of the frictional force on the
box increase, decrease, or remain the same?

Figure 6-12 Question 1.

2 Repeat Question 1 for force F angled upward instead of down-
ward as drawn.

3 In Fig, 6-13, horizontal force
of magnitude 10N is applied to a
box on a floor, but the box does not
slide. Then, as the magnitude of ver-
tical force F, is increased from zero,
do the following quantities increase,
decrease, or stay the same: (a) the magnitude of the frictional
force vA on the box; (b) the magnitude of the normal force Fy on
the box from the floor; (c) the maximum value fymox of the magni-
tude of the static frictional force on the box? (d) Does the box
eventually slide?

 

Figure 6-13 Question 3.

4 In three experiments, three different horizontal forces are ap-
plied to the same block lying on the same countertop. The force
magnitudes are F, = 12 N, F) = 8N, and Fy = 4N. In each experi-
ment, the block remains stationary in spite of the applied force.
Rank the forces according to (a) the magnitude f, of the static fric-
tional force on the block from the countertop and (b) the maximum
value fi, mya. of that force, greatest first.

5 If you press an apple crate against a wall so hard that the crate
cannot slide down the wall, what is the direction of (a) the static
frictional force f, on the crate from the wall and (b) the normal
force Fy on the crate from the wall? If you increase your push,
what happens to (c) f,, (d) Fy. and (e) fi max?

6 InFig.6-14,a block of mass mis held sta- FE
tionary on a ramp by the frictional force on
it from the ramp. A force F, directed up the e
ramp, is then applied to the block and grad- \o

ually increased in magnitude from zero. ~

During the increase, what happens to the di-
rection and magnitude of the frictional force
on the block?

7 Reconsider Question 6 but with the force F now directed
down the ramp. As the magnitude of F is increased from zero,
what happens to the direction and magnitude of the frictional
force on the block?

8 In Fig. 6-15, a horizontal force of 100 N is to be applied to a 10
kg slab that is initially stationary on a frictionless floor, to acceler-
ate the slab. A 10 kg block lies on top of the slab; the coefficient of
friction 4 between the block and the slab is not known, and the

Block;
a 100N

Figure 6-15 Question 8.

Figure 6-14
Question 6.

QUESTIONS 139

block might slip. In fact, the contact between the block and the slab
might even be frictionless. (a) Considering that possibility, what is
the possible range of values for the magnitude of the slab’s acceler-
ation dja)? (Hint: You don’t need written calculations; just consider
extreme values for j1.) (b) What is the possible range for the mag-
nitude dpiock of the block’s acceleration?

9 Figure 6-16 shows the overhead view of the path of an
amusement-park ride that travels at constant speed through five
circular ares of radii Ro, 2Ro, and 3Ro. Rank the arcs according to
the magnitude of the centripetal force on a rider traveling in the
ares, greatest first.

 

  

 

Figure 6-16 Question 9.

10 <6 In 1987, as a Halloween stunt, two sky divers passed a
pumpkin back and forth between them while they were in free fall
just west of Chicago. The stunt was great fun until the last sky diver
with the pumpkin opened his parachute. The pumpkin broke free
from his grip, plummeted about 0.5 km, ripped through the roof of
a house, slammed into the kitchen floor, and splattered all over the
newly remodeled kitchen. From the sky diver’s viewpoint and from
the pumpkin’s viewpoint, why did the sky diver lose control of the
pumpkin?

 

11 A person riding a Ferris wheel moves through positions at
(1) the top, (2) the bottom, and (3) midheight. If the wheel rotates
at a constant rate, rank these three positions according to (a) the
magnitude of the person’s centripetal acceleration, (b) the magni-
tude of the net centripetal force on the person, and (c) the magni-
tude of the normal force on the person, greatest first.

12 During aroutine flight in 1956, test pilot Tom Attridge put his
jet fighter into a 20° dive for a test of the aircraft's 20 mm machine
cannons. While traveling faster than sound at 4000 m altitude,
he shot a burst of rounds. Then, after allowing the cannons to cool,
he shot another burst at 2000 m; his speed was then 344 m/s, the
speed of the rounds relative to him was 730 m/s, and he was still in
adive.

Almost immediately the canopy around him was shredded
and his right air intake was damaged. With little flying capability
left, the jet crashed into a wooded area, but Attridge managed to
escape the resulting explosion. Explain what apparently happened
just after the second burst of cannon rounds. (Attridge has been
the only pilot who has managed to shoot himself down.)

 

13 A box is on a ramp that is at angle @ to the horizontal. As ¢
is increased from zero, and before the box slips, do the following
increase, decrease, or remain the same: (a) the component of the
gravitational force on the box, along the ramp, (b) the magnitude
of the static frictional force on the box from the ramp, (c) the
component of the gravitational force on the box, perpendicular
to the ramp, (d) the magnitude of the normal force on the
box from the ramp, and (e) the maximum value f,max of the static
frictional force?
