7-2 WoRK AND KINETIC ENERGY

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

7.03 Apply the relationship between a force (magnitude and
direction) and the work done on a particle by the force
when the particle undergoes a displacement.

7.04 Calculate work by taking a dot product of the force vec-
tor and the displacement vector, in either magnitude-angle
or unit-vector notation.

7-2 WORK AND KINETIC ENERGY 151

7.05 If multiple forces act on a particle, calculate the net work
done by them.

7.06 Apply the work-kinetic energy theorem to relate the
work done by a force (or the net work done by multiple
forces) and the resulting change in kinetic energy.

 

Key Ideas
@ Work W is energy transferred to or from an object via a
force acting on the object. Energy transferred to the object
is positive work, and from the object, negative work.

@ The work done on a particle by a constant force F’ during
displacement d is

W = Fdcosé = Fed

(work, constant force),
in which ¢is the constant angle between the directions of F

and d.

@ Only the component of F thatis along the displacement d
can do work on the object.

@ When two or more forces act on an object, their net work is
the sum of the individual works done by the forces, which is
also equal to the work that would be done on the object by
the net force Fo of those forces.

@ For aparticle, a change AK in the kinetic energy equals the
net work W done on the particle:

AK =K,—K;=W
in which K;is the initial kinetic energy of the particle and Kyis
the kinetic energy after the work is done. The equation
rearranged gives us

(work-kinetic energy theorem),

K,=K,+W.

 

Work

If you accelerate an object to a greater speed by applying a force to the object,
you increase the kinetic energy K (= } mv?) of the object. Similarly, if you decel-
erate the object to a lesser speed by applying a force, you decrease the kinetic
energy of the object. We account for these changes in kinetic energy by saying
that your force has transferred energy to the object from yourself or from the
object to yourself. In such a transfer of energy via a force, work W is said to be
done on the object by the force. More formally, we define work as follows:

Oo Work Wis energy transferred to or from an object by means of a force acting on
the object. Energy transferred to the object is positive work, and energy transferred
from the object is negative work.

“Work,” then, is transferred energy; “doing work” is the act of transferring the
energy. Work has the same units as energy and is a scalar quantity.

The term transfer can be misleading. It does not mean that anything material
flows into or out of the object; that is, the transfer is not like a flow of water.
Rather, it is like the electronic transfer of money between two bank accounts:
The number in one account goes up while the number in the other account goes
down, with nothing material passing between the two accounts.

Note that we are not concerned here with the common meaning of the word
“work,” which implies that any physical or mental labor is work. For example, if
you push hard against a wall, you tire because of the continuously repeated mus-
cle contractions that are required, and you are, in the common sense, working.
However, such effort does not cause an energy transfer to or from the wall and
thus is not work done on the wall as defined here.

To avoid confusion in this chapter, we shall use the symbol W only for work
and shall represent a weight with its equivalent mg.
