Three Experiments. Here we deal with the frictional forces that exist be-
tween dry solid surfaces, either stationary relative to each other or moving across
each other at slow speeds. Consider three simple thought experiments:

1. Send a book sliding across a long horizontal counter. As expected, the book
slows and then stops. This means the book must have an acceleration parallel
to the counter surface, in the direction opposite the book’s velocity. From
Newton’s second law, then, a force must act on the book parallel to the counter
surface, in the direction opposite its velocity. That force is a frictional force.

2. Push horizontally on the book to make it travel at constant velocity along the
counter. Can the force from you be the only horizontal force on the book?
No, because then the book would accelerate. From Newton’s second law, there
must be a second force, directed opposite your force but with the same magni-
tude, so that the two forces balance. That second force is a frictional force,
directed parallel to the counter.

3. Push horizontally on a heavy crate. The crate does not move. From Newton’s
second law, a second force must also be acting on the crate to counteract your
force. Moreover, this second force must be directed opposite your force and
have the same magnitude as your force, so that the two forces balance. That
second force is a frictional force. Push even harder. The crate still does not
move. Apparently the frictional force can change in magnitude so that the two
forces still balance. Now push with all your strength. The crate begins to slide.
Evidently, there is a maximum magnitude of the frictional force. When you
exceed that maximum magnitude, the crate slides.

Two Types of Friction. Figure 6-1 shows a similar situation. In Fig. 6-1a, a block
rests on a tabletop, with the gravitational force FE balanced by a normal force Fy.
In Fig, 6-1b, you exert a force F on the block, attempting to pull it to the left. In re-
sponse, a frictional force f, is directed to the right, exactly balancing your force.
The force f, is called the static frictional force. The block does not move.

There is no attempt Fy.
at sliding. Thus,

no friction and

no motion.

(@) 7
Force F attempts
sliding but is balanced

by the frictional force.
No motion.

 

Force F is now
stronger but is still Fy:

balanced by the 7 7,
frictional force. ‘
No motion. =
ty

Figure 6-1 (a) The forces ona _ i)

stationary block. (b-d) An external Force F is now even

force F, applied to the block, is stronger but is still

balanced by a static frictional force balanced by the

J. As Fis increased, f, also increases, Facnonalionces

until f, reaches a certain maximum,
value. (Figure continues)

No motion.

 

6-1 FRICTION

Frictional force =O

Frictional force = F

Frictional force =F

Frictional force =F

125

 
