are passed to offspring, guiding the growth
of the corresponding part in the developing
embryo. Most similar theories of the direct
transmission of hereditary material assumed
that the male and female contributions
blend in the offspring. Thus, parents with
red and brown hair would produce children
with reddish brown hair, and tall and short
parents would produce children of interme-
diate height.

Koelreuter Demonstrates
Hybridization between Species

Taken together, however, these two con-
cepts lead to a paradox. If no variation en-
ters a species from outside, and if the varia-
tion within each species blends in every
generation, then all members of a species
should soon have the same appearance.
Obviously, this does not happen. Individu-
als within most species differ widely from
each other, and they differ in characteris-
tics that are transmitted from generation to
generation.

How could this paradox be resolved? Ac-
tually, the resolution had been provided
long before Darwin, in the work of the
German botanist Josef Koelreuter. In 1760,
Koelreuter carried out successful hy-
bridizations of plant species, crossing dif-
ferent strains of tobacco and obtaining fer-
tile offspring. The hybrids differed in appearance from
both parent strains. When individuals within the hybrid
generation were crossed, their offspring were highly vari-
able. Some of these offspring resembled plants of the hy-
brid generation (their parents), but a few resembled the
original strains (their grandparents).

FIGURE 13.4

The Classical Assumptions Fail

Koelreuter’s work represents the beginning of modern
genetics, the first clues pointing to the modern theory of
heredity. Koelreuter’s experiments provided an impor-
tant clue about how heredity works: the traits he was
studying could be masked in one generation, only to
reappear in the next. This pattern contradicts the theory
of direct transmission. How could a trait that is transmi
ted directly disappear and then reappear? Nor were the
traits of Koelreuter’s plants blended. A contemporary ac-
count stated that the traits reappeared in the third gener-
ation “fully restored to all their original powers and
properties.”

It is worth repeating that the offspring in Koelreuter’s
crosses were not identical to one another. Some resembled
the hybrid generation, while others did not. The alternative

 

 

‘The garden pea, Pisum
sativum. Easy to cultivate and
able to produce many distinctive
varieties, the garden pea was a
popular experimental subject in
investigations of heredity as long
as a century before Gregor
Mendel’s experiments.

forms of the characters Koelreuter was
studying were distributed among the off-
spring. Referring to a heritable feature as a
character, a modern geneticist would say
the alternative forms of each character were
segregating among the progeny of a mat-
ing, meaning that some offspring exhibited
one alternative form of a character (for ex-
ample, hairy leaves), while other offspring
from the same mating exhibited a different
alternative (smooth leaves). This segrega-
tion of alternative forms of a character, or
traits, provided the clue that led Gregor
Mendel to his understanding of the nature
of heredity.

Knight Studies Heredity in Peas

Over the next hundred years, other inves-
tigators elaborated on Koelreuter’s work.
Prominent among them were English
gentleman farmers trying to improve vari-
eties of agricultural plants. In one such se-
ries of experiments, carried out in the
1790s, T. A. Knight crossed two true-
breeding varieties (varieties that remain
uniform from one generation to the next)
of the garden pea, Pisum sativum (fig-
ure 13.4). One of these varieties had pur-
ple flowers, and the other had white flow-
ers. All of the progeny of the cross had
purple flowers. Among the offspring of
these hybrids, however, were some plants with purple
flowers and others, less common, with white flowers. Just
as in Koelreuter’s earlier studies, a trait from one of the
parents disappeared in one generation only to reappear
in the next.

In these deceptively simple results were the makings of a
scientific revolution. Nevertheless, another century passed
before the process of gene segregation was fully appreci-
ated. Why did it take so long? One reason was that early
workers did not quantify their results. A numerical record
of results proved to be crucial to understanding the process.
Knight and later experimenters who carried out other
crosses with pea plants noted that some traits had a
“stronger tendency” to appear than others, but they did not
record the numbers of the different classes of progeny. Sci-
ence was young then, and it was not obvious that the num-
bers were important.

 

Early geneticists demonstrated that some forms of an
inherited character (1) can disappear in one generation
only to reappear unchanged in future generations;

(2) segregate among the offspring of a cross; and

(3) are more likely to be represented than their
alternatives.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 241
