10-5 CALCULATING THE ROTATIONAL INERTIA

and thus must each be zero. Because x? + y? is equal to R?, where R is the dis-
tance from O to dm, the first integral is simply J,m, the rotational inertia of the
body about an axis through its center of mass. Inspection of Fig. 10-12 shows that
the last term in Eq. 10-37 is Mh?, where M is the body’s total mass. Thus,

275

Eg. 10-37 reduces to Eq. 10-36, which is the relation that we set out to prove.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

The figure shows a book-like object (one side is
longer than the other) and four choices of rotation
axes,all perpendicular to the face of the object.
Rank the choices according to the rotational inertia
of the object about the axis, greatest first.

qd) (2)

OF

(3) (4)

Sample Problem 10.06 Rotational inertia of a two-particle system

Figure 10-13a shows a rigid body consisting of two particles of
mass m connected by a rod of length L and negligible mass.

(a) What is the rotational inertia J,,., about an axis through the
center of mass, perpendicular to the rod as shown?

KEY IDEA

 

Because we have only two particles with mass, we can find
the body’s rotational inertia J... by using Eq. 10-33 rather
than by integration. That is, we find the rotational inertia of
each particle and then just add the results.

Calculations: For the two particles, each at perpendicular
distance 3L from the rotation axis, we have

T= Xi my? = (m)GLY + (mGLy

=$mL. (Answer)

(b) What is the rotational inertia J of the body about an axis
through the left end of the rod and parallel to the first axis
(Fig. 10-135)?

KEY IDEAS

 

This situation is simple enough that we can find J using
either of two techniques. The first is similar to the one used
in part (a). The other, more powerful one is to apply the
parallel-axis theorem.

First technique: We calculate J as in part (a), except here
the perpendicular distance r; is zero for the particle on the

WILEY

     

left and L for the particle on the right. Now Eq. 10-33
gives us

I= m(0)? + mL? = mL?. (Answer)
Second technique: Because we already know [,,, about an
axis through the center of mass and because the axis here is

parallel to that “com axis,” we can apply the parallel-axis
theorem (Eq. 10-36). We find

T= loom + Mh? = ymL? + (2m)GL)*

irra (Answer)

—Rotation axis
through
center of mass

—

(a)

 

Here the rotation axis is through the com.

Rotation axis through
end of rod

Here it has been shifted from the com
without changing the orientation. We
can use the parallel-axis theorem.

Figure 10-13 A rigid body consisting of two particles of mass m
joined by a rod of negligible mass.

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

yy
