220 CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

9-2 NEWTON'S SECOND LAW FOR A SYSTEM OF PARTICLES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

9.08 Given the position of a system's center of mass as a func-

9.04 Apply Newton's second law to a system of particles by re- tion of time, determine the velocity of the center of mass.
lating the net force (of the forces acting on the particles) to 9.09 Given the velocity of a system's center of mass as a
the acceleration of the system's center of mass. function of time, determine the acceleration of the center

9.05 Apply the constant-acceleration equations to the motion of mass.
of the individual particles in a system and to the motion of 9.10 Calculate the change in the velocity of a com by integrat-
the system's center of mass. ing the com's acceleration function with respect to time.

9.06 Given the mass and velocity of the particles in a system, 9.11 Calculate a com's displacement by integrating the
calculate the velocity of the system's center of mass. com's velocity function with respect to time.

9.07 Given the mass and acceleration of the particles ina 9.12 When the particles in a two-particle system move with-
system, calculate the acceleration of the system's center out the system's com moving, relate the displacements of
of mass. the particles and the velocities of the particles.

Key Idea —

@ The motion of the center of mass of any system of particles Here F,,.; is the net force of all the external forces acting on

is governed by Newton's second law for a system of parti- the system, M is the total mass of the system, and @com is the

cles, which is

Foot = MG com.

acceleration of the system's center of mass.

 

Newton’s Second Law for a System of Particles

Now that we know how to locate the center of mass of a system of particles, we
discuss how external forces can move a center of mass. Let us start with a simple
system of two billiard balls.

Ifyou roll a cue ball at a second billiard ball that is at rest, you expect that the
two-ball system will continue to have some forward motion after impact. You
would be surprised, for example, if both balls came back toward you or if both
moved to the right or to the left. You already have an intuitive sense that some-
thing continues to move forward.

What continues to move forward, its steady motion completely unaf-
fected by the collision, is the center of mass of the two-ball system. If you fo-
cus on this point—which is always halfway between these bodies because
they have identical masses—you can easily convince yourself by trial at a bil-
liard table that this is so. No matter whether the collision is glancing, head-on,
or somewhere in between, the center of mass continues to move forward, as if
the collision had never occurred. Let us look into this center-of-mass motion
in more detail.

Motion of a System’s com. To do so, we replace the pair of billiard balls with
a system of n particles of (possibly) different masses. We are interested not in the
individual motions of these particles but only in the motion of the center of mass
of the system. Although the center of mass is just a point, it moves like a particle
whose mass is equal to the total mass of the system; we can assign a position, a ve-
locity, and an acceleration to it. We state (and shall prove next) that the vector
equation that governs the motion of the center of mass of such a system of parti-
cles is

Fre = Micon (system of particles). (9-14)

This equation is Newton’s second law for the motion of the center of mass of
a system of particles. Note that its form is the same as the form of the equation
