10-1

y

Reference line

   
   

This change in the angle of the reference line
(which is part of the body) is equal to the angular
displacement of the body itself during this

time interval.

Figure 10-4 The reference line of the rigid body of Figs. 10-2 and 10-3 is at angular position
6, at time f; and at angular position @, at a later time 4. The quantity A@ (= @ — @)) is the
angular displacement that occurs during the interval At (= f, — t;). The body itself is not
shown.

The (instantaneous) angular velocity «, with which we shall be most con-
cerned, is the limit of the ratio in Eq. 10-5 as At approaches zero. Thus,

o= lim =, (10-6)

If we know (¢), we can find the angular velocity w by differentiation.

Equations 10-5 and 10-6 hold not only for the rotating rigid body as a whole
but also for every particle of that body because the particles are all locked
together. The unit of angular velocity is commonly the radian per second (rad/s)
or the revolution per second (rev/s). Another measure of angular velocity was
used during at least the first three decades of rock: Music was produced by vinyl
(phonograph) records that were played on turntables at “331 rpm” or “45 rpm,”
meaning at 33; rev/min or 45 rev/min.

Ifa particle moves in translation along an x axis, its linear velocity v is either
positive or negative, depending on its direction along the axis. Similarly, the angu-
lar velocity of a rotating rigid body is either positive or negative, depending on
whether the body is rotating counterclockwise (positive) or clockwise (negative).
(“Clocks are negative” still works.) The magnitude of an angular velocity is called
the angular speed, which is also represented with w.

Angular Acceleration
If the angular velocity of a rotating body is not constant, then the body has an an-
gular acceleration. Let w) and @, be its angular velocities at times f) and ft,
respectively. The average angular acceleration of the rotating body in the interval
from f, to b is defined as

@— 0, — Aw

org = aE (10-7)

in which Aw is the change in the angular velocity that occurs during the time
interval At. The (instantaneous) angular acceleration a, with which we shall be
most concerned, is the limit of this quantity as At approaches zero. Thus,

_ Aw dw
BO Ar a oy
As the name suggests, this is the angular acceleration of the body at a given in-
stant. Equations 10-7 and 10-8 also hold for every particle of that body. The unit of
angular acceleration is commonly the radian per second-squared (rad/s?) or the
revolution per second-squared (rew/s”).

ROTATIONAL VARIABLES

261
