278 CHAPTER 10 ROTATION

 

(a)

The torque due to this force
causes rotation around this axis
(which extends out toward you).

 

(d)

But actually only the tangential
component of the force causes
the rotation.

Line of _,
action of F

 

You calculate the same torque by
using this moment arm distance
and the full force magnitude.

Figure 10-18 (a) A force F acts ona rigid
body, with a rotation axis perpendicular to
the page. The torque can be found with
(a) angle ¢, (b) tangential force compo-
nent F,, or (c) moment arm r,.

lv] Checkpoint 6

The figure shows an overhead view of a meter stick that can pivot about the dot at the position
marked 20 (for 20 cm). Alll five forces on the stick are horizontal and have the same magnitude.
Rank the forces according to the magnitude of the torque they produce, greatest first.

Torque

A doorknob is located as far as possible from the door’s hinge line for a good rea-
son. If you want to open a heavy door, you must certainly apply a force, but that
is not enough. Where you apply that force and in what direction you push are also
important. If you apply your force nearer to the hinge line than the knob, or at
any angle other than 90° to the plane of the door, you must use a greater force
than if you apply the force at the knob and perpendicular to the door’s plane.

Figure 10-16a shows a cross section of a body that is free to rotate about an
axis passing through O and perpendicular to the cross section. A force F is
applied at point P, whose position relative to O is defined by a position vector 7.
The directions of vectors F and? make an angle ¢ with each other. (For simplic-
ity, we consider only forces that have no component parallel to the rotation axis;
thus, F is in the plane of the page.)

To determine how F results in a rotation of the body around the rotation
axis, we resolve F into two components (Fig. 10-16). One component, called the
radial component F,, points along 7. This component does not cause rotation,
because it acts along a line that extends through O. (If you pull on a door par-
allel to the plane of the door, you do not rotate the door.) The other compo-
nent of F, called the tangential component F,, is perpendicular to 7 and has
magnitude F, = Fsin ¢. This component does cause rotation.

Calculating Torques. The ability of F to rotate the body depends not only
on the magnitude of its tangential component F,, but also on just how far from O
the force is applied. To include both these factors, we define a quantity called
torque ras the product of the two factors and write it as

r= (r)(Fsin ¢). (10-39)
Two equivalent ways of computing the torque are
r= (r)(Fsin ¢) =rF, (10-40)
and 7 = (rsin 6)(F) =rF (10-41)

where r, is the perpendicular distance between the rotation axis at O and an extended
line running through the vector F (Fig. 10-16c). This extended line is called the line
of action of F, andr, is called the moment arm of F. Figure 10-16b shows that we
can describe r,the magnitude of 7, as being the moment arm of the force component F,.

Torque, which comes from the Latin word meaning “to twist,” may be loosely
identified as the turning or twisting action of the force F. When you apply a force
to an object—such as a screwdriver or torque wrench—with the purpose of turn-
ing that object, you are applying a torque. The SI unit of torque is the newton-
meter (N-m). Caution: The newton-meter is also the unit of work. Torque and
work, however, are quite different quantities and must not be confused. Work is
often expressed in joules (1 J = 1 N-m), but torque never is.

Clocks Are Negative. In Chapter 11 we shall use vector notation for torques,
but here, with rotation around a single axis, we use only an algebraic sign. If a
torque would cause counterclockwise rotation, it is positive. If it would cause
clockwise rotation, it is negative. (The phrase “clocks are negative” from Module
10-1 still works.)

Torques obey the superposition principle that we discussed in Chapter 5 for
forces: When several torques act on a body, the net torque (or resultant torque) is
the sum of the individual torques. The symbol for net torque is 7.1.

Pivot point

 
