Mendel’s Experimental Design

Mendel was careful to focus on only a few specific differ-
ences between the plants he was using and to ignore the
countless other differences he must have seen. He also had
the insight to realize that the differences he selected to ana-
lyze must be comparable. For example, he appreciated that
trying to study the inheritance of round seeds versus tall
height would be useless.

Mendel usually conducted his experiments in three
stages:

1. First, he allowed pea plants of a given variety to pro-
duce progeny by self-fertilization for several genera-
tions. Mendel thus was able to assure himself that
the traits he was studying were indeed constant,
transmitted unchanged from generation to genera-
tion. Pea plants with white flowers, for example,
when crossed with each other, produced only off-
spring with white flowers, regardless of the number
of generations.

2. Mendel then performed crosses between varieties
exhibiting alternative forms of characters. For ex-
ample, he removed the male parts from the flower
of a plant that produced white
flowers and fertilized it with
pollen from a purple-flowered
plant. He also carried out the
reciprocal cross, using pollen
from a white-flowered individual
to fertilize a flower on a pea plant
that produced purple flowers (fig-
ure 13.8).

3. Finally, Mendel permitted the hy-
brid offspring produced by these
crosses to self-pollinate for several
generations. By doing so, he al-
lowed the alternative forms of a
character to segregate among the
progeny. This was the same exper-
imental design that Knight and !
others had used much earlier. But
Mendel went an important step
farther: he counted the numbers of
offspring exhibiting each trait in
each succeeding generation. No
one had ever done that before.

The quantitative results Mendel
obtained proved to be of supreme
importance in revealing the

process of heredity. FIGURE 13.8

 

Petals

Anther 3

Carpel 2

 

FIGURE 13.7

Structure of the pea flower (longitudinal section). In a pea
plant flower, the petals enclose the male anther (containing
pollen grains, which give rise to haploid sperm) and the female
carpel (containing ovules, which give rise to haploid eggs). This
ensures that self-fertilization will take place unless the flower is
disturbed.

Pollen transferred from
white flower to stigma
of purple flower

<>

     

 

 

 

 

How Mendel conducted his experiments. Mendel pushed aside the petals of a white
flower and collected pollen from the anthers. He then placed that pollen onto the stigma

Mendel’s experiments with the
garden pea involved crosses between
true-breeding varieties, followed by a
generation or more of inbreeding.

(part of the carpel) of a purple flower whose anthers had been removed, causing cross-
fertilization to take place. All the seeds in the pod that resulted from this pollination
were hybrids of the white-flowered male parent and the purple-flowered female parent.
After planting these seeds, Mendel observed the pea plants they produced. All of the
progeny of this cross had purple flowers.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 243
