Mendel’s Second Law of Heredity:
Independent Assortment

After Mendel had demonstrated that different traits of a
given character (alleles of a given gene) segregate inde-
pendently of each other in crosses, he asked whether dif-
ferent genes also segregate independently. Mendel set out
to answer this question in a straightforward way. He first
established a series of pure-breeding lines of peas that dif-
fered in just two of the seven characters he had studied.
He then crossed contrasting pairs of the pure-breeding
lines to create heterozygotes. In a cross involving differ-
ent seed shape alleles (round, R, and wrinkled, r) and dif-
ferent seed color alleles (yellow, Y, and green, y), all the
F; individuals were identical, each one heterozygous for
both seed shape (Rr) and seed color (Yy). The Fy individu-
als of such a cross are dihybrids, individuals heterozygous
for both genes.

The third step in Mendel’s analysis was to allow the di-
hybrids to self-fertilize. If the alleles affecting seed shape
and seed color were segregating independently, then the
probability that a particular pair of seed shape alleles
would occur together with a particular pair of seed color
alleles would be simply the product of the individual prob-
abilities that each pair would occur separately. Thus, the
probability that an individual with wrinkled green seeds
(rryy) would appear in the F) generation would be equal to
the probability of observing an individual with wrinkled
seeds (4) times the probability of observing one with green
seeds (4), or Ys.

Because the gene controlling seed shape and the gene
controlling seed color are each represented by a pair of
alternative alleles in the dihybrid individuals, four types
of gametes are expected: RY, Ry, rY, and ry. Therefore, in
the F) generation there are 16 possible combinations of
alleles, each of them equally probable (figure 13.16). Of
these, 9 possess at least one dominant allele for each gene
(signified R__Y__, where the dash indicates the presence
of either allele) and, thus, should have round, yellow
seeds. Of the rest, 3 possess at least one dominant R allele
but are homozygous recessive for color (R__yy); 3 others
possess at least one dominant FY allele but are homozy-
gous recessive for shape (rrY_); and 1 combination
among the 16 is homozygous recessive for both genes
(rryy). The hypothesis that color and shape genes assort
independently thus predicts that the F) generation will
display a 9:3:3:1 phenotypic ratio: nine individuals with
round, yellow seeds, three with round, green seeds, three
with wrinkled, yellow seeds, and one with wrinkled,
green seeds (see figure 13.16).

What did Mendel actually observe? From a total of 556
seeds from dihybrid plants he had allowed to self-fertilize,
he observed: 315 round yellow (R__Y_), 108 round green
(R_yy), 101 wrinkled yellow (rrY_), and 32 wrinkled green
(rryy). These results are very close to a 9:3:3:1 ratio (which
would be 313:104:104:35). Consequently, the two genes
appeared to assort completely independently of each other.

252 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

  
  

   

Round, yellow
seeds (RRYY)

Wrinkled, green
seeds (rryy)

F, generation

 

Alll round, yellow
seeds (Rr¥y)

a .
3

 

 

 

 

 

E
@|@| @ | zone
BRYY | RRYy | RrYY | RrYY | 9/16 are round, yellow
| W/O | @ | QI steer runt gon
RRYs RR; RrYs Rr i
Sperm y yy y wyy_| 3/16 are wrinkled, yellov
i i 1/16 are wrinkled, greet
® @\ala 9
Rrvy_| Rrvy | myy | vy
@ @|\a/ ea
Rrvy | Rry | vy | my

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 13.16

Analyzing a dihybrid cross. This Punnett square shows the
results of Mendel’s dihybrid cross between plants with round
yellow seeds and plants with wrinkled green seeds. The ratio of
the four possible combinations of phenotypes is predicted to be
9:3:3:1, the ratio that Mendel found.

 

 

Note that this independent assortment of different genes in
no way alters the independent segregation of individual
pairs of alleles. Round versus wrinkled seeds occur in a
ratio of approximately 3:1 (423:133); so do yellow versus
green seeds (416:140). Mendel obtained similar results for
other pairs of traits.

Mendel’s discovery is often referred to as Mendel’s
Second Law of Heredity, or the Law of Independent
Assortment. Genes that assort independently of one an-
other, like the seven genes Mendel studied, usually do so
because they are located on different chromosomes, which
segregate independently during the meiotic process of ga-
mete formation. A modern restatement of Mendel’s Second
Law would be that genes that are located on different chromo-
somes assort independently during meiosis.

 

Mendel summed up his discoveries about heredity in
two laws. Mendel’s First Law of Heredity states that
alternative alleles of a trait segregate independently; his
Second Law of Heredity states that genes located on
different chromosomes assort independently.

 
