11-6 NEWTON’S SECOND LAW IN ANGULAR FORM 307

11-6 Newton's SECOND LAW IN ANGULAR FORM

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

11.21 Apply Newton's second law in angular form to relate the torque acting on a particle to the resulting rate of change of the
particle's angular momentum, all relative to a specified point.

 

Key Idea

@ Newton's second law for a particle can be written in angular form as
. dl
Toet = ap?

where 7,2r is the net torque acting on the particle and ( is the angular momentum of the particle.

Newton’s Second Law in Angular Form

Newton’s second law written in the form

Fra = £ (single particle) (11-22)

expresses the close relation between force and linear momentum for a single
particle. We have seen enough of the parallelism between linear and angular
quantities to be pretty sure that there is also a close relation between torque
and angular momentum. Guided by Eq. 11-22, we can even guess that it must be

isn = cate (single particle). (11-23)
dt
Equation 11-23 is indeed an angular form of Newton’s second law for a single particle:

oO The (vector) sum of all the torques acting on a particle is equal to the time rate of
change of the angular momentum of that particle.

Equation 11-23 has no meaning unless the torques 7 and the angular momentum
€ are defined with respect to the same point, usually the origin of the coordinate
system being used.

Proof of Equation 11-23
‘We start with Eq. 11-18, the definition of the angular momentum of a particle:
C=m(F x ¥),

where 7 is the position vector of the particle and ¥ is the velocity of the particle.
Differentiating* each side with respect to time f yields

dt dv dr.)
ff em(rx 2 +2 xo) (11-24)

However, dv/dt is the acceleration @ of the particle, and d7/dt is its velocity V.
Thus, we can rewrite Eq. 11-24 as

a FXa@+V XP)
a Mr a+vxXy).

*In differentiating a vector product, be sure not to change the order of the two quantities (here 7 and
Y¥) that form that product. (See Eq. 3-25.)
