9-5 CONSERVATION OF LINEAR MOMENTUM

231

momentum of the grapefruit changes, but since no horizontal external force acts on
the grapefruit, the horizontal component of the linear momentum cannot change.
Note that we focus on the external forces acting on a closed system.
Although internal forces can change the linear momentum of portions of the sys-
tem, they cannot change the total linear momentum of the entire system. For ex-
ample, there are plenty of forces acting between the organs of your body, but they

do not propel you across the room (thankfully).

The sample problems in this module involve explosions that are either one-
dimensional (meaning that the motions before and after the explosion are along
a single axis) or two-dimensional (meaning that they are in a plane containing

two axes). In the following modules we consider collisions.

lV] Checkpoint 6

An initially stationary device lying on a frictionless floor explodes into two pieces, which
then slide across the floor, one of them in the positive x direction. (a) Whatis the sum of
the momenta of the two pieces after the explosion? (b) Can the second piece move at an
angle to the x axis? (c) What is the direction of the momentum of the second piece?

Sample Problem 9.05 One-dimensional explosion, relative velocity, space hauler

One-dimensional explosion: Figure 9-12a shows a space hauler
and cargo module, of total mass M, traveling along an x axis in
deep space. They have an initial velocity ¥, of magnitude 2100
km/h relative to the Sun. With a small explosion, the hauler
ejects the cargo module, of mass 0.20M (Fig. 9-12b).The hauler
then travels 500 km/h faster than the module along the x axis;
that is, the relative speed v,,, between the hauler and the mod-
ule is 500 km/h. What then is the velocity ¥75 of the hauler rela-
tive to the Sun?

KEY IDEA

 

Because the hauler—module system is closed and isolated,
its total linear momentum is conserved; that is,

ee (9-44)

where the subscripts i and f refer to values before and after
the ejection, respectively. (We need to be careful here:
Although the momentum of the system does not change, the
momenta of the hauler and module certainly do.)

Calculations: Because the motion is along a single axis, we can
write momenta and velocities in terms of their x components,
using a sign to indicate direction. Before the ejection, we have
P; = Myj. (9-45)
Let vyys be the velocity of the ejected module relative to the
Sun. The total linear momentum of the system after the ejec-
tion is then
P= (0.20M)vys + (0.80M)v ns, (9-46)
where the first term on the right is the linear momentum of
the module and the second term is that of the hauler.

The explosive separation can change the momentum
of the parts but not the momentum of the system.

   

Hauler

0.20M

Cargo module 0.80M

(@) (d)

Figure 9-12 (a) A space hauler, with a cargo module, moving at initial
velocity ¥;. (b) The hauler has ejected the cargo module. Now the
velocities relative to the Sun are Vys for the module and Vj;5 for the
hauler.

‘We can relate the vs to the known velocities with

velocity of
hauler relative | =
to Sun

velocity of velocity of
hauler relative | + | module relative },
to module to Sun

In symbols, this gives us

Vis = Vrei + VMs (9-47)
a VMs = VHS — Vrel-
Substituting this expression for vys into Eq. 9-46, and then
substituting Eqs. 9-45 and 9-46 into Eq. 9-44, we find

Mv; = 0.20M(viis — Veet) + 0.80MV ys,
which gives us
Vus = Vi + 0.20V;e1,

or Vys = 2100 km/h + (0.20)(500 km/h)

= 2200 km/h. (Answer)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
