9-6 MOMENTUM AND KINETIC ENERGY IN COLLISIONS

233

9-6 MOMENTUM AND KINETIC ENERGY IN COLLISIONS

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

9.28 Distinguish between elastic collisions, inelastic collisions,
and completely inelastic collisions.

9.29 Identify a one-dimensional collision as one where the ob-
jects move along a single axis, both before and after the
collision.

9.30 Apply the conservation of momentum for an isolated
one-dimensional collision to relate the initial momenta of
the objects to their momenta after the collision.

9.31 Identify that in an isolated system, the momentum and
velocity of the center of mass are not changed even if the
objects collide.

 

Key Ideas

@ In an inelastic collision of two bodies, the kinetic energy of
the two-body system is not conserved. If the system is closed
and isolated, the total linear momentum of the system must
be conserved, which we can write in vector form as

Pai + Poi = Pag + Pop

where subscripts i and frefer to values just before and just
after the collision, respectively.

@ If the motion of the bodies is along a single axis, the collision
is one-dimensional and we can write the equation in terms of

Momentum and Kinetic Energy in Collisions

velocity components along that axis:
MV; + MyVoi = MyVip + MgVoy-

@ If the bodies stick together, the collision is a completely
inelastic collision and the bodies have the same final veloc-
ity V (because they are stuck together).

@ The center of mass of a closed, isolated system of two col-
liding bodies is not affected by a collision. In particular, the ve-
locity Vom of the center of mass cannot be changed by the
collision.

In Module 9-4, we considered the collision of two particle-like bodies but focused
on only one of the bodies at a time. For the next several modules we switch our
focus to the system itself, with the assumption that the system is closed and iso-
lated. In Module 9-5, we discussed a rule about such a system: The total linear
momentum P of the system cannot change because there is no net external force
to change it. This is a very powerful rule because it can allow us to determine the
results of a collision without knowing the details of the collision (such as how

much damage is done).

We shall also be interested in the total kinetic energy of a system of two col-
liding bodies. If that total happens to be unchanged by the collision, then the
kinetic energy of the system is conserved (it is the same before and after the
collision). Such a collision is called an elastic collision. In everyday collisions of
common bodies, such as two cars or a ball and a bat, some energy is always trans-
ferred from kinetic energy to other forms of energy, such as thermal energy or
energy of sound. Thus, the kinetic energy of the system is not conserved. Such a

collision is called an inelastic collision.

However, in some situations, we can approximate a collision of common bod-
ies as elastic. Suppose that you drop a Superball onto a hard floor. If the collision
between the ball and floor (or Earth) were elastic, the ball would lose no kinetic
energy because of the collision and would rebound to its original height.
However, the actual rebound height is somewhat short, showing that at least
some kinetic energy is lost in the collision and thus that the collision is somewhat
inelastic. Still, we might choose to neglect that small loss of kinetic energy to ap-

proximate the collision as elastic.

The inelastic collision of two bodies always involves a loss in the kinetic
energy of the system. The greatest loss occurs if the bodies stick together, in
which case the collision is called a completely inelastic collision. The collision of a
baseball and a bat is inelastic. However, the collision of a wet putty ball and a bat

is completely inelastic because the putty sticks to the bat.
