310 CHAPTER 11 ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

11-7 ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A RIGID BODY

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

11.22 For a system of particles, apply Newton's second law
in angular form to relate the net torque acting on the
system to the rate of the resulting change in the system's
angular momentum.

11.23 Apply the relationship between the angular momentum
of a rigid body rotating around a fixed axis and the body's
rotational inertia and angular speed around that axis.

11.24 If two rigid bodies rotate about the same axis, calculate
their total angular momentum.

 

Key Ideas

@ The angular momentum L of a system of particles is
the vector sum of the angular momenta of the individual
particles:

n

C=64+64+::4+6=>6.

i=1
@ The time rate of change of this angular momentum is equal
to the net external torque on the system (the vector sum of

the torques due to interactions of the particles of the system
with particles external to the system):

Toet = a (system of particles).

@ For a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis, the component
of its angular momentum parallel to the rotation axis is

L=Iw  (tigid body, fixed axis).

 

The Angular Momentum of a System of Particles

Now we turn our attention to the angular momentum of a system of particles with
respect to an origin. The total angular momentum L of the system is the (vector)
sum of the angular momenta f of the individual particles (here with label i):

C=G4+G+G+--+%,=3%
i=1

(11-26)

With time, the angular momenta of individual particles may change because
of interactions between the particles or with the outside. We can find the resulting
change in L by taking the time derivative of Eq. 11-26. Thus,

aE _ Sy ae

= o 11-27
dt dt (11-27)

From Eq. 11-23, we see that d@,/dt is equal to the net torque 7,.,; on the ith
particle. We can rewrite Eq. 11-27 as

dL. n

om Tact

11-28
a (11-28)

That is, the rate of change of the system’s angular momentum L is equal to the
vector sum of the torques on its individual particles. Those torques include inter-
nal torques (due to forces between the particles) and external torques (due to
forces on the particles from bodies external to the system). However, the forces
between the particles always come in third-law force pairs so their torques sum to
zero. Thus, the only torques that can change the total angular momentum L of
the system are the external torques acting on the system.

Net External Torque. Let 7,., represent the net external torque, the vector
sum of all external torques on all particles in the system. Then we can write

Eg. 11-28 as

Tnet =

i (11-29)

(system of particles),
