308

CHAPTER 11

ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

Now ¥ X ¥ = 0 (the vector product of any vector with itself is zero because the
angle between the two vectors is necessarily zero). Thus, the last term of this
expression is eliminated and we then have

We now use Newton's second law (F,., = ma) to replace ma with its equal, the
vector sum of the forces that act on the particle, obtaining

MO ix Ry = LOX),

Here the symbol > indicates that we must sum the vector products 7 * F for all
the forces. However, from Eq. 11-14, we know that each one of those vector prod-
ucts is the torque associated with one of the forces. Therefore, Eq. 11-25 tells us that

(11-25)

. dt
Toet = “dt”

This is Eq. 11-23, the relation that we set out to prove.

VJ Checkpoint 5

The figure shows the position vector 7’ of a particle
at a certain instant, and four choices for the direc-
tion of a force that is to accelerate the particle. All
four choices lie in the xy plane. (a) Rank the
choices according to the magnitude of the time rate
of change (d@/dt) they produce in the angular mo-

 

mentum of the particle about point O, greatest
first. (b) Which choice results in a negative rate of change about O?

Sample Problem 11.04 Torque and the time derivative of angular momentum

Figure 11-14a shows a freeze-frame of a 0.500 kg particle
moving along a straight line with a position vector given by
F = (—2.007 — ti + 5.00),
with 7 in meters and fin seconds, starting at t = 0. The posi-
tion vector points from the origin to the particle. In unit-vector
notation, find expressions for the angular momentum ¢ of
the particle and the torque 7 acting on the particle, both
with respect to (or about) the origin. Justify their algebraic

signs in terms of the particle’s motion.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The point about which an angular momentum of a par-
ticle is to be calculated must always be specified. Here it is
the origin. (2) The angular momentum f of a particle is
given by Eq. 11-18 (€ =7 x p’ = m(7 x V)). (3) The sign
associated with a particle’s angular momentum is set by the
sense of rotation of the particle’s position vector (around
the rotation axis) as the particle moves: clockwise is nega-
tive and counterclockwise is positive. (4) If the torque acting

on a particle and the angular momentum of the particle
are calculated around the same point, then the torque is re-
lated to angular momentum by Eq. 11-23 (7 = d€/dt).

Calculations: In order to use Eq. 11-18 to find the angular
momentum about the origin, we first must find an expres-
sion for the particle’s velocity by taking a time derivative of
its position vector. Following Eq. 4-10 (Vv = dridt), we write

d 7 -
¥ = (2.0077 — i + 5.00))

= (—4.00t — 1.00)i,

with V in meters per second.
Next, let’s take the cross product of 7 and V using the
template for cross products displayed in Eq. 3-27:

aX B = (ab; — bya.) + (azby — beay)j + (ayby — bay)k.

Here the generic @ is 7 and the generic b is ¥. However,
because we really don’t want to do more work than
needed, let’s first just think about our substitutions into
