228 CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF

 

Projectiles

 

Figure 9-10 A steady stream of projectiles,
with identical linear momenta, collides
with a target, which is fixed in place. The
average force F,,. on the target is to the
right and has a magnitude that depends on
the rate at which the projectiles collide
with the target or, equivalently, the rate at
which mass collides with the target.

MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

want the average force Fy, on the wall during the bombardment —that is, the av-
erage force during a large number of collisions.

In Fig. 9-10, a steady stream of projectile bodies, with identical mass m and
linear momenta mv, moves along an x axis and collides with a target body that is
fixed in place. Let n be the number of projectiles that collide in a time interval At.
Because the motion is along only the x axis, we can use the components of the
momenta along that axis. Thus, each projectile has initial momentum mv and
undergoes a change Ap in linear momentum because of the collision. The total
change in linear momentum for n projectiles during interval At is n Ap. The
resulting impulse TJ on the target during Af is along the x axis and has the same
magnitude of n Ap but is in the opposite direction. We can write this relation in
component form as

J=—n Ap, 9-36
P.

where the minus sign indicates that J and Ap have opposite directions.
Average Force. By rearranging Eq. 9-35 and substituting Eq. 9-36, we find
the average force Fy, acting on the target during the collisions:

_J
wear

n

F
At

ym Ay.

(9-37)

This equation gives us Fay, in terms of n/At, the rate at which the projectiles
collide with the target, and Av, the change in the velocity of those projectiles.

Velocity Change. If the projectiles stop upon impact, then in Eq. 9-37 we can
substitute, for Av,

Av =vp-vj=0-v=-v, (9-38)
where v; (=v) and v; (= 0) are the velocities before and after the collision,
respectively. If, instead, the projectiles bounce (rebound) directly backward from

the target with no change in speed, then vy = —v and we can substitute

Av = vp— vj) = —V — v= —2v. (9-39)
In time interval At, an amount of mass Am = nm collides with the target.
With this result, we can rewrite Eq. 9-37 as

Am ny.

F.
At

we (9-40)
This equation gives the average force Fy in terms of Am/Ar, the rate at which
mass collides with the target. Here again we can substitute for Av from Eq. 9-38
or 9-39 depending on what the projectiles do.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

The figure shows an overhead view of a ball bouncing froma vertical wall without any
change in its speed. Consider the change AF in the ball’s linear momentum. (a) Is Ap,
positive, negative, or zero? (b) Is Ap, positive,negative, or zero? (c) What is the direc-
tion of AB?
