224

9-3 LINEAR MOMENTUM

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

9.13 Identify that momentum is a vector quantity and thus has
both magnitude and direction and also components.

9.14 Calculate the (linear) momentum of a particle as the
product of the particle’s mass and velocity.

9.15 Calculate the change in momentum (magnitude and di-
rection) when a particle changes its speed and direction of
travel.

CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

9.16 Apply the relationship between a particle's momentum
and the (net) force acting on the particle.

9.17 Calculate the momentum of a system of particles as the
product of the system's total mass and its center-of-mass
velocity.

9.18 Apply the relationship between a system's center-of-
mass momentum and the net force acting on the system.

 

Key Ideas

@ Fora single particle, we define a quantity 7 called its linear
momentum as

B= mv.

which is a vector quantity that has the same direction as the
particle’s velocity. We can write Newton's second law in

terms of this momentum:

= d
Foet = z
@ Fora system of particles these relations become
P=MV oom and Foe = £

Linear Momentum

Here we discuss only a single particle instead of a system of particles, in order to
define two important quantities. Then we shall extend those definitions to sys-
tems of many particles.

The first definition concerns a familiar word —momentum—that has several
meanings in everyday language but only a single precise meaning in physics and
engineering. The linear momentum of a particle is a vector quantity p that is
defined as

PB =m’ (linear momentum ofa particle), (9-22)
in which m is the mass of the particle and V is its velocity. (The adjective linear is of-
ten dropped, but it serves to distinguish p from angular momentum, which is intro-
duced in Chapter 11 and which is associated with rotation.) Since m is always a
positive scalar quantity, Eq. 9-22 tells us that p and V have the same direction. From
Eq. 9-22, the SI unit for momentum is the kilogram-meter per second (kg - m/s).

Force and Momentum. Newton expressed his second law of motion in terms
of momentum:

Oo The time rate of change of the momentum of a particle is equal to the net force
acting on the particle and is in the direction of that force.

In equation form this becomes

= dp

net = ae (9-23)
In words, Eq. 9-23 says that the net external force F,., on a particle changes the
particle’s linear momentum fp. Conversely, the linear momentum can be
changed only by a net external force. If there is no net external force, p cannot
change. As we shall see in Module 9-5, this last fact can be an extremely power-
ful tool in solving problems.
