How Mendel Interpreted His
Results

Does Mendel’s model predict the results he actually ob-
tained? To test his model, Mendel first expressed it in
terms of a simple set of symbols, and then used the symbols
to interpret his results. It is very instructive to do the same.
Consider again Mendel’s cross of purple-flowered with
white-flowered plants. We will assign the symbol P to the
dominant allele, associated with the production of purple
flowers, and the symbol p to the recessive allele, associated
with the production of white flowers. By convention, ge-
netic traits are usually assigned a letter symbol referring to
their more common forms, in this case “P” for purple
flower color. The dominant allele is written in upper case,
as P; the recessive allele (white flower color) is assigned the
same symbol in lower case, p.

In this system, the genotype of an individual that is true-
breeding for the recessive white-flowered trait would be
designated pp. In such an individual, both copies of the al-
lele specify the white-flowered phenotype. Similarly, the
genotype of a true-breeding purple-flowered individual
would be designated PP, and a heterozygote would be des-
ignated Pp (dominant allele first). Using these conventions,
and denoting a cross between two strains with x, we can
symbolize Mendel’s original cross as pp x PP.

The F; Generation

Using these simple symbols, we can now go back and re-
examine the crosses Mendel carried out. Because a white-
flowered parent (pp) can produce only p gametes, and a
pure purple-flowered (homozygous dominant) parent
(PP) can produce only P gametes, the union of an egg
and a sperm from these parents can produce only het-
erozygous Pp offspring in the F; generation. Because the
P allele is dominant, all of these F; individuals are ex-
pected to have purple flowers. The p allele is present in
these heterozygous individuals, but it is not phenotypi-
cally expressed. This is the basis for the latency Mendel
saw in recessive traits.

The F,; Generation

When F; individuals are allowed to self-fertilize, the P
and p alleles segregate randomly during gamete forma-
tion. Their subsequent union at fertilization to form F)
individuals is also random, not being influenced by which
alternative alleles the individual gametes carry. What will
the F) individuals look like? The possibilities may be visu-
alized in a simple diagram called a Punnett square,
named after its originator, the English geneticist Reginald
Crundall Punnett (figure 13.13). Mendel’s model, ana-

248 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gametes
P Pp

P
Gametes

p
(a)

P p P p

1
y
P P > Pp
v

p > pp p pp

P p P p

\
Y

P Pp Pt» PP Pp

v
p> Pp pp Pp Pp pp
(b)
FIGURE 13.13

‘A Punnett square. (a) To make a Punnett square, place the
different possible types of female gametes along one side of a
square and the different possible types of male gametes along the
other. (4) Each potential zygote can then be represented as the
intersection of a vertical line and a horizontal line.
