226 CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

9-4 cOLuisioN AND IMPULSE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

9.19 Identify that impulse is a vector quantity and thus has both
magnitude and direction and also components.

9.20 Apply the relationship between impulse and momentum
change.

9.21 Apply the relationship between impulse, average force,
and the time interval taken by the impulse.

9.22 Apply the constant-acceleration equations to relate im-
pulse to average force.

9.23 Given force as a function of time, calculate the impulse (and
thus also the momentum change) by integrating the function.

9.24 Given a graph of force versus time, calculate the im-
pulse (and thus also the momentum change) by graphical
integration.

9.25 In a continuous series of collisions by projectiles, calcu-
late the average force on the target by relating it to the rate
at which mass collides and to the velocity change experi-
enced by each projectile.

 

Key Ideas
@ Applying Newton's second law in momentum form to a
particle-like body involved in a collision leads to the
impulse-linear momentum theorem:

Py Bi= AP = J.
where py — P; = Ap is the change in the body's linear momen-

tum, and J is the impulse due to the force F(t) exerted on the
body by the other body in the collision:

J= [ F(t) dt.

@ If Fayg is the average magnitude of F(t) during the collision
and At is the duration of the collision, then for one-dimensional
motion

J = Fayg At.

@ When a steady stream of bodies, each with mass m and
speed v, collides with a body whose position is fixed, the aver-
age force on the fixed body is
n n
a Pa ae AY
where n/At is the rate at which the bodies collide with the
fixed body, and Av is the change in velocity of each colliding
body. This average force can also be written as
Am
At

Fag = —

Fayg = — Av,

where Am/Atis the rate at which mass collides with the fixed
body. The change in velocity is Av = —v if the bodies stop
upon impact and Av = —2v if they bounce directly backward
with no change in their speed.

 

Single Collision

 

Photo by Harold E. Edgerton, © The Harold and Esther Edgerton

Family Trust, courtesy of Palm Press, Inc.

The collision of a ball with a bat collapses
part of the ball.

Collision and Impulse

The momentum p’ of any particle-like body cannot change unless a net
external force changes it. For example, we could push on the body to change its
momentum. More dramatically, we could arrange for the body to collide with a
baseball bat. In such a collision (or crash), the external force on the body is brief,
has large magnitude, and suddenly changes the body’s momentum. Collisions oc-
cur commonly in our world, but before we get to them, we need to consider a sim-
ple collision in which a moving particle-like body (a projectile) collides with some
other body (a target).

Let the projectile be a ball and the target be a bat. The collision is brief, and the ball
experiences a force that is great enough to slow, stop, or even reverse its motion.
Figure 9-8 depicts the collision at one instant. The ball experiences a force F(s) that
varies during the collision and changes the linear momentum p of the ball. That
change is related to the force by Newton’s second law written in the form F= dpildt.
By rearranging this second-law expression, we see that, in time interval dt, the
change in the ball’s momentum is

dp = F(t) dt. (9-28)
