10-1 ROTATIONAL VARIABLES

i
_cd>
Rotation
axis

This reference line is part of the body
and perpendicular to the rotation axis.
We use it to measure the rotation of the
body relative to a fixed direction.

on Hi Reference line

7 Body

 

Figure 10-2 A rigid body of arbitrary shape in pure rotation about the z axis of a coordinate
system. The position of the reference line with respect to the rigid body is arbitrary, but it is
perpendicular to the rotation axis. It is fixed in the body and rotates with the body.

letters) to sort out. (2) Although you are very familiar with linear motion (you
can get across the room and down the road just fine), you are probably very
unfamiliar with rotation (and that is one reason why you are willing to pay so
much for amusement park rides). If a homework problem looks like a foreign
language to you, see if translating it into the one-dimensional linear motion of
Chapter 2 helps. For example, if you are to find, say, an angular distance, tem-
porarily delete the word angular and see if you can work the problem with the
Chapter 2 notation and ideas.

Rotational Variables

We wish to examine the rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis. A rigid body is
a body that can rotate with all its parts locked together and without any change in
its shape. A fixed axis means that the rotation occurs about an axis that does not
move. Thus, we shall not examine an object like the Sun, because the parts of the
Sun (a ball of gas) are not locked together. We also shall not examine an object
like a bowling ball rolling along a lane, because the ball rotates about a moving
axis (the ball’s motion is a mixture of rotation and translation).

Figure 10-2 shows a rigid body of arbitrary shape in rotation about a fixed
axis, called the axis of rotation or the rotation axis. In pure rotation (angular
motion), every point of the body moves in a circle whose center lies on the axis of
rotation, and every point moves through the same angle during a particular time
interval. In pure translation (linear motion), every point of the body moves in a
straight line, and every point moves through the same linear distance during a
particular time interval.

We deal now—one at a time—with the angular equivalents of the linear
quantities position, displacement, velocity, and acceleration.

Angular Position

Figure 10-2 shows a reference line, fixed in the body, perpendicular to the rotation
axis and rotating with the body. The angular position of this line is the angle of
the line relative to a fixed direction, which we take as the zero angular position.
In Fg. 10-3, the angular position @ is measured relative to the positive direction of
the x axis. From geometry, we know that @is given by

Ss
@=— (radian measure).
be

(10-1)

Here s is the length of a circular arc that extends from the x axis (the zero angular
position) to the reference line, and r is the radius of the circle.

259

The body has rotated
counterclockwise
by angle @. This is the
positive direction.

 

Rotation
axis

This dot means that
the rotation axis is
out toward you.

Figure 10-3 The rotating rigid body of

Fig. 10-2 in cross section, viewed from
above. The plane of the cross section is
perpendicular to the rotation axis, which
now extends out of the page, toward you.
In this position of the body, the reference
line makes an angle 6 with the x axis.
