10-1 ROTATIONAL VARIABLES 265

 

z z
Axis Axis
S
o o

This right-hand rule
establishes the
direction of the (a) (d) (0)
angular velocity
vector.

Figure 10-6 (a) A record rotating about a vertical axis that coincides with the axis of the
spindle. (b) The angular velocity of the rotating record can be represented by the vector
G, lying along the axis and pointing down, as shown. (c) We establish the direction of the
angular velocity vector as downward by using a right-hand rule. When the fingers of the
right hand curl around the record and point the way it is moving, the extended thumb
points in the direction of 6.

hand rule would tell you that the angular velocity vector then points in the op-
posite direction.

It is not easy to get used to representing angular quantities as vectors. We in-
stinctively expect that something should be moving along the direction of a vec-
tor. That is not the case here. Instead, something (the rigid body) is rotating
around the direction of the vector. In the world of pure rotation, a vector defines
an axis of rotation, not a direction in which something moves. Nonetheless, the
vector also defines the motion. Furthermore, it obeys all the rules for vector
manipulation discussed in Chapter 3. The angular acceleration @ is another
vector, and it too obeys those rules.

In this chapter we consider only rotations that are about a fixed axis. For such
situations, we need not consider vectors —we can represent angular velocity with
@ and angular acceleration with a, and we can indicate direction with an implied
plus sign for counterclockwise or an explicit minus sign for clockwise.

Angular Displacements. Now for the caution: Angular displacements
(unless they are very small) cannot be treated as vectors. Why not? We can cer-
tainly give them both magnitude and direction, as we did for the angular veloc-
ity vector in Fig. 10-6. However, to be represented as a vector, a quantity must
also obey the rules of vector addition, one of which says that if you add two
vectors, the order in which you add them does not matter. Angular displace-
ments fail this test.

Figure 10-7 gives an example. An initially horizontal book is given two
90° angular displacements, first in the order of Fig. 10-7a and then in the order
of Fig. 10-7b. Although the two angular displacements are identical, their order
is not, and the book ends up with different orientations. Here’s another exam-
ple. Hold your right arm downward, palm toward your thigh. Keeping your
wrist rigid, (1) lift the arm forward until it is horizontal, (2) move it horizon-
tally until it points toward the right, and (3) then bring it down to your side.
Your palm faces forward. If you start over, but reverse the steps, which way
does your palm end up facing? From either example, we must conclude that
the addition of two angular displacements depends on their order and they
cannot be vectors.

 

 

 

 

 

 

z z The order of the

tg 4 rotations makes

a big difference
in the result.

    

 

 

PHYSICS}

 

(a) (d)
Figure 10-7 (a) From its initial position, at
the top, the book is given two successive
90° rotations, first about the (horizontal)
x axis and then about the (vertical) y axis.
(b) The book is given the same rotations,
but in the reverse order.
