A Disguised 1:2:1 Ratio

Mendel went on to examine how the
F) plants passed traits on to subse-
quent generations. He found that the
recessive / were always true-breeding.
In the cross of white-flowered with
purple-flowered plants, for example,
the white-flowered F) individuals reli-
ably produced white-flowered off-
spring when they were allowed to self-
fertilize. By contrast, only “% of the
dominant purple-flowered F) individ-
uals (‘4 of all F) offspring) proved
true-breeding, while 4 were not. This
last class of plants produced dominant
and recessive individuals in the third
filial (F3) generation in a 3:1 ratio.
This result suggested that, for the en-
tire sample, the 3:1 ratio that Mendel
observed in the F) generation was re-
ally a disguised 1:2:1 ratio: % pure-
breeding dominant individuals, 4 not-
pure-breeding dominant individuals,
and ¥; pure-breeding recessive indi-

viduals (figure 13.12).

 

Mendel’s Model of Heredity

From his experiments, Mendel was
able to understand four things about
the nature of heredity. First, the
plants he crossed did not produce
progeny of intermediate appearance,
as a theory of blending inheritance
would have predicted. Instead, differ-
ent plants inherited each alternative
intact, as a discrete characteristic that
either was or was not visible in a par-
ticular generation. Second, Mendel
learned that for each pair of alterna-
tive forms of a character, one alterna-
tive was not expressed in the F; hy-
brids, although it reappeared in some
F) individuals. The trait that “disap-
peared” must therefore be latent
(present but not expressed) in the F,
individuals. Third, the pairs of alter-
native traits examined segregated
among the progeny of a particular
cross, some individuals exhibiting one
trait, some the other. Fourth, these al-
ternative traits were expressed in the
F) generation in the ratio of % domi-
nant to % recessive. This characteris-
tic 3:1 segregation is often referred to
as the Mendelian ratio.

246 = PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

P (parental) . Cross-
generation j fertilize
J y f
Purple White
F, generation Selt-fertilize

Fa generation

PPP s

Purple Purple Purple White

Pres

 

Fg generation 3 : 1

,

7
1 : 2 B 1
True-breeding Not-true-breeding True-breeding
dominant dominant recessive

~~
Pre

 

 

FIGURE 13.12

The F2 generation is a disguised 1:2:1 ratio. By allowing the F) generation to self-
fertilize, Mendel found from the offspring (Fs) that the ratio of F) plants was one true-
breeding dominant, two not-true-breeding dominant, and one true-breeding recessive.

 
