Recessive Traits
Albinism
Alkaptonuria

Red-green color
blindness

Cystic fibrosis

Duchenne muscular
dystrophy
Hemophilia

Sickle cell anemia

Table 13.1 Some Dominant and Recessive Traits in Humans

Phenotypes

Lack of melanin pigmentation
Inability to metabolize
homogenistic acid

Inability to distinguish red or green
wavelengths of light

Abnormal gland secretion, leading to
liver degeneration and lung failure
Wasting away of muscles during
childhood

Inability to form blood clots
Defective hemoglobin that causes
red blood cells to curve and stick
together

Dominant Traits Phenotypes

Middigital hair Presence of hair on middle
segment of fingers

Brachydactyly Short fingers

Huntington's disease

Phenylthiocarbamide (PTC)

Degeneration of nervous
system, starting in middle age

Ability to taste PTC as bitter

sensitivity

Camptodactyly Inability to straighten the litle
finger

Hypercholesterolemia (the most Elevated levels of blood

common human Mendelian cholesterol and risk of heart

disorder—1 in 500) attack

Polydactyly

To explain these results, Mendel proposed a simple
model. It has become one of the most famous models in the
history of science, containing simple assumptions and mak-
ing clear predictions. The model has five elements:

4,

Extra fingers and toes

The two alleles, one contributed by the male gamete
and one by the female, do not influence each other in
any way. In the cells that develop within the new in-
dividual, these alleles remain discrete. They neither

1. Parents do not transmit physiological traits directly to
their offspring. Rather, they transmit discrete infor-
mation about the traits, what Mendel called “factors.”
These factors later act in the offspring to produce the
trait. In modern terms, we would say that information
about the alternative forms of characters that an indi-
vidual expresses is encoded by the factors that it re-
ceives from its parents.

2. Each individual receives two factors that may code for
the same trait or for two alternative traits for a char-
acter. We now know that there are two factors for
each character present in each individual because
these factors are carried on chromosomes, and each
adult individual is diploid. When the individual forms
gametes (eggs or sperm), they contain only one of
each kind of chromosome (see chapter 12); the ga-
metes are haploid. Therefore, only one factor for each
character of the adult organism is contained in the
gamete. Which of the two factors ends up in a partic-
ular gamete is randomly determined.

3. Not all copies of a factor are identical. In modern
terms, the alternative forms of a factor, leading to al-
ternative forms of a character, are called alleles.
When two haploid gametes containing exactly the
same allele of a factor fuse during fertilization to form
a zygote, the offspring that develops from that zygote
is said to be homozygous; when the two haploid ga-
metes contain different alleles, the individual off-
spring is heterozygous.

In modern terminology, Mendel’s factors are called
genes. We now know that each gene is composed of a
particular DNA nucleotide sequence (see chapter 3).
The particular location of a gene on a chromosome is
referred to as the gene’s locus (plural, loci).

blend with nor alter each other. (Mendel referred to
them as “uncontaminated.”) Thus, when the individ-
ual matures and produces its own gametes, the alleles
for each gene segregate randomly into these gametes,
as described in element 2.

5. The presence of a particular allele does not ensure
that the trait encoded by it will be expressed in an in-
dividual carrying that allele. In heterozygous individ-
uals, only one allele (the dominant one) is expressed,
while the other (recessive) allele is present but unex-
pressed. To distinguish between the presence of an
allele and its expression, modern geneticists refer to
the totality of alleles that an individual contains as the
individual’s genotype and to the physical appearance
of that individual as its phenotype. The phenotype of
an individual is the observable outward manifestation
of its genotype, the result of the functioning of the
enzymes and proteins encoded by the genes it carries.
In other words, the genotype is the blueprint, and the
phenotype is the visible outcome.

These five elements, taken together, constitute Mendel’s
model of the hereditary process. Many traits in humans
also exhibit dominant or recessive inheritance, similar to
the traits Mendel studied in peas (table 13.1).

 

‘When Mendel crossed two contrasting varieties, he
found all of the offspring in the first generation
exhibited one (dominant) trait, and none exhibited the
other (recessive) trait. In the following generation,
25% were pure-breeding for the dominant trait, 50%
were hybrid for the two traits and exhibited the
dominant trait, and 25% were pure-breeding for the
recessive trait.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 247
