9-7 ELASTIC COLLISIONS IN ONE DIMENSION

237

9-7 ELASTIC COLLISIONS IN ONE DIMENSION

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

9.32 For isolated elastic collisions in one dimension, apply the
conservation laws for both the total energy and the net mo-
mentum of the colliding bodies to relate the initial values to
the values after the collision.

Key Idea

9.33 For a projectile hitting a stationary target, identify the re-
sulting motion for the three general cases: equal masses,
target more massive than projectile, projectile more mas-
sive than target.

 

@ An elastic collision is a special type of collision in which
the kinetic energy of a system of colliding bodies is con-

yield the following expressions for the velocities immediately
after the collision:

served. If the system is closed and isolated, its linear mo-
mentum is also conserved. For a one-dimensional collision in
which body 2 is a target and body 1 is an incoming projec-

tile, conservation of kinetic energy and linear momentum and

Elastic Collisions in One Dimension

As we discussed in Module 9-6, everyday collisions are inelastic but we can
approximate some of them as being elastic; that is, we can approximate that the
total kinetic energy of the colliding bodies is conserved and is not transferred to
other forms of energy:

(om kinetic snerey _ (‘et kinetic ners) (9-62)

before the collision) — \ after the collision

This means:

o In an elastic collision, the kinetic energy of each colliding body may change, but
the total kinetic energy of the system does not change.

For example, the collision of a cue ball with an object ball in a game of pool
can be approximated as being an elastic collision. If the collision is head-on
(the cue ball heads directly toward the object ball), the kinetic energy of the cue
ball can be transferred almost entirely to the object ball. (Still, the collision trans-
fers some of the energy to the sound you hear.)

Stationary Target
Figure 9-18 shows two bodies before and after they have a one-dimensional colli-
sion, like a head-on collision between pool balls. A projectile body of mass m,
and initial velocity v); moves toward a target body of mass mr that is initially at
rest (V2; = 0). Let’s assume that this two-body system is closed and isolated. Then
the net linear momentum of the system is conserved, and from Eq. 9-51 we can write
that conservation as

MV yj = MVyp + MgV2¢ (9-63)
If the collision is also elastic, then the total kinetic energy is conserved and we
can write that conservation as

(linear momentum).

(9-64)

In each of these equations, the subscript i identifies the initial velocities and the
subscript f the final velocities of the bodies. If we know the masses of the bodies
and if we also know 1,;, the initial velocity of body 1, the only unknown quantities
are vypand v,, the final velocities of the two bodies. With two equations at our dis-
posal, we should be able to find these two unknowns.

NVI; = NWI, + QV}, (kinetic energy).

mm
Vip = Vii
m +m
2m,
Vp = ——— Vj.
1m +m,"

Here is the generic setup
for an elastic collision with

a stationary target.
Before 4;

—> 7,,=0

m, my
Projectile Target
An vy ty
ter SS
—_—_ 9—_o—_«

m, my
Figure 9-18 Body 1 moves along an x axis
before having an elastic collision with
body 2, which is initially at rest. Both
bodies move along that axis after the
collision.
