 

218

CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

Sample Problem 9.02 com of plate with missing piece

This sample problem has lots of words to read, but they will
allow you to calculate a com using easy algebra instead of
challenging integral calculus. Figure 9-4a shows a uniform
metal plate P of radius 2R from which a disk of radius R has
been stamped out (removed) in an assembly line. The disk is
shown in Fig. 9-4b. Using the xy coordinate system shown,
locate the center of mass com» of the remaining plate.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) Let us roughly locate the center of plate P by using sym-
metry. We note that the plate is symmetric about the x axis
(we get the portion below that axis by rotating the upper
portion about the axis). Thus, comp must be on the x axis.
The plate (with the disk removed) is not symmetric about
the y axis. However, because there is somewhat more mass
on the right of the y axis, comp must be somewhat to the
right of that axis. Thus, the location of comp should be
roughly as indicated in Fig. 9-4a.

(2) Plate P is an extended solid body, so in principle we
can use Egs. 9-11 to find the actual coordinates of the center
of mass of plate P. Here we want the xy coordinates of the
center of mass because the plate is thin and uniform. If it
had any appreciable thickness, we would just say that the
center of mass is midway across the thickness. Still, using
Egs. 9-11 would be challenging because we would need a
function for the shape of the plate with its hole, and then we
would need to integrate the function in two dimensions.

(3) Here is a much easier way: In working with centers
of mass, we can assume that the mass of a uniform object (as
we have here) is concentrated in a particle at the object’s
center of mass. Thus we can treat the object as a particle and
avoid any two-dimensional integration.

Calculations: First, put the stamped-out disk (call it disk S)
back into place (Fig. 9-4c) to form the original composite
plate (call it plate C). Because of its circular symmetry, the
center of mass coms for disk S is at the center of S, at x =
—R (as shown). Similarly, the center of mass comc for com-
posite plate C is at the center of C, at the origin (as shown).

 

Center Location
Plate of Mass of com Mass
P comp p=? mp
Ss coms ms
c come xc=0 me =ms + mp

Assume that mass mts of disk S is concentrated in a parti-
cle at x; = —R, and mass mp is concentrated in a particle
at xp (Fig. 9-4d). Next we use Eq. 9-2 to find the center of
mass Xs,p of the two-particle system:

MsXs5 + MpXp

Ms + Mp a)

Xsep =

Next note that the combination of disk S and plate P is

composite plate C Thus, the position xs,p of coms, must

coincide with the position x¢ of come, which is at the origin; so
Xs.p = Xc = 0.Substituting this into Eq. 9-12, we get

za)
Xp = —Xs—.

(9-13)

Mp"
‘We can relate these masses to the face areas of S and P by
noting that

mass = density X volume
= density x thickness X area.

ms _ densitys

areas
Mp densityp

thickness w
thicknessp

Then
areap

Because the plate is uniform, the densities and thicknesses
are equal; we are left with

Ms _ areas

areas

Mp afeap —areac — areas

- aR? el
~ a(2R)P— aR? 3°

Substituting this and xs = — R into Eq. 9-13, we have

 

 

 

 

=i
We then have the following: xp = 3k. (Answer)
Ge,
PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
VI Checkpoint 1 y

The figure shows a uniform square plate from which four identical

squares at the corners will be removed. (a) Where is the center of mass of 1 2

the plate originally? Where is it after the removal of (b) square 1;(c)

squares 1 and 2; (d) squares 1 and 3;(e) squares 1,2, and 3;(f) all four x

squares? Answer in terms of quadrants, axes, or points (without calcula-

tion, of course). 2 a

 

 

 

 

 

 
