Rotation

10-1 ROTATIONAL VARIABLES

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

10.01 Identify that if all parts of a body rotate around a fixed
axis locked together, the body is a rigid body. (This chapter
is about the motion of such bodies.)

10.02 Identify that the angular position of a rotating rigid body
is the angle that an internal reference line makes with a
fixed, external reference line.

10.03 Apply the relationship between angular displacement
and the initial and final angular positions.

10.04 Apply the relationship between average angular veloc-
ity, angular displacement, and the time interval for that dis-
placement.

10.05 Apply the relationship between average angular accel-
eration, change in angular velocity, and the time interval for
that change.

10.06 Identify that counterclockwise motion is in the positive
direction and clockwise motion is in the negative direction.

10.07 Given angular position as a function of time, calculate the
instantaneous angular velocity at any particular time and the
average angular velocity between any two particular times.

Key Ideas

10.08 Given a graph of angular position versus time, deter-
mine the instantaneous angular velocity at a particular time
and the average angular velocity between any two particu-
lar times.

10.09 Identify instantaneous angular speed as the magnitude
of the instantaneous angular velocity.

10.10 Given angular velocity as a function of time, calculate
the instantaneous angular acceleration at any particular
time and the average angular acceleration between any
two particular times.

10.11 Given a graph of angular velocity versus time, deter-
mine the instantaneous angular acceleration at any partic-
ular time and the average angular acceleration between
any two particular times.

10.12 Calculate a body's change in angular velocity by
integrating its angular acceleration function with respect
to time.

10.13 Calculate a body's change in angular position by inte-
grating its angular velocity function with respect to time.

 

@ To describe the rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis,
called the rotation axis, we assume a reference line is fixed in
the body, perpendicular to that axis and rotating with the
body. We measure the angular position of this line
relative to a fixed direction. When @ is measured in radians,

5

6 =— (radian measure),

r
where s is the arc length of a circular path of radius r and
angle 0.
@ Radian measure is related to angle measure in revolutions
and degrees by

1 rev = 360° = 27rad.

@ A body that rotates about a rotation axis, changing its angu-
lar position from 6, to @, undergoes an angular displacement

Ad= 0) — A,
where A@is positive for counterclockwise rotation and nega-
tive for clockwise rotation.
@ If a body rotates through an angular displacement A@in a
time interval Af, its average angular velocity wayg is

Ae
avg = At
The (instantaneous) angular velocity w of the body is
dé
ora

Both wy, and w are vectors, with directions given by a
right-hand rule. They are positive for counterclockwise rota-
tion and negative for clockwise rotation. The magnitude of the
body's angular velocity is the angular speed.

@ If the angular velocity of a body changes from «, to w ina
time interval At = 4 — t,, the average angular acceleration
yg of the body is

w-o _ do

Gos Dt Mt
The (instantaneous) angular acceleration a of the body is
_ dw
a=

Both ay, and a are vectors.

 

257
