9-9 SYSTEMS WITH VARYING MASS: A ROCKET

ation we would rewrite Eq. 9-77 for components along the x axis as

MV; = MV COS H + MyV2 COS bh,
and along the y axis as

(9-79)

0 = —myvip sin A + myvo, sin A. (9-80)

We can also write Eq. 9-78 (for the special case of an elastic collision) in terms of
speeds:

Lnyv3, = Lyv2, + by, (kinetic energy). (9-81)

Equations 9-79 to 9-81 contain seven variables: two masses, m, and nn; three
speeds, v1;, vir, and v2"; and two angles, 6, and 6). If we know any four of these

quantities, we can solve the three equations for the remaining three quantities.

lv] Checkpoint 9

In Fig. 9-21, suppose that the projectile has an initial momentum of 6 kg-m/s,a final
x component of momentum of 4 kg -m/s, and a final y component of momentum of
—3 kg m/s. For the target, what then are (a) the final. component of momentum

and (b) the final y component of momentum?

9-9 sysTEMs WITH VARYING MASS: A ROCKET

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

9.36 Apply the first rocket equation to relate the rate at which
the rocket loses mass, the speed of the exhaust products rel-
ative to the rocket, the mass of the rocket, and the accelera-
tion of the rocket.

Key Ideas

@ In the absence of external forces a rocket accelerates at an

instantaneous rate given by
RV,, = Ma

(first rocket equation),

in which M is the rocket's instantaneous mass (including
unexpended fuel), R is the fuel consumption rate, and V,. is

9.37 Apply the second rocket equation to relate the change in
the rocket's speed to the relative speed of the exhaust
products and the initial and final mass of the rocket.

9.38 For a moving system undergoing a change in mass at a
given rate, relate that rate to the change in momentum.

the fuel's exhaust speed relative to the rocket. The term Rv;.)
is the thrust of the rocket engine.

@ Fora rocket with constant R and v,., whose speed
changes from v; to vywhen its mass changes from M; to M,,

I M;
Vp — Vi = Vee In
a ™ M;

(second rocket equation).

 

Systems with Varying Mass: A Rocket

So far, we have assumed that the total mass of the system remains constant.
Sometimes, as in a rocket, it does not. Most of the mass of a rocket on its launch-
ing pad is fuel, all of which will eventually be burned and ejected from the nozzle
of the rocket engine. We handle the variation of the mass of the rocket as the
rocket accelerates by applying Newton’s second law, not to the rocket alone but
to the rocket and its ejected combustion products taken together. The mass of this
system does not change as the rocket accelerates.

Finding the Acceleration

Assume that we are at rest relative to an inertial reference frame, watching a
rocket accelerate through deep space with no gravitational or atmospheric drag
