 

236

CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

Sample Problem 9.07 Conservation of momentum, ballistic pendulum

Here is an example of a common technique in physics. We
have a demonstration that cannot be worked out as a whole
(we don’t have a workable equation for it). So, we break it
up into steps that can be worked separately (we have equa-
tions for them).

The ballistic pendulum was used to measure the speeds of
bullets before electronic timing devices were developed. The
version shown in Fig. 9-17 consists of a large block of wood of
mass M = 5.4kg, hanging from two long cords. A bullet of
mass m = 9.5 g is fired into the block, coming quickly to rest.
The block + bullet then swing upward, their center of mass
rising a vertical distance h = 6.3 cm before the pendulum
comes momentarily to rest at the end of its arc. What is the
speed of the bullet just prior to the collision?

KEY IDEAS

 

‘We can see that the bullet’s speed v must determine the rise
height h. However, we cannot use the conservation of mechan-
ical energy to relate these two quantities because surely energy
is transferred from mechanical energy to other forms (such as
thermal energy and energy to break apart the wood) as the
bullet penetrates the block. Nevertheless, we can split this com-
plicated motion into two steps that we can separately analyze:
(1) the bullet—block collision and (2) the bullet—block rise,
during which mechanical energy is conserved.

Reasoning step 1: Because the collision within the
bullet—block system is so brief, we can make two impor-
tant assumptions: (1) During the collision, the gravita-
tional force on the block and the force on the block from
the cords are still balanced. Thus, during the collision, the
net external impulse on the bullet—block system is zero.
Therefore, the system is isolated and its total linear momen-
tum is conserved:

totalmomentum \ _ / total momentum
before the collision) —

) (9-57)

(2) The collision is one-dimensional in the sense that the di-
rection of the bullet and block just after the collision is in the
bullet’s original direction of motion.

Because the collision is one-dimensional, the block is ini-
tially at rest, and the bullet sticks in the block, we use Eq. 9-53 to
express the conservation of linear momentum. Replacing the
symbols there with the corresponding symbols here, we have

after the collision

m
Sean
m+M

Reasoning step 2: As the bullet and block now swing up to-
gether, the mechanical energy of the bullet—block—Earth

(9-58)

Witey

system is conserved:
( mechanical aia _ (mechanics enerey) (9-59)
at bottom at top

(This mechanical energy is not changed by the force of the
cords on the block, because that force is always directed
perpendicular to the block’s direction of travel.) Let’s take the
block’s initial level as our reference level of zero gravitational
potential energy. Then conservation of mechanical energy
means that the system’s kinetic energy at the start of the swing
must equal its gravitational potential energy at the highest
point of the swing. Because the speed of the bullet and block
at the start of the swing is the speed V immediately after the
collision, we may write this conservation as

3(m + M)V? = (m + M)gh. (9-60)

Combining steps: Substituting for V from Eq. 9-58 leads to

+M
ve mad V2gh (9-61)

(20 ate ) V/(2)(9.8 mis?)(0.063 m)

0.0095 kg

= 630 m/s. (Answer)

The ballistic pendulum is a kind of “transformer,” exchang-
ing the high speed of a light object (the bullet) for the low—
and thus more easily measurable—speed of a massive ob-
ject (the block).

There are two events here.
The bullet collides with the
block. Then the bullet-block
system swings upward by
height A.

Figure 9-17 A ballistic
pendulum, used to
measure the speeds
of bullets.

 

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
