302 CHAPTER 11 ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

a

   

fe
(a (4)

Figure 11-9 (a) A yo-yo, shown in cross

section. The string, of assumed negligible

thickness, is wound around an axle of

radius Rp. (b) A free-body diagram for the

falling yo-yo. Only the axle is shown.

11-4 torque REVISITED

Learning Objectives

The Yo-Yo

A yo-yo is a physics lab that you can fit in your pocket. If a yo-yo rolls down its
string for a distance h, it loses potential energy in amount mgh but gains kinetic
energy in both translational GMV25m) and rotational Geom”) forms. As it climbs
back up, it loses kinetic energy and regains potential energy.

In a modern yo-yo, the string is not tied to the axle but is looped around it.
‘When the yo-yo “hits” the bottom of its string, an upward force on the axle from
the string stops the descent. The yo-yo then spins, axle inside loop, with only
rotational kinetic energy. The yo-yo keeps spinning (“sleeping”) until you “wake
it” by jerking on the string, causing the string to catch on the axle and the yo-yo to
climb back up. The rotational kinetic energy of the yo-yo at the bottom of its
string (and thus the sleeping time) can be considerably increased by throwing the
yo-yo downward so that it starts down the string with initial speeds v,,, and @ in-
stead of rolling down from rest. eS

To find an expression for the linear acceleration d,4,, of a yo-yo rolling down
a string, we could use Newton’s second law (in linear and angular forms) just as
we did for the body rolling down a ramp in Fig. 11-8. The analysis is the same ex-
cept for the following:

1. Instead of rolling down a ramp at angle @ with the horizontal, the yo-yo rolls
down a string at angle @ = 90° with the horizontal.

2. Instead of rolling on its outer surface at radius R, the yo-yo rolls on an axle of
radius Ro (Fig. 11-9a).

3. Instead of being slowed by frictional force f,, the yo-yo is slowed by the force
T onit from the string (Fig. 11-9b).

The analysis would again lead us to Eq. 11-10. Therefore, let us just change the
notation in Eq. 11-10 and set @ = 90° to write the linear acceleration as

&

= -___£___ 11-13
Soom TE TomlMR3” (1-13)

where J[,,m is the yo-yo’s rotational inertia about its center and M is its mass. A
yo-yo has the same downward acceleration when it is climbing back up.

After reading this module, you should be able to...

11.13 Identify that torque is a vector quantity.

11.14 Identify that the point about which a torque is
calculated must always be specified.

11.15 Calculate the torque due to a force on a particle by
taking the cross product of the particle's position vector

Key Ideas
@ In three dimensions, torque 7 is a vector quantity defined
relative to a fixed point (usually an origin); it is

F=7XF,

where F isa force applied to a particle and 7 isa
position vector locating the particle relative to the fixed
point.

and the force vector, in either unit-vector notation or
magnitude-angle notation.

11.16 Use the right-hand rule for cross products to find the
direction of a torque vector.

@ The magnitude of 7 is given by
t=rFsnd=rF,=1rF,

where dis the angle between Fand Tf, F, isthe component

of F perpendicular to 7, and r, is the moment arm of F.

@ The direction of 7 is given by the right-hand rule for cross
products.
