11-2 FORCES AND KINETIC ENERGY OF ROLLING 299

The Forces of Rolling

Friction and Rolling

If a wheel rolls at constant speed, as in Fig. 11-3, it has no tendency to slide at the
point of contact P, and thus no frictional force acts there. However, if a net force
acts on the rolling wheel to speed it up or to slow it, then that net force causes ac-
celeration G.om Of the center of mass along the direction of travel. It also causes
the wheel to rotate faster or slower, which means it causes an angular
acceleration a. These accelerations tend to make the wheel slide at P. Thus, a fric-
tional force must act on the wheel at P to oppose that tendency.

If the wheel does not slide, the force is a static frictional force ra and the
motion is smooth rolling. We can then relate the magnitudes of the linear acceler-
ation Gj, and the angular acceleration a by differentiating Eq. 11-2 with respect
to time (with R held constant). On the left side, dVeoq/dt iS deom, and on the right
side dw/dt is a. So, for smooth rolling we have

com = @R (smooth rolling motion). (11-6)

If the wheel does slide when the net force acts on it, the frictional force that
acts at P in Fig. 11-3 is a kinetic frictional force f;,. The motion then is not smooth
rolling, and Eq. 11-6 does not apply to the motion. In this chapter we discuss only
smooth rolling motion.

Figure 11-7 shows an example in which a wheel is being made to rotate faster
while rolling to the right along a flat surface, as on a bicycle at the start of a race.
The faster rotation tends to make the bottom of the wheel slide to the left at
point P. A frictional force at P, directed to the right, opposes this tendency to
slide. If the wheel does not slide, that frictional force is a static frictional force f
(as shown), the motion is smooth rolling, and Eq. 11-6 applies to the motion.
(Without friction, bicycle races would be stationary and very boring.)

If the wheel in Fig. 11-7 were made to rotate slower, as on a slowing bicy-
cle, we would change the figure in two ways: The directions of the center-of-
mass acceleration @,,,, and the frictional force f at point P would now be to
the left.

Rolling Down a Ramp

Figure 11-8 shows a round uniform body of mass M and radius R rolling smoothly
down a ramp at angle @, along an x axis. We want to find an expression for the body’s

Forces Fry and Fa cos @
merely balance.

      
 

The torque due to h
determines the

x angular acceleration
around the com.

Forces F sin @ and f, sin @
determine the /inear

acceleration down
the ramp.

Figure 11-8 A round uniform body of radius R rolls down a ramp. The forces that act on it
are the gravitational force F,, a normal force Fy,anda frictional force f, pointing up the
ramp. (For clarity, vector Fy has been shifted in the direction it points until its tail is at the
center of the body.)

 

out sliding while accelerating with linear
acceleration @,,,, as on a bicycle at the start
of arace.A static frictional force f, acts

on the wheel at P, opposing its tendency

to slide.
