11-5 angutar MomeNTUM

Learning Objectives

11-5 ANGULAR MOMENTUM 305

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

11.17 Identify that angular momentum is a vector quantity.

11.18 Identify that the fixed point about which an angular
momentum is calculated must always be specified.

11.19 Calculate the angular momentum of a particle by taking
the cross product of the particle's position vector and its

Key Ideas

@ The angular momentum C ofa particle with linear momen-
tum p, mass m, and linear velocity V is a vector quantity
defined relative to a fixed point (usually an origin) as

C=7 XxX p=m(F xd).
@ The magnitude of € is given by

€=rmvsin &
= rp, =rmv,
="np=rmy,

Angular Momentum

Recall that the concept of linear momentum p and the principle of conservation
of linear momentum are extremely powerful tools. They allow us to predict
the outcome of, say, a collision of two cars without knowing the details of the col-
lision. Here we begin a discussion of the angular counterpart of p , winding up in
Module 11-8 with the angular counterpart of the conservation principle, which
can lead to beautiful (almost magical) feats in ballet, fancy diving, ice skating, and

many other activities.

Figure 11-12 shows a particle of mass m with linear momentum p (= mV) as
it passes through point A in an xy plane. The angular momentum ¢ of this parti-
cle with respect to the origin O is a vector quantity defined as

C=7X p=mr xv)

(angular momentum defined),

momentum vector, in either unit-vector notation or
magnitude-angle notation.

11.20 Use the right-hand rule for cross products to find the
direction of an angular momentum vector.

where @is the angle between F and pi, p, and v, are
the components of pf and V perpendicular to 7, and r, is
the perpendicular distance between the fixed point and
the extension of p.

@ The direction of is given by the right-hand rule: Position
your right hand so that the fingers are in the direction of 7.
Then rotate them around the palm to be in the direction of p.
Your outstretched thumb gives the direction of g.

      
 

T(=Fxp)
B redrawn, with
tail at origin)

(@

(11-18)

where 7 is the position vector of the particle with respect to O. As the particle

moves relative to O in the direction of its momentum p’ (= mV), position vector
F rotates around O. Note carefully that to have angular momentum about O, the
particle does not itself have to rotate around O. Comparison of Eqs. 11-14 and 11-18
shows that angular momentum bears the same relation to linear momentum that
torque does to force. The SI unit of angular momentum is the kilogram-
meter-squared per second (kg -m7/s), equivalent to the joule-second (J -s).
Direction. To find the direction of the angular momentum vector Cin Fig. 11-

 

x

12, we slide the vector p until its tail is at the origin O.Then we use the right-hand (b)

rule for vector products, sweeping the fingers from F into p. The outstretched
thumb then shows that the direction of @ is in the positive direction of the z axis in
Fig. 11-12. This positive direction is consistent with the counterclockwise rotation of
position vector 7 about the z axis, as the particle moves. (A negative direction of c
would be consistent with a clockwise rotation of 7 about the z axis.)

Magnitude. To find the magnitude of €, we use the general result of Eq. 3-27

to write .
€ =rmvsin ¢,

where ¢ is the smaller angle between 7

and p when these two vectors are tail

Figure 11-12 Defining angular momentum. A
particle passing through point A has linear
momentum p (= mv), with the vector >’
lying in an xy plane. The particle has angular
momentum ¢ (= F X p) with respect to the
origin O. By the right-hand rule, the angular
momentum vector points in the positive
direction of z. (a) The magnitude of € is
given by € = rp, = rmv,.(b) The magni-
tude of € is also given by € = r,p = r.mv.

(11-19)
