Cross rinto F.
Torque is in the

positive z direction.
tail at origin)

 

(a) x (B) x

points in the positive direction of z. Its magnitude is given by rF, in (b) and by r, Fin (c).

Torque Revisited

In Chapter 10 we defined torque 7 for a rigid body that can rotate around a fixed
axis. We now expand the definition of torque to apply it to an individual particle
that moves along any path relative to a fixed point (rather than a fixed axis). The
path need no longer be a circle, and we must write the torque as a vector 7 that may
have any direction. We can calculate the magnitude of the torque with a formula
and determine its direction with the right-hand rule for cross products.

Figure 11-10a shows such a particle at point A in an xy plane. A single force F
in that plane acts on the particle, and the particle’s position relative to the origin
Ois given by position vector 7.The torque 7 acting on the particle relative to the
fixed point O is a vector quantity defined as

F=F X F (torque defined). (11-14)

We can evaluate the vector (or cross) product in this definition of 7 by using
the rules in Module 3-3. To find the direction of 7, we slide the vector F (without
changing its direction) until its tail is at the origin O, so that the two vectors in the
vector product are tail to tail as in Fig. 11-10b. We then use the right-hand rule in
Fig. 3-19a, sweeping the fingers of the right hand from 7 (the first vector in the
product) into F (the second vector). The outstretched right thumb then gives the
direction of 7. In Fig. 11-10d, it is in the positive direction of the z axis.

To determine the magnitude of 7, we apply the general result of Eq. 3-27

(c = ab sin ¢), finding = rFsin 6, (11-15)
where ¢is the smaller angle between the directions of 7 and F when the vectors
are tail to tail. From Fig. 11-10b, we see that Eq. 11-15 can be rewritten as

r=rF,, (11-16)
where F, (=F sin 4) is the component of F perpendicular to7’. From Fig, 11-10e,
we see that Eq. 11-15 can also be rewritten as

r=rF, (11-17)

where r, (= rsin ¢) is the moment arm of F (the perpendicular distance
between O and the line of action of F).

lv] Checkpoint 3

The position vector 7 ofa particle points along the positive direction of az axis. If
the torque on the particle is (a) zero, (b) in the negative direction of x,and (c) in the
negative direction of y, in what direction is the force causing the torque?

 

11-4

TORQUE REVISITED

 

(Q x
Figure 11-10 Defining torque. (a) A force Flying in an xy plane,acts on a particle at point A. (b) This force produces a torque
7 (=F X F)onthe particle with respect to the origin O. By the right-hand rule for vector (cross) products, the torque vector

303
