Probability and
Allele Distribution

 

Many, although not all, alternative alleles
produce discretely different phenotypes.
Mendel’s pea plants were tall or dwarf, had
purple or white flowers, and produced
round or wrinkled seeds. The eye color of a
fruit fly may be red or white, and the skin
color of a human may be pigmented or al-
bino. When only two alternative alleles exist
for a given character, the distribution of
phenotypes among the offspring of a cross is
referred to as a binomial distribution.

As an example, consider the distribution
of sexes in humans. Imagine that a couple
has chosen to have three children. How
likely is it that two of the children will be
boys and one will be a girl? The frequency
of any particular possibility is referred to as
its probability of occurrence. Let p symbol-
ize the probability of having a boy at any
given birth and g symbolize the probability
of having a girl. Since any birth is equally
likely to produce a girl or boy:

Tia

Table 13.A shows eight possible gender
combinations among the three children. The
sum of the probabilities of the eight possible
combinations must equal one. Thus:

p+3pq+3pr+gel

 

fr noe

 

allele One of two or more alternative
forms ofa gene.

diploid Having two sets of chromo-
somes, which are referred to as homologues.
Animals and plants are diploid in the dom-
inant phase of their life cycles as are some
protists.

dominant allele An allele that dictates the
appearance of heterozygotes. One allele is
said to be dominant over another if a het-

The probability that the three children

will be two boys and one girl is:
3p'g =3 x (Px (=

To test your understanding, try to esti-
mate the probability that two parents het-
erozygous for the recessive allele producing
albinism (@) will have one albino child in a
family of three. First, set up a Punnett square:

Father’s

Gametes

A a
Mother’s A AA Aa
Gametes a Aa aa

You can see that one-fourth of the chil-
dren are expected to be albino (aa). Thus,
for any given birth the probability of an al-
bino child is 4. This probability can be sym-
bolized by q. The probability of a nonalbino
child is %, symbolized by p. Therefore, the
probability that there will be one albino
child among the three children is:

3p2q =3 x (42x (4) = Ms, or 42%

This means that the chance of having
one albino child in the three is 42%.

Table 13.A Binomial Distribution of the Sexes of Children in Human Families

 

Composition Order
of Family of Birth Calculation Probability
3 boys bbb pxpxp P
2 boys and 1 girl bbg pxpxq Pq
bgb PXqXp Pq hoes
gbb qXxPXp Pq
1 boy and 2 girls ggb qX4Xp Pr
gbg qXPXq PP 7 3pP
bes PROXY er
3 girls seg 9X%9%4 g

erozygous individual with one copy of that
allele has the same appearance as a homozy-
gous individual with two copies of it.

gene The basic unit of heredity; a se-
quence of DNA nucleotides on a chromo-
some that encodes a polypeptide or RNA
molecule and so determines the nature of
an individual's inherited traits.

genotype The total set of genes present
in the cells of an organism. This term is
often also used to refer to the set of alleles
ata single gene.

haploid Having only one set of chromo-
somes. Gametes, certain animals, protists
and fungi, and certain stages in the life cycle
of plants are haploid.

heterozygote A diploid individual carry-
ing two different alleles of a gene on two
homologous chromosomes. Most human
beings are heterozygous for many genes.

homozygote A diploid individual carry-
ing identical alleles of a gene on both ho-
mologous chromosomes.

locus The location of a gene on a
chromosome.

phenotype The realized expression of the
genotype; the observable manifestation of a
trait (affecting an individual’s structure, phys-
iology, or behavior) that results from the bio-
logical activity of the DNA molecules.
recessive allele An allele whose pheno-
typic effect is masked in heterozygotes by
the presence of a dominant allele.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 251
