212

energy of the snowball—Earth system change as the snowball
moves from the launch point to the point of maximum height? (c)
What is that maximum height?

116 A 68kg sky diver falls at a constant terminal speed of
59 m/s. (a) At what rate is the gravitational potential energy of the
Earth-sky diver system being reduced? (b) At what rate is the sys-
tem’s mechanical energy being reduced?

117 A 20kg block on a horizontal surface is attached to a hori-
zontal spring of spring constant k = 4.0 kN/m. The block is pulled
to the right so that the spring is stretched 10 cm beyond its relaxed
length, and the block is then released from rest. The frictional force
between the sliding block and the surface has a magnitude of 80 N.
(a) What is the kinetic energy of the block when it has moved
2.0 cm from its point of release? (b) What is the kinetic energy of
the block when it first slides back through the point at which the
spring is relaxed? (c) What is the maximum kinetic energy attained
by the block as it slides from its point of release to the point at
which the spring is relaxed?

118 Resistance to the motion of an automobile consists of road
friction, which is almost independent of speed, and air drag, which
is proportional to speed-squared. For a certain car with a weight of
12 OOON, the total resistant force F is given by F = 300 + 1.8v?,
with F in newtons and v in meters per second. Calculate the power
(in horsepower) required to accelerate the car at 0.92 m/s? when
the speed is 80 km/h.

119 ssm A 50g ball is thrown from a window with an initial
velocity of 8.0 m/s at an angle of 30° above the horizontal. Using
energy methods, determine (a) the kinetic energy of the ball at the
top of its flight and (b) its speed when it is 3.0 m below the window.
Does the answer to (b) depend on either (c) the mass of the ball or
(d) the initial angle?

120 A spring with a spring constant of 3200 N/m is initially
stretched until the elastic potential energy of the spring is 1.44 J.
(U = 0 for the relaxed spring.) What is AU if the initial stretch is
changed to (a) a stretch of 2.0 cm, (b) a compression of 2.0 cm, and
(c) a compression of 4.0 cm?

121 A locomotive with a power capability of 1.5 MW can
accelerate a train from a speed of 10 m/s to 25 m/s in 6.0 min. (a)
Calculate the mass of the train. Find (b) the speed of the train and
(c) the force accelerating the train as functions of time (in seconds)
during the 6.0 min interval. (d) Find the distance moved by the
train during the interval.

122 SSM A 0.42 kg shuffleboard disk is initially at rest when a
player uses a cue to increase its speed to 4.2 m/s at constant ac-
celeration. The acceleration takes place over a 2.0 m distance, at
the end of which the cue loses contact with the disk. Then the
disk slides an additional 12 m before stopping. Assume that the
shuffleboard court is level and that the force of friction on the
disk is constant. What is the increase in the thermal energy of the
disk—court system (a) for that additional 12 m and (b) for the
entire 14 m distance? (c) How much work is done on the disk by
the cue?

123 A river descends 15 m through rapids. The speed of the wa-
ter is 3.2 m/s upon entering the rapids and 13 m/s upon leaving.
What percentage of the gravitational potential energy of the
water—Earth system is transferred to kinetic energy during the de-
scent? (Hint: Consider the descent of, say, 10 kg of water.)

CHAPTER 8 POTENTIAL ENERGY AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY

124 The magnitude of the gravitational force between a particle
of mass m, and one of mass my is given by
mum:

F(x) =G =
where G is a constant and x is the distance between the particles.
(a) What is the corresponding potential energy function U(x)?
Assume that U(x) > 0 as x > and that x is positive. (b) How
much work is required to increase the separation of the particles
fromx = x, tox =x, +d?
125 Approximately 5.5 X 10° kg of water falls 50 m over
Niagara Falls each second. (a) What is the decrease in the gravi-
tational potential energy of the water—Earth system each sec-
ond? (b) If all this energy could be converted to electrical
energy (it cannot be), at what rate would electrical energy be
supplied? (The mass of 1 m3 of water is 1000 kg.) (c) If the elec-
trical energy were sold at 1 cent/kW-h, what would be the yearly
income?

126 To make a pendulum, a 300 g ball is attached to one end of
a string that has a length of 1.4 m and negligible mass. (The other
end of the string is fixed.) The ball is pulled to one side until the
string makes an angle of 30.0° with the vertical; then (with
the string taut) the ball is released from rest. Find (a) the speed of
the ball when the string makes an angle of 20.0° with the vertical
and (b) the maximum speed of the ball. (c) What is the angle be-
tween the string and the vertical when the speed of the ball is
one-third its maximum value?

127 Ina circus act, a 60 kg clown is shot from a cannon with an
initial velocity of 16 m/s at some unknown angle above the hori-
zontal. A short time later the clown lands in a net that is 3.9 m ver-
tically above the clown’s initial position. Disregard air drag. What
is the kinetic energy of the clown as he lands in the net?

128 A 70 kg firefighter slides, from rest, 4.3 m down a vertical
pole. (a) If the firefighter holds onto the pole lightly, so that the
frictional force of the pole on her is negligible, what is her speed
just before reaching the ground floor? (b) If the firefighter grasps
the pole more firmly as she slides, so that the average frictional
force of the pole on her is 500 N upward, what is her speed just be-
fore reaching the ground floor?

129 The surface of the continental United States has an area of
about 8 X 10° km? and an average elevation of about 500 m
(above sea level). The average yearly rainfall is 75 cm. The frac-
tion of this rainwater that returns to the atmosphere by evapora-
tion is 3; the rest eventually flows into the ocean. If the decrease
in gravitational potential energy of the water—Earth system asso-
ciated with that flow could be fully converted to electrical en-
ergy, what would be the average power? (The mass of 1 m of
water is 1000 kg.)

130 A spring with spring constant k = 200 N/m is suspended
vertically with its upper end fixed to the ceiling and its lower
end at position y = 0. A block of weight 20 N is attached to the
lower end, held still for a moment, and then released. What are
(a) the kinetic energy K, (b) the change (from the initial value)
in the gravitational potential energy AU,, and (c) the change in
the elastic potential energy AU, of the spring—block system when
the block is at y = —5.0 em? What are (d) K, (e) AU,, and (f) AU,
when y = —10cm,(g) K, (h) AU,, and (i) AU, when y = —15 cm,
and (j) K,(k) AU,,and (1) AU, when y = —20 em?

 
