9-4 COLLISION AND IMPULSE

‘We can find the net change in the ball’s momentum due to the collision if we inte-
grate both sides of Eq. 9-28 from a time ¢; just before the collision to a time tyjust

after the collision:
7 4
[o-| F(t) dt.
fi fi

The left side of this equation gives us the change in momentum: pi, — p; = Ap.
The right side, which is a measure of both the magnitude and the duration of the
collision force, is called the impulse J of the collision:

(9-29)

y
i I F(t) dt (impulse defined). (9-30)

Nt

Thus, the change in an object’s momentum is equal to the impulse on the object:

Ap =F (linearmomentum-impulse theorem). (9-31)
This expression can also be written in the vector form
Pr-Bi=T (9-32)
and in such component forms as
Ap. =J, (9-33)
a
and Pre — Pix = I F dt. (9-34)
fi

Integrating the Force. If we have a function for F(t), we can evaluate J (and
thus the change in momentum) by integrating the function. If we have a plot of F
versus time f, we can evaluate J by finding the area between the curve and the ¢
axis, such as in Fig. 9-9a. In many situations we do not know how the force varies
with time but we do know the average magnitude F,,, of the force and the duration
At (= t— &) of the collision. Then we can write the magnitude of the impulse as

J = Fag Mt. (9-35)

The average force is plotted versus time as in Fig. 9-9b. The area under that curve
is equal to the area under the curve for the actual force F(t) in Fig. 9-9a because
both areas are equal to impulse magnitude J.

Instead of the ball, we could have focused on the bat in Fig. 9-8. At any
instant, Newton’s third law tells us that the force on the bat has the same
magnitude but the opposite direction as the force on the ball. From Eq. 9-30, this
means that the impulse on the bat has the same magnitude but the opposite
direction as the impulse on the ball.

Vv] Checkpoint 4

A paratrooper whose chute fails to open lands in snow;he is hurt slightly. Had he
landed on bare ground, the stopping time would have been 10 times shorter and the
collision lethal. Does the presence of the snow increase, decrease, or leave unchanged
the values of (a) the paratrooper’s change in momentum, (b) the impulse stopping the
paratrooper, and (c) the force stopping the paratrooper?

Series of Collisions

Now let’s consider the force on a body when it undergoes a series of identical, re-
peated collisions. For example, as a prank, we might adjust one of those machines
that fire tennis balls to fire them at a rapid rate directly at a wall. Each collision
would produce a force on the wall, but that is not the force we are seeking. We

227

FW)
x
Bat Ball

Figure 9-8 Force F(t) acts ona ball as the
ball and a bat collide.

The impulse in the collision
is equal to the area under

the curve.
F
F(t)
7 7!
t, 4
|. ——
(a)
F

The average force gives
the same area under the
curve.

 

 

(d)

Figure 9-9 (a) The curve shows the magni-
tude of the time-varying force F(t) that acts
on the ball in the collision of Fig. 9-8. The
area under the curve is equal to the magni-
tude of the impulse J on the ball in the col-
lision. (b) The height of the rectangle repre-
sents the average force F,,, acting on the
ball over the time interval At. The area within
the rectangle is equal to the area under the
curve in (a) and thus is also equal to the
magnitude of the impulse J in the collision.
