292 CHAPTER 10 ROTATION

the disks lie in the same plane. The disks can be rotated around a per-
pendicular axis through point O at the center of the larger disk. The
disks both have a uniform density (mass per unit volume) of 1.40 x
10° kg/m* and a uniform thickness of 5.00 mm. What is the rota-
tional inertia of the two-disk assembly about the rotation axis
through O?

70 A wheel, starting from rest, rotates with a constant angular
acceleration of 2.00 rad/s”. During a certain 3.00 s interval, it turns
through 90.0 rad. (a) What is the angular velocity of the wheel at
the start of the 3.00 s interval? (b) How long has the wheel been
turning before the start of the 3.00 s interval?

71 ssM In Fig. 10-50, two 6.20 kg
blocks are connected by a massless
string over a pulley of radius 2.40 cm
and rotational inertia 7.40 x 10-4
kg-m’. The string does not slip on
the pulley; it is not known whether
there is friction between the table and
the sliding block; the pulley’s axis is
frictionless. When this system is re-
leased from rest, the pulley turns through 0.130 rad in 91.0 ms and the
acceleration of the blocks is constant. What are (a) the magnitude of
the pulley’s angular acceleration, (b) the magnitude of either block’s
acceleration, (c) string tension T;, and (d) string tension 7,?

72 Attached to each end of a thin steel rod of length 1.20 m and
mass 6.40 kg is a small ball of mass 1.06 kg. The rod is constrained
to rotate in a horizontal plane about a vertical axis through its mid-
point. At a certain instant, it is rotating at 39.0 rev/s. Because of fric
tion, it slows to a stop in 32.0 s. Assuming a constant retarding torque
due to friction, compute (a) the angular acceleration, (b) the retard-
ing torque, (c) the total energy transferred from mechanical energy
to thermal energy by friction, and (d) the number of revolutions ro-
tated during the 32.0 s. (e) Now suppose that the retarding torque is
known not to be constant. If any of the quantities (a), (b), (c),and (d)
can still be computed without additional information, give its value.

Figure 10-50 Problem 71.

 

73 A uniform helicopter rotor blade is 7.80 m long, has a mass of
110 kg, and is attached to the rotor axle bya single bolt. (a) What is
the magnitude of the force on the bolt from the axle when the ro-
tor is turning at 320 rev/min? (Hint: For this calculation the blade
can be considered to be a point mass at its center of mass. Why?)
(b) Calculate the torque that must be applied to the rotor to bring
it to full speed from rest in 6.70 s. Ignore air resistance. (The blade
cannot be considered to be a point mass for this calculation. Why
not? Assume the mass distribution of a uniform thin rod.) (c) How
much work does the torque do on the blade in order for the blade
to reach a speed of 320 rev/min?

74 Racing disks. Figure 10-51 shows {

two disks that can rotate about their

centers like a merry-go-round. At
time ¢ = 0, the reference lines of the
two disks have the same orientation.
Disk A is already rotating, with a con-
stant angular velocity of 9.5 rad/s.
Disk B has been stationary but now begins to rotate at a constant
angular acceleration of 2.2 rad/s”. (a) At what time f will the refer-
ence lines of the two disks momentarily have the same angular dis-
placement 6? (b) Will that time ¢ be the first time since t = 0 that
the reference lines are momentarily aligned?

Disk A Disk B
Figure 10-51 Problem 74.

75 <= A high-wire walker always attempts to keep his center of
mass over the wire (or rope). He normally carries a long, heavy pole

 

to help: If he leans, say, to his right (his com moves to the right) and is
in danger of rotating around the wire, he moves the pole to his left
(its com moves to the left) to slow the rotation and allow himself
time to adjust his balance. Assume that the walker has a mass of
70.0 kg and a rotational inertia of 15.0 kg-m? about the wire. What is
the magnitude of his angular acceleration about the wire if his com is
5.0 cm to the right of the wire and (a) he carries no pole and (b) the
14.0 kg pole he carries has its com 10 cm to the left of the wire?

76 Starting from rest at ¢ = 0, a wheel undergoes a constant an-
gular acceleration. When ¢=2.0s, the angular velocity of the
wheel is 5.0 rad/s. The acceleration continues until f = 20s, when it
abruptly ceases. Through what angle does the wheel rotate in the
interval t = 0 tor = 40s?

  

77 SSM A record turntable rotating at 33; rev/min slows down
and stops in 30s after the motor is turned off. (a) Find its (con-
stant) angular acceleration in revolutions per minute-squared.
(b) How many revolutions does it make in this time?

78 ® A rigid body is made of three
identical thin rods, each with length
L = 0.600 m, fastened together in the
form of a letter H (Fig. 10-52). The
body is free to rotate about a hori-
zontal axis that runs along the length
of one of the legs of the H. The body
is allowed to fall from rest from a position in which the plane of the
H is horizontal. What is the angular speed of the body when the
plane of the H is vertical?

79 SSM (a) Show that the rotational inertia of a solid cylinder of
mass M and radius R about its central axis is equal to the rotational
inertia of a thin hoop of mass M and radius R/V 2 about its central
axis. (b) Show that the rotational inertia J of any given body of
mass M about any given axis is equal to the rotational inertia of an
equivalent hoop about that axis, if the hoop has the same mass M
anda radius k given by

 

Figure 10-52 Problem 78.

 

The radius k of the equivalent hoop is called the radius of gyration
of the given body.

80 A disk rotates at constant angular acceleration, from angular
position 6, = 10.0 rad to angular position @, = 70.0 rad in 6.00 s. Its
angular velocity at @, is 15.0 rad/s. (a) What was its angular velocity
at 6,2? (b) What is the angular acceleration? (c) At what angular
position was the disk initially at rest? (d) Graph @ versus time ¢ and
angular speed w versus ¢ for the disk, from the beginning of the
motion (let ¢ = 0 then).

81 © The thin uniform rod in Fig. 10-53 has
length 2.0 m and can pivot about a horizontal,
frictionless pin through one end. It is released
from rest at angle @ = 40° above the horizontal. eo
Use the principle of conservation of energy to

2 c Pin
tection ame
ig . Problem 81.

82 <= George Washington Gale Ferris, Jr..a

civil engineering graduate from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute,
built the original Ferris wheel for the 1893 World’s Columbian
Exposition in Chicago. The wheel, an astounding engineering con-
struction at the time, carried 36 wooden cars, each holding up to 60
passengers, around a circle 76 m in diameter. The cars were loaded 6
at a time, and once all 36 cars were full, the wheel made a complete
