snow was at the survivable limit of 1.2 x 10° N. What are (a) the
minimum depth of snow that would have stopped him safely and
(b) the magnitude of the impulse on him from the snow?

°25 A 1.2kg ball drops vertically onto a floor, hitting with a
speed of 25 m/s. It rebounds with an initial speed of 10 m/s. (a)
What impulse acts on the ball during the contact? (b) If the ball is
in contact with the floor for 0.020 s, what is the magnitude of the
average force on the floor from the ball?

+26 Inacommon but dangerous prank, a chair is pulled away as
a person is moving downward to sit on it, causing the victim to land
hard on the floor. Suppose the victim falls by 0.50 m, the mass that
moves downward is 70 kg, and the collision on the floor lasts 0.082 s.
What are the magnitudes of the (a) impulse and (b) average force
acting on the victim from the floor during the collision?

°27 SSM A force in the negative direction of an x axis is applied
for 27 ms to a 0.40 kg ball initially moving at 14 m/s in the positive
direction of the axis. The force varies in magnitude, and the im-
pulse has magnitude 32.4 Ns What are the ball’s (a) speed and (b)
direction of travel just after the force is applied? What are (c) the
average magnitude of the force and (d) the direction of the im-
pulse on the ball?

°28 <= In tae-kwon-do, a hand is slammed down onto a target
ata speed of 13 m/s and comes to a stop during the 5.0 ms collision.
Assume that during the impact the hand is independent of the arm
and has a mass of 0.70 kg. What are the magnitudes of the (a) im-
pulse and (b) average force on the hand from the target?

°29 Suppose a gangster sprays Superman’s chest with 3 g bullets
at the rate of 100 bullets/min, and the speed of each bullet is 500
m/s. Suppose too that the bullets rebound straight back with no
change in speed. What is the magnitude of the average force on
Superman’s chest?

30 Two average forces. A steady stream of 0.250 kg snowballs is
shot perpendicularly into a wall at a speed of 4.00 m/s. Each ball
sticks to the wall. Figure 9-49 gives the magnitude F of the force on
the wall as a function of time ¢ for two of the snowball impacts.
Impacts occur with a repetition time interval Af, = 50.0 ms, last a du-
ration time interval Ar; = 10 ms, and produce isosceles triangles on
the graph, with each impact reaching a force maximum F,,,,, = 200 N.
During each impact, what are the magnitudes of (a) the impulse and
(b) the average force on the wall? (c) During a time interval of many
impacts, what is the magnitude of the average force on the wall?

FB

ha ha,

ta ta
AL, |
Figure 9-49 Problem 30.

 

°°31 <= Jumping up before the elevator hits. After the cable
snaps and the safety system fails, an elevator cab free-falls from a
height of 36 m. During the collision at the bottom of the elevator
shaft, a 90 kg passenger is stopped in 5.0 ms. (Assume that neither the
passenger nor the cab rebounds.) What are the magnitudes of the (a)
impulse and (b) average force on the passenger during the collision?
If the passenger were to jump upward with a speed of 7.0 m/s relative
to the cab floor just before the cab hits the bottom of the shaft, what

PROBLEMS 249

are the magnitudes of the (c) impulse
and (d) average force (assuming the
same stopping time)?

E,(N)

32 A 5.0kg toy car can move Fx

along an x axis; Fig. 9-50 gives F, of

the force acting on the car, which be- t(s)
gins at rest at time f = 0. The scale on 2 4

the F, axis is set by F,, =5.0N. In
unit-vector notation, what is p at (a)
t=4.0s and (b) t=7.0s, and (c)
what is ¥ att = 9.0 s?

33 @ Figure 9-51 shows a 0.300
kg baseball just before and just after
it collides with a bat. Just before, the
ball has velocity ¥, of magnitude
12.0 m/s and angle @, = 35.0°. Just
after, it is traveling directly upward
with velocity ¥, of magnitude 10.0
m/s. The duration of the collision is
2.00 ms. What are the (a) magni-
tude and (b) direction (relative to the positive direction of the x
axis) of the impulse on the ball from the bat? What are the (c)
magnitude and (d) direction of the average force on the ball from
the bat?

 

 

 

34 <= Basilisk lizards can run across the top of a water sur-
face (Fig. 9-52). With each step, a lizard first slaps its foot against
the water and then pushes it down into the water rapidly enough to
form an air cavity around the top of the foot. To avoid having to
pull the foot back up against water drag in order to complete the
step, the lizard withdraws the foot before water can flow into the
air cavity. If the lizard is not to sink, the average upward impulse
on the lizard during this full action of slap, downward push, and
withdrawal must match the downward impulse due to the gravita-
tional force. Suppose the mass of a basilisk lizard is 90.0 g, the mass
of each foot is 3.00 g, the speed of a foot as it slaps the water is
1.50 m/s, and the time for a single step is 0.600 s. (a) What is the
magnitude of the impulse on the lizard during the slap? (Assume
this impulse is directly upward.) (b) During the 0.600 s duration of
a step, what is the downward impulse on the lizard due to the gravi-
tational force? (c) Which action, the slap or the push, provides the
primary support for the lizard, or are they approximately equal in
their support?

   

Stephen Dalton/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Figure 9-52 Problem 34. Lizard running across water.
