Sample Problem 10.08 Rotational kinetic energy, spin test explosion

Large machine components that undergo prolonged, high-
speed rotation are first examined for the possibility of fail-
ure in a spin test system. In this system, a component is spun
up (brought up to high speed) while inside a cylindrical
arrangement of lead bricks and containment liner, all within
a steel shell that is closed by a lid clamped into place. If the
rotation causes the component to shatter, the soft lead
bricks are supposed to catch the pieces for later analysis.

Tn 1985, Test Devices, Inc. (www.testdevices.com) was spin
testing a sample of a solid steel rotor (a disk) of mass M =
272kg and radius R = 38.0 cm. When the sample reached
an angular speed w of 14 000 rev/min, the test engineers
heard a dull thump from the test system, which was
located one floor down and one room over from them.
Investigating, they found that lead bricks had been thrown
out in the hallway leading to the test room, a door to the
room had been hurled into the adjacent parking lot, one
lead brick had shot from the test site through the wall of a
neighbor’s kitchen, the structural beams of the test build-
ing had been damaged, the concrete floor beneath the
spin chamber had been shoved downward by about 0.5
cm, and the 900 kg lid had been blown upward through
the ceiling and had then crashed back onto the test equip-
ment (Fig. 10-15). The exploding pieces had not pene-
trated the room of the test engineers only by luck.

How much energy was released in the explosion of the

rotor? ee

WILEY

10-6 TORQUE 277

Figure 10-15 Some of the
destruction caused by
the explosion of a rap-
idly rotating steel disk.

KEY IDEA

The released energy was equal to the rotational kinetic en-
ergy K of the rotor just as it reached the angular speed of
14.000 rev/min.

Calculations: We can find K with Eq. 10-34 (K = 3Jw”), but
first we need an expression for the rotational inertia J. Because
the rotor was a disk that rotated like a merry-go-round, J is
given in Table 10-2c (I = ;MR?). Thus,

1 =3MR? = 3(272 kg)(0.38 m)? = 19.64 kgm’.
The angular speed of the rotor was
@ = (14000 revinin) 2rad/een)( 2)
= 1.466 x 10% rad/s.
Then, with Eq. 10-34, we find the (huge) energy release:
= 51a? = 5(19.64 kg-m?)(1.466 x 103 rad/s)?
=21 x 107J. (Answer)

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

10-6 Torque

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

10.23 Identify that a torque on a body involves a force and a
position vector, which extends from a rotation axis to the
point where the force is applied.

10.24 Calculate the torque by using (a) the angle between
the position vector and the force vector, (b) the line of ac-
tion and the moment arm of the force, and (c) the force
component perpendicular to the position vector.

Key Ideas

@ Torque is a turning or twisting action on a body about a

rotation axis due to a force F.. If F is exerted ata point given

by the position vector F relative to the axis, then the magni-

tude of the torque is
t=rk=r.F=rFsind,

where F, is the component of FE perpendicular to 7 and

dis the angle between 7 and F. The quantity r, is the

10.25 Identify that a rotation axis must always be specified to
calculate a torque.

10.26 Identify that a torque is assigned a positive or negative
sign depending on the direction it tends to make the body
rotate about a specified rotation axis: “clocks are negative.”

10.27 When more than one torque acts on a body about a
rotation axis, calculate the net torque.

perpendicular distance between the rotation axis and
an extended line running through the F vector. This line
is called the line of action of F, and r, is called the
moment arm of F. Similarly, r is the moment arm of F,.
@ The SI unit of torque is the newton-meter (N-m). A
torque Tis positive if it tends to rotate a body at rest
counterclockwise and negative if it tends to rotate the
body clockwise.

g
y
a
a
a
5
&

 
