 

280

lv] Checkpoint 7

CHAPTER 10 ROTATION

The figure shows an overhead view of a meter stick that can pivot about the point indicated, which is

to the left of the stick’s midpoint. Two horizontal forces, Fj and B, are applied to the stick. Only Fis
shown. Force & is perpendicular to the stick and is applied at the right end. If the stick is not to turn,

 

(a) what should be the direction of and (b) should F, be greater than, less than, or equal to F,? z

Sample Problem 10.09 Using Newton’s second law for rotation in a basic judo hip throw

To throw an 80 kg opponent with a basic judo hip throw, you
intend to pull his uniform with a force F anda moment arm
d, = 0.30 m from a pivot point (rotation axis) on your right
hip (Fig. 10-18). You wish to rotate him about the pivot
point with an angular acceleration a of —6.0 rad/s*—that is,
with an angular acceleration that is clockwise in the figure.
Assume that his rotational inertia J relative to the pivot
point is 15 kg-m2.

(a) What must the magnitude of F be if, before you throw
him, you bend your opponent forward to bring his center of
mass to your hip (Fig. 10-18a)?

KEY IDEA

 

‘We can relate your pull Fon your opponent to the given an-
gular acceleration a via Newton’s second law for rotation
(net = Ia).

Calculations: As his feet leave the floor, we can assume that
only three forces act on him: your pull F, a force N on him
from you at the pivot point (this force is not indicated in Fig.
10-18), and the gravitational force F,.To USE Tre = Ja, we need
the corresponding three torques, each about the pivot point.

From Eq. 10-41 (7 = r, F), the torque due to your pull F
is equal to —d,F, where d, is the moment arm r, and the
sign indicates the clockwise rotation this torque tends to
cause. The torque due to Nis zero, because acts at the
pivot point and thus has moment armr, = 0.

To evaluate the torque due to F,, we can assume that F,
acts at your opponent’s center of mass. With the center of
mass at the pivot point, F, has moment arm r, = 0 and thus
the torque due to F, is zero, So, the only torque on your op-
ponent is due to your pull F, and we can write 7,., = Ja as

-d,F = Ia.
We then find
p= Ia _ —(15 kg-m’)(—6.0 rad/s’)
da 0.30m
= 300N. (Answer)

(b) What must the magnitude of F be if your opponent
remains upright before you throw him, so that F, has a mo-
ment arm d, = 0.12 m (Fig. 10-18b)?

Moment arm a,

     
 

of your pull | Moment arm d,
ns of gravitational
Opponent's a
@ force on
rae opponent

  

Moment
) arm d,
ofyour pull

Figure 10-18 A judo hip throw (a) correctly executed and (b) incor-
rectly executed.

KEY IDEA

Because the moment arm for Fi is no longer zero, the torque
due to F, is now equal to nine and is positive because the
torque attempts counterclockwise rotation.
Calculations: Now we write 7. = Ja as
—d,F + domg = Ta,

which gives
Ta dmg
+S,
a, a,
From (a), we know that the first term on the right is equal to
300 N. Substituting this and the given data, we have
(0.12 m)(80 kg) (9.8 m/s?)

0.30 m

i

F=300N +

= 613.6N ~ 610N. (Answer)

The results indicate that you will have to pull much harder if
you do not initially bend your opponent to bring his center
of mass to your hip. A good judo fighter knows this lesson
from physics. Indeed, physics is the basis of most of the mar-
tial arts, figured out after countless hours of trial and error
over the centuries.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
