Questions

1 Figure 923 shows an overhead
view of three particles on which ex-
ternal forces act. The magnitudes and
directions of the forces on two of the
particles are indicated. What are the
magnitude and direction of the force
acting on the third particle if the cen-
ter of mass of the three-particle sys-
tem is (a) stationary, (b) moving at a
constant velocity rightward, and (c) accelerating rightward?

 

Figure 9-23 Question 1.

2 Figure 9-24 shows an over- y(n)

 

head view of four particles of
equal mass sliding over a fric- »
tionless surface at constant T+?
velocity. The directions of the I
velocities are indicated; their Jo tm)
magnitudes are equal. Consider 204

pairing the particles, Which I

pairs form a system with a cen- —t—ed

 

ter of mass that (a) is stationary,
(b) is stationary and at the ori-
gin, and (c) passes through the origin?

Figure 9-24 Question 2.

3 Consider a box that explodes into two pieces while moving with
a constant positive velocity along an x axis. If one piece, with mass
m,, ends up with positive velocity ¥;, then the second piece, with
mass m,, could end up with (a) a positive velocity 75 (Fig. 9-25a), (b)
a negative velocity 7 (Fig. 9-25b), or (c) zero velocity (Fig. 9-25¢).
Rank those three possible results for the second piece according to
the corresponding magnitude of Vj, greatest first.

EE ] r+ B Ee
2) ) C)

Figure 9-25 Question 3.

4 Figure 9-26 shows graphs of force magnitude versus time for a
body involved in a collision. Rank the graphs according to the
magnitude of the impulse on the body, greatest first.

F F F
4h,
2h 2h
t t t
6H 36

12%
(a) (2) ()
Figure 9-26 Question 4.

5. The free-body diagrams in Fig. 9-27 give, from overhead views,
the horizontal forces acting on three boxes of chocolates as the
)
3N
4N

ON 2N
2N

 

(@)
Figure 9-27 Question 5.

QUESTIONS 245

boxes move over a frictionless confectioner’s counter. For each box,
is its linear momentum conserved along the x axis and the y axis?

6 Figure 9-28 shows four groups of three or four identical particles
that move parallel to either the x axis or the y axis, at identical speeds.
Rank the groups according to center-of-mass speed, greatest first.

y y

 

 

()
Figure 9-28 Question 6.

 

7 A block slides along a frictionless floor and into a stationary sec-
ond block with the same mass. Figure 9-29 shows four choices for a
graph of the kinetic energies K of the blocks. (a) Determine which
represent physically impossible situations. Of the others, which best
represents (b) an elastic collision and (c) an inelastic collision?

K K
t t
(a) (b)
K
K
t
t
(©) (d)

Figure 9-29 Question 7.

8 Figure 9-30 shows a snapshot of
block 1 as it slides along an x axis on a
frictionless floor, before it undergoes
an elastic collision with stationary
block 2. The figure also shows three possible positions of the center of
mass (com) of the two-block system at the time of the snapshot. (Point
Bis halfway between the centers of the two blocks.) Is block 1 station-
ary, moving forward, or moving backward after the collision if the com
is located in the snapshot at (a) A, (b) B,and (c) C?

1

 

¢ = 2

Figure 9-30 Question 8.
