The Testcross

To test his model further, Mendel devised a simple and
powerful procedure called the testeross. Consider a purple-
flowered plant. It is impossible to tell whether such a plant
is homozygous or heterozygous simply by looking at its
phenotype. To learn its genotype, you must cross it with
some other plant. What kind of cross would provide the
answer? If you cross it with a homozygous dominant indi-
vidual, all of the progeny will show the dominant pheno-
type whether the test plant is homozygous or heterozygous.
It is also difficult (but not impossible) to distinguish be-
tween the two possible test plant genotypes by crossing
with a heterozygous individual. However, if you cross the
test plant with a homozygous recessive individual, the two
possible test plant genotypes will give totally different re-
sults (figure 13.15):

Alternative 1: unknown individual homozygous
dominant (PP). PP x pp: all offspring
have purple flowers (Pp)

Alternative 2: unknown individual heterozygous (Pp).
Pp x pp: / of offspring have white flowers
(pp) and % have purple flowers (Pp)

© ©

=> (*) Pp Pp

we AN —— > ©) Pp | Pp

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Homozygous
recessive
(white) All offspring are purple;
therefore, unknown,
flower is homozygous
dominant,
Alternative 1
FIGURE 13.15

To perform his testcross, Mendel crossed heterozygous
F| individuals back to the parent homozygous for the reces-
sive trait. He predicted that the dominant and recessive
traits would appear in a 1:1 ratio, and that is what he ob-
served. For each pair of alleles he investigated, Mendel ob-
served phenotypic F) ratios of 3:1 (see figure 13.14) and
testcross ratios very close to 1:1, just as his model predicted.

Testcrosses can also be used to determine the genotype
of an individual when two genes are involved. Mendel car-
ried out many two-gene crosses, some of which we will dis-
cuss. He often used testcrosses to verify the genotypes of
particular dominant-appearing F) individuals. Thus, an F)
individual showing both dominant traits (4_ B_) might
have any of the following genotypes: AABB, AaBB, AABb,
or AaBb. By crossing dominant-appearing F) individuals
with homozygous recessive individuals (that is, A_ B_ x
aabb), Mendel was able to determine if either or both of the
traits bred true among the progeny, and so to determine
the genotype of the F) parent:

AABB trait A breeds true trait B breeds true
AaBB trait B breeds true
AABb trait A breeds true
AaBb

Dominant phenotype

(unknown genotype)

if Pp
f |

© ©

> () Pp | pp

” 4 a) Pp pp

Homozygous

(white) Half of offspring are white;

therefore, unknown flower
is heterozygous.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alternative 2

A testcross. To determine whether an individual exhibiting a dominant phenotype, such as purple flowers, is homozygous or
heterozygous for the dominant allele, Mendel crossed the individual in question with a plant that he knew to be homozygous recessive, in

this case a plant with white flowers.

250 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity
