10-3 RELATING THE LINEAR AND ANGULAR VARIABLES 269

The Position

If a reference line on a rigid body rotates through an angle @, a point within the
body at a position r from the rotation axis moves a distance s along a circular arc,
where s is given by Eq. 10-1:

5S = Or (radian measure). (10-17)
This is the first of our linear—angular relations. Caution: The angle @ here must be

measured in radians because Eq. 10-17 is itself the definition of angular measure
in radians.

The Speed

Differentiating Eq. 10-17 with respect to time—with r held constant —leads to
ds _ do
a a”

However, ds/dt is the linear speed (the magnitude of the linear velocity) of the
point in question, and d6/dtis the angular speed of the rotating body. So

v= or (radian measure). (10-18)

Caution: The angular speed w must be expressed in radian measure.

Equation 10-18 tells us that since all points within the rigid body have the
same angular speed «, points with greater radius r have greater linear speed v.
Figure 10-94 reminds us that the linear velocity is always tangent to the circular
path of the point in question.

If the angular speed w of the rigid body is constant, then Eg. 10-18 tells
us that the linear speed v of any point within it is also constant. Thus, each point
within the body undergoes uniform circular motion. The period of revolution T
for the motion of each point and for the rigid body itself is given by Eq. 4-35:

ra2™, (10-19)
v
This equation tells us that the time for one revolution is the distance 27r traveled
in one revolution divided by the speed at which that distance is traveled.
Substituting for v from Eq. 10-18 and canceling r, we find also that

T= 7 (radian measure). (10-20)
o

This equivalent equation says that the time for one revolution is the angular dis-
tance 27r rad traveled in one revolution divided by the angular speed (or rate) at
which that angle is traveled.

The Acceleration
Differentiating Eq. 10-18 with respect to time—again with r held constant—
leads to
dv do,
dt dt”

= (10-21)
Here we run up against a complication. In Eq. 10-21, dv/dt represents only the
part of the linear acceleration that is responsible for changes in the magnitude v
of the linear velocity ¥. Like ¥, that part of the linear acceleration is tangent to
the path of the point in question. We call it the tangential component a, of the lin-
ear acceleration of the point, and we write

 

ar (radian measure), (10-22)

The velocity vector is
always tangent to this

y circle around the
Circle = rotation axis.
7 ¥
traveled by P
~P

 

axis

(a)

The acceleration always
has a radial (centripetal)
y component and may have
a tangential component.

S
,

 

axis

 

(0)

Figure 10-9 The rotating rigid body of Fig, 10-2,
shown in cross section viewed from above.
Every point of the body (such as P) moves
in a circle around the rotation axis. (a) The
linear velocity V of every point is tangent to
the circle in which the point moves. (b) The
linear acceleration @ of the point has (in
general) two components: tangential a, and
radial a,.
