268 CHAPTER 10 ROTATION

(b) How much time did the speed decrease take? @— % _ 2.00 rad/s — 3.40 rad/s

= 2
Calculation: Now that we know a, we can use Eq. 10-12 to a 0.0301 rad/s

solve for f:

S$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

(Answer)

10-3 RELATING THE LINEAR AND ANGULAR VARIABLES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

10.15 For a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis, relate the angular
variables of the body (angular position, angular velocity, and an-
gular acceleration) and the linear variables of a particle on the
body (position, velocity, and acceleration) at any given radius.

Key Ideas

10.16 Distinguish between tangential acceleration and radial
acceleration, and draw a vector for each ina sketch of a
particle on a body rotating about an axis, for both an in-
crease in angular speed and a decrease.

 

@ A point in a rigid rotating body, at a perpendicular distance
r from the rotation axis, moves in a circle with radius r. If the

@ The linear acceleration @ of the point has both tangential
and radial components. The tangential component is

body rotates through an angle @, the point moves along an
arc with length s given by

4,;= ar (radian measure),

where ais the magnitude of the angular acceleration (in radi-

5S = 6r (radian measure), ans per second-squared) of the body. The radial component
where @is in radians. ofdis v
@ The linear velocity ¥ of the point is tangent to the circle; the ap = wr (radian measure).

point's linear speed vis given by @ If the point moves in uniform circular motion, the period T of

v=or (radian measure), the motion for the point and the body is
where wis the angular speed (in radians per second) of the body, T= 2a _ 2a (radian measure).
and thus also the point. v

Relating the Linear and Angular Variables

In Module 4-5, we discussed uniform circular motion, in which a particle travels at con-
stant linear speed v along a circle and around an axis of rotation. When a rigid body,
such as a merry-go-round, rotates around an axis, each particle in the body moves in its
own circle around that axis. Since the body is rigid, all the particles make one revolu-
tion in the same amount of time; that is, they all have the same angular speed w.

However, the farther a particle is from the axis, the greater the circumference
of its circle is,and so the faster its linear speed v must be. You can notice this on a
merry-go-round. You turn with the same angular speed w regardless of your dis-
tance from the center, but your linear speed v increases noticeably if you move to
the outside edge of the merry-go-round.

We often need to relate the linear variables s, v, and a for a particular point in
a rotating body to the angular variables 0, w, and a for that body. The two sets of
variables are related by r, the perpendicular distance of the point from the
rotation axis. This perpendicular distance is the distance between the point and
the rotation axis, measured along a perpendicular to the axis. It is also the radius r
of the circle traveled by the point around the axis of rotation.
