230 CHAPTER 9 CENTER OF MASS AND LINEAR MOMENTUM

9-5 CONSERVATION OF LINEAR MOMENTUM

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to. . .

9.26 For an isolated system of particles, apply the conservation 9.27 Identify that the conservation of linear momentum can be
of linear momenta to relate the initial momenta of the particles done along an individual axis by using components along

to their momenta at a later instant.

Key Ideas

that axis, provided that there is no net external force com-
ponent along that axis.

 

e Ifa system is closed and isolated so that no net external @ This conservation of linear momentum can also be written
force acts on it, then the linear momentum P must be constant __ in terms of the system's initial momentum and its momentum

even if there are internal changes:

at some later instant:

P = constant (closed, isolated system). P, = P, (closed, isolated system),

Conservation of Linear Momentum

Suppose that the net external force F,.; (and thus the net impulse J) acting on a
system of particles is zero (the system is isolated) and that no particles leave or
enter the system (the system is closed). Putting F,., = 0 in Eq. 9-27 then yields
dPldt = 0, which means that

P = constant (closed, isolated system). (9-42)

In words,

o If no net external force acts on a system of particles, the total linear momentum P
of the system cannot change.

This result is called the law of conservation of linear momentum and is an extremely
powerful tool in solving problems. In the homework we usually write the law as

P, = P, (closed, isolated system). (9-43)
In words, this equation says that, for a closed, isolated system,

total linear momentum) __ (total linear momentum
at some initial time f; at some later time fy

Caution: Momentum should not be confused with energy. In the sample problems
of this module, momentum is conserved but energy is definitely not.

Equations 9-42 and 9-43 are vector equations and, as such, each is equivalent
to three equations corresponding to the conservation of linear momentum in
three mutually perpendicular directions as in, say, an xyz coordinate system.
Depending on the forces acting on a system, linear momentum might be
conserved in one or two directions but not in all directions. However,

o If the component of the net external force on a closed system is zero along an axis, then
the component of the linear momentum of the system along that axis cannot change.

In a homework problem, how can you know if linear momentum can be con-
served along, say, an x axis? Check the force components along that axis. If the net of
any such components is zero, then the conservation applies. As an example, suppose
that you toss a grapefruit across a room. During its flight, the only external force act-
ing on the grapefruit (which we take as the system) is the gravitational force F,,
which is directed vertically downward. Thus, the vertical component of the linear
