H A P T CE

Rolling, Torque, and Angular Momentum

11-1 ROLLING AS TRANSLATION AND ROTATION COMBINED

Learning Objectives

 

Atter reading this module, you should be able to...

 

11.01 Identify that smooth rolling can be considered as a 11.02 Apply the relationship between the center-of-mass

combination of pure translation and pure rotation. speed and the angular speed of a body in smooth rolling.
Key Ideas
@ Fora wheel of radius R rolling smoothly, @ The wheel may also be viewed as rotating instantaneously

y about the point P of the “road” that is in contact with the
ay ° wheel. The angular speed of the wheel about this point

where Vom is the linear speed of the wheel's center of mass is the same as the angular speed of the wheel about
and w is the angular speed of the wheel about its center. its center.

 

What Is Physics?

As we discussed in Chapter 10, physics includes the study of rotation. Arguably,
the most important application of that physics is in the rolling motion of wheels
and wheel-like objects. This applied physics has long been used. For example,
when the prehistoric people of Easter Island moved their gigantic stone statues
from the quarry and across the island, they dragged them over logs acting as
rollers. Much later, when settlers moved westward across America in the 1800s,
they rolled their possessions first by wagon and then later by train. Today, like it
or not, the world is filled with cars, trucks, motorcycles, bicycles, and other
rolling vehicles.

The physics and engineering of rolling have been around for so long that
you might think no fresh ideas remain to be developed. However, skateboards
and inline skates were invented and engineered fairly recently, to become huge
financial successes. Street luge is now catching on, and the self-righting Segway
(Fig. 11-1) may change the way people move around in large cities. Applying the
physics of rolling can still lead to surprises and rewards. Our starting point in
exploring that physics is to simplify rolling motion.

Rolling as Translation and Rotation Combined

Here we consider only objects that roll smoothly along a surface; that is, the
objects roll without slipping or bouncing on the surface. Figure 11-2 shows how
complicated smooth rolling motion can be: Although the center of the object
moves in a straight line parallel to the surface, a point on the rim certainly
does not. However, we can study this motion by treating it as a combination
of translation of the center of mass and rotation of the rest of the object around
that center.

 

Justin Sullivan/Getty Images, Inc.

Figure 11-1 The self-righting Segway Human.
Transporter.
