Covalent Bonds Build
Stable Molecules

Covalent bonds form when two atoms
share one or more pairs of valence
electrons. Consider hydrogen (H) as an
example. Each hydrogen atom has an
unpaired electron and an unfilled outer
energy level; for these reasons the hy-
drogen atom is unstable. When two
hydrogen atoms are close to each
other, however, each atom’s electron
can orbit both nuclei. In effect, the nu-
clei are able to share their electrons.
The result is a diatomic (two-atom)
molecule of hydrogen gas (figure 2.10).
The molecule formed by the two hy-
drogen atoms is stable for three reasons:
1. It has no net charge. The di-
atomic molecule formed as a result

of this sharing of electrons is not
charged, because it still contains

(b)

two protons and two electrons.
2. The octet rule is satisfied.

Each of the two hydrogen atoms FIGURE 2.10

H, (hydrogen gas)

 

Molecules with Several Covalent
Bonds

Covalent bond

Molecules often consist of more than
two atoms. One reason that larger mole-
cules may be formed is that a given atom
is able to share electrons with more than
one other atom. An atom that requires
two, three, or four additional electrons
to fill its outer energy level completely
may acquire them by sharing its elec-
trons with two or more other atoms.

For example, the carbon atom (C)
contains six electrons, four of which are
in its outer energy level. To satisfy the
octet rule, a carbon atom must gain ac-
cess to four additional electrons; that is,
it must form four covalent bonds. Be-
cause four covalent bonds may form in
many ways, carbon atoms are found in
many different kinds of molecules.

Chemical Reactions

‘The formation and breaking of chemi-
cal bonds, the essence of chemistry, is

can be considered to have two or-
biting electrons in its outer energy
level. This satisfies the octet rule,
because each shared electron orbits
both nuclei and is included in the
outer energy level of both atoms.

Hydrogen gas. (a) Hydrogen gas isa
diatomic molecule composed of two
hydrogen atoms, each sharing its electron
with the other. (}) The flash of fire that
consumed the Hindenburg occurred when
the hydrogen gas that was used to inflate the
dirigible combined explosively with oxygen

called a chemical reaction. All chemi-
cal reactions involve the shifting of at-
oms from one molecule or ionic com-
pound to another, without any change
in the number or identity of the atoms.
For convenience, we refer to the origi-

3. It has no free electrons. The
bonds between the two atoms
also pair the two free electrons.

Unlike ionic bonds, covalent bonds
are formed between two specific atoms, giving rise to true,
discrete molecules. While ionic bonds can form regular crys-
tals, the more specific associations made possible by covalent
bonds allow the formation of complex molecular structures.

Covalent Bonds Can Be Very Strong

The strength of a covalent bond depends on the number of
shared electrons. Thus double bonds, which satisfy the oc-
tet rule by allowing two atoms to share two pairs of elec-
trons, are stronger than single bonds, in which only one
electron pair is shared. This means more chemical energy is
required to break a double bond than a single bond. The
strongest covalent bonds are triple bonds, such as those
that link the two nitrogen atoms of nitrogen gas molecules.
Covalent bonds are represented in chemical formulations as
lines connecting atomic symbols, where each line between
two bonded atoms represents the sharing of one pair of
electrons. The structural formulas of hydrogen gas and
oxygen gas are H—H and O=O, respectively, while their
molecular formulas are H? and O2.

gas in the air to form water.

nal molecules before the reaction starts
as reactants, and the molecules result-
ing from the chemical reaction as prod-
ucts. For example:
A—B+C—D — A—C+B+D
reactants products

The extent to which chemical reactions occur is influ-
enced by several important factors:

1. Temperature. Heating up the reactants increases
the rate of a reaction (as long as the temperature isn’t
so high as to destroy the molecules).

Concentration of reactants and products. Reac-
tions proceed more quickly when more reactants are
available. An accumulation of products typically
speeds reactions in the reverse direction.

Catalysts. A catalyst is a substance that increases the
rate of a reaction. It doesn’t alter the reaction’s equi-
librium between reactants and products, but it does
shorten the time needed to reach equilibrium, often
dramatically. In organisms, proteins called enzymes
catalyze almost every chemical reaction.

2.

 

A covalent bond is a stable chemical bond formed when
two atoms share one or more pairs of electrons.

 

Chapter 2. The Nature of Molecules 27
