Latin for “son”), or Fy, generation. Thus, in a cross of
white-flowered with purple-flowered plants, the F; off-
spring all had purple flowers, just as Knight and others
had reported earlier.

Mendel referred to the trait expressed in the F) plants as
dominant and to the alternative form that was not ex-
pressed in the F; plants as recessive. For each of the seven
pairs of contrasting traits that Mendel examined, one of the
pair proved to be dominant and the other recessive.

The F; Generation

After allowing individual F, plants to mature and self-
pollinate, Mendel collected and planted the seeds from
each plant to see what the offspring in the second filial, or
F), generation would look like. He found, just as Knight
had earlier, that some F) plants exhibited white flowers, the
recessive trait. Hidden in the F; generation, the recessive
form reappeared among some F) individuals.

Believing the proportions of the F) types would pro-
vide some clue about the mechanism of heredity, Mendel
counted the numbers of each type among the F) progeny
(figure 13.10). In the cross between the purple-flowered
F, plants, he counted a total of 929 F) individuals (see
figure 13.9). Of these, 705 (75.9%) had purple flowers
and 224 (24.1%) had white flowers. Approximately % of
the F) individuals exhibited the recessive form of the
character. Mendel obtained the same numerical result
with the other six characters he examined: 4 of the F) in-
dividuals exhibited the dominant trait, and % displayed
the recessive trait. In other words, the dominant:recessive
ratio among the F) plants was always close to 3:1. Mendel
carried out similar experiments with other traits, such as
wrinkled versus round seeds (figure 13.11), and obtained
the same result.

FIGURE 13.11
Seed shape: a Mendelian character. One of the differences Mendel
studied affected the shape of pea plant seeds. In some varieties, the
seeds were round, while in others, they were wrinkled.

 

Mago

Warr oll = ao 0

wie ARTE fae ae

    

oN th OF a
Viin=iy ft Tyee yo

AM = ASD

Wo = SO =37 fit $8 HG
ayy ME os ot,

2 8 129 th He :
ds a

eke Fy,
tts = syiyh Mn Gurnee tie Hate nell ung
: 24)

wea hedon, bed,
£
mgm Oa
wl pick hE

FIGURE 13.10
A page from Mendel’s notebook.

 

245

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance
