 

White
(pp)

 

) Gametes |__Pp Pp
~

" by Pp Pp

F; generation

 

 

 

 

 

Purple \

—_ (>) \/

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gametes
{ {
y —Sametes PP Pp
4 yo © ;
Yr
Purple Pp pp
(Fp) F> generation

 

FIGURE 13.14

Mendel’s cross of pea plants differing in flower color. All of the offspring of the first cross (the F; generation) are Pp heterozygotes
with purple flowers. When two heterozygous F; individuals are crossed, three kinds of F, offspring are possible: PP homozygotes (purple
flowers); Pp heterozygotes (also purple flowers); and pp homozygotes (white flowers). Therefore, in the F, generation, the ratio of
dominant to recessive phenotypes is 3:1. However, the ratio of genotypes is 1:2:1 (1 PP: 2 Pp: 1 pp).

lyzed in terms of a Punnett square, clearly predicts that
the F2 generation should consist of 7; purple-flowered
plants and % white-flowered plants, a phenotypic ratio of
3:1 (figure 13.14).

The Laws of Probability Can
Predict Mendel’s Results

A different way to express Mendel’s result is to say that
there are three chances in four (/) that any particular F)
individual will exhibit the dominant trait, and one chance
in four (%4) that an F) individual will express the recessive
trait. Stating the results in terms of probabilities allows
simple predictions to be made about the outcomes of
crosses. If both F, parents are Pp (heterozygotes), the
probability that a particular F) individual will be pp (ho-
mozygous recessive) is the probability of receiving a p ga-
mete from the male ('4) times the probability of receiving
a p gamete from the female (4), or 4. This is the same
operation we perform in the Punnett square illustrated in
figure 13.13. The ways probability theory can be used to
analyze Mendel’s results is discussed in detail on
page 251.

Further Generations

‘As you can see in figure 13.14, there are really three kinds
of F) individuals: 4 are pure-breeding, white-flowered indi-
viduals (pp); 4 are heterozygous, purple-flowered individu-
als (Pp); and ¥ are pure-breeding, purple-flowered individ-
uals (PP). The 3:1 phenotypic ratio is really a disguised
1:2:1 genotypic ratio.

Mendel’s First Law of Heredity: Segregation

Mendel’s model thus accounts in a neat and satisfying way
for the segregation ratios he observed. Its central assump-
tion—that alternative alleles of a character segregate from
each other in heterozygous individuals and remain dis-
tinct—has since been verified in many other organisms. It
is commonly referred to as Mendel’s First Law of Hered-
ity, or the Law of Segregation. As you saw in chapter 12,
the segregational behavior of alternative alleles has a simple
physical basis, the alignment of chromosomes at random
on the metaphase plate during meiosis I. It is a tribute to
the intellect of Mendel’s analysis that he arrived at the cor-
rect scheme with no knowledge of the cellular mechanisms
of inheritance; neither chromosomes nor meiosis had yet
been described.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 249
