10-7 NEWTON’S SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION 279

10-7 Newton's SECOND LAW FOR ROTATION

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

 

10.28 Apply Newton's second law for rotation to relate the rotational acceleration, all calculated relative to a specified
net torque on a body to the body's rotational inertia and rotation axis.
Key Idea
@ The rotational analog of Newton's second law is Jis the rotational inertia of the particle or body about the
Tret = La, rotation axis, and q@ is the resulting angular acceleration about
where Tht is the net torque acting on a particle or rigid body, that axis.

Newton’s Second Law for Rotation

A torque can cause rotation of a rigid body, as when you use a torque to rotate
a door. Here we want to relate the net torque 7,.; on a rigid body to the angular
acceleration a that torque causes about a rotation axis. We do so by analogy with
Newton’s second law (F., = ma) for the acceleration a of a body of mass m due
to a net force F,., along a coordinate axis. We replace Fy, with 7,..,7 with J, and a
with ain radian measure, writing

Tret = 1a (Newton's second law for rotation). (10-42)

Proof of Equation 10-42

We prove Eq. 10-42 by first considering the simple situation shown in Fig. 10-17.
The rigid body there consists of a particle of mass m on one end of a massless rod
of length r.The rod can move only by rotating about its other end, around a rota-
tion axis (an axle) that is perpendicular to the plane of the page. Thus, the particle
can move only in a circular path that has the rotation axis at its center.
A force F acts on the particle. However, because the particle can move
only along the circular path, only the tangential component F, of the force (the
component that is tangent to the circular path) can accelerate the particle along
the path. We can relate F, to the particle’s tangential acceleration a, along the
path with Newton’s second law, writing The torque due to the tangential
component of the force causes
an angular acceleration around
The torque acting on the particle is, from Eq. 10-40, the rotation axis.

F,= ma,.

t= Fr=may.
From Eq. 10-22 (a, = ar) we can write this as
7 = m(ar)r = (mr’)a. (10-43)

The quantity in parentheses on the right is the rotational inertia of the particle
about the rotation axis (see Eq. 10-33, but here we have only a single particle).
Thus, using / for the rotational inertia, Eq. 10-43 reduces to

t=TJa (radian measure). (10-44)

 

Ifmore than one force is applied to the particle, Eq. 10-44 becomes Oo

Rotation axis

Toet = Ta (radian measure), (10-45) Figure 10-17 A simple rigid body, free to

i . . .: . rotate about an axis through O, consists of
which we set out to prove. We can extend this equation to any rigid body rotating a particle of mass m fastened to the end of

about a fixed axis, because any such body can always be analyzed as an assembly _a rod of length r and negligible mass. An
of single particles. applied force F causes the body to rotate.
