Review & Summary

Static Equilibrium A rigid body at rest is said to be in static
equilibrium. For such a body, the vector sum of the external forces

acting on it is zero:
Fa = 0 (balance of forces).

(12-3)

If all the forces lie in the xy plane, this vector equation is equiva-
lent to two component equations:

Fee =O and Frey =0 (12-7, 12-8)

Static equilibrium also implies that the vector sum of the external
torques acting on the body about any point is zero, or

(balance of forces).

(12-5)
If the forces lie in the xy plane, all torque vectors are parallel to the
z axis, and Eq. 12-5 is equivalent to the single component equation
(12-9)

Fret =O (balance of torques).

Trot: = 0 (balance of torques).

Center of Gravity The gravitational force acts individually on
each element of a body. The net effect of all individual actions may
be found by imagining an equivalent total gravitational force F,
acting at the center of gravity. If the gravitational acceleration ¢ is
the same for all the elements of the body, the center of gravity is at

the center of mass.

Elastic Moduli Three elastic moduli are used to describe the
elastic behavior (deformations) of objects as they respond to
forces that act on them. The strain (fractional change in length) is
linearly related to the applied stress (force per unit area) by the
proper modulus, according to the general relation

stress = modulus x strain.

<Questions

1 Figure 12-15 shows three situations in which the same
horizontal rod is supported by a hinge on a wall at one end and a
cord at its other end. Without written calculation, rank the situa-
tions according to the magnitudes of (a) the force on the rod
from the cord, (b) the vertical force on the rod from the hinge,
and (c) the horizontal force on the rod from the hinge, greatest

first.
I
I

qd) (2) (3)

Figure 12-15 Question 1.
2 InFig, 12-16,a rigid beam is at-
tached to two posts that are fas-
tened toa floor. A small but heavy
safe is placed at the six positions
indicated, in turn. Assume that the
mass of the beam is negligible

(12-22)

 

Figure 12-16 Question 2.

QUESTIONS 343

Tension and Compression When an object is under tension
or compression, Eq. 12-22 is written as

FE AL

a TE (12-23)
where AL/L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object, F is
the magnitude of the applied force F causing the strain, A is the
cross-sectional area over which F is applied (perpendicular to A,
as in Fig. 12-11a), and E is the Young’s modulus for the object. The
stress is FIA.

Shearing When an object is under a shearing stress, Eq. 12-22 is
written as
F
A

a
Za

 

(12-24)

where Av/L is the shearing strain of the object, Av is the
displacement of one end of the object in the direction of the ap-
plied force F (as in Fig, 12-11b), and G is the shear modulus of the
object. The stress is F/A.

Hydraulic Stress When an object undergoes hydraulic com-

pression due to a stress exerted by a surrounding fluid, Eq. 12-22 is
written as

AV

p=B vo

where p is the pressure (hydraulic stress) on the object due to the

fluid, AV/V (the strain) is the absolute value of the fractional

change in the object’s volume due to that pressure, and B is the

bulk modulus of the object.

(12-25)

compared to that of the safe.(a) Rank the positions according to
the force on post A due to the safe, greatest compression first,
greatest tension last, and indicate where, if anywhere, the force is
zero. (b) Rank them according to the force on post B.

3 Figure 12-17 shows four overhead views of rotating uniform
disks that are sliding across a frictionless floor. Three forces, of
magnitude F, 2F, or 3F, act on each disk, either at the rim, at the
center, or halfway between rim and center. The force vectors rotate
along with the disks, and, in the “snapshots” of Fig. 12-17, point left
or right. Which disks are in equilibrium?

2F 2F

 

(@) (4) () @
Figure 12-17 Question 3.

4 A ladder leans against a frictionless wall but is prevented from
falling because of friction between it and the ground. Suppose
you shift the base of the ladder toward the wall. Determine
whether the following become larger, smaller, or stay the same (in
