11-8 CONSERVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM 313

Eq. 11-29 (Tet = dLidt), which is Newton’s second law in angular form. If no
net external torque acts on the system, this equation becomes dL/dt = 0, or

L =aconstant (isolated system). (11-32)
This result, called the law of conservation of angular momentum, can also be
written as
net angular momentum = net angular momentum)
at some initial time ¢; at some later time ft,
or L,= = (isolated system). (11-33)

Equations 11-32 and 11-33 tell us:

Ok] If the net external torque acting on a system is zero, the angular momentum L of
the system remains constant, no matter what changes take place within the system.

Equations 11-32 and 11-33 are vector equations; as such, they are equivalent
to three component equations corresponding to the conservation of angular
momentum in three mutually perpendicular directions Depending on the
torques acting on a system, the angular momentum of the system might be con-
served in only one or two directions but not in all directions:

Oo If the component of the net external torque on a system along a certain axis is
zero, then the component of the angular momentum of the system along that axis
cannot change, no matter what changes take place within the system.

This is a powerful statement: In this situation we are concerned with only the initial
and final states of the system; we do not need to consider any intermediate state.

We can apply this law to the isolated body in Fig. 11-15, which rotates around
the z axis. Suppose that the initially rigid body somehow redistributes its mass

 

. . an _ , Rotation axis
relative to that rotation axis, changing its rotational inertia about that axis. (a)

Equations 11-32 and 11-33 state that the angular momentum of the body cannot
change. Substituting Eq. 11-31 (for the angular momentum along the rotational
axis) into Eq. 11-33, we write this conservation law as L

Ty, = Iyeny (11-34)
Here the subscripts refer to the values of the rotational inertia J and angular
speed w before and after the redistribution of mass.

Like the other two conservation laws that we have discussed, Eqs. 11-32 and
11-33 hold beyond the limitations of Newtonian mechanics. They hold for parti-
cles whose speeds approach that of light (where the theory of special relativity
reigns), and they remain true in the world of subatomic particles (where quantum
physics reigns). No exceptions to the law of conservation of angular momentum
have ever been found.

‘We now discuss four examples involving this law.

   

1. The spinning volunteer Figure 11-16 shows a student seated on a stool that -_ ()
can rotate freely about a vertical axis. The student, who has been set into Figure 11-16 (a) The student has a relatively
rotation at a modest, initial angular speed w, holds two dumbbells in his large rotational inertia about the rotation
outstretched hands. His angular momentum vector L lies along the verticalro- ayig anda relatively small angular speed.
tation axis, pointing upward. (b) By decreasing his rotational inertia, the

The instructor now asks the student to pull in his arms; this action reduces _ student automatically increases his angular
his rotational inertia from its initial value J; to a smaller value J; because he _ speed.The angular momentum F of the
moves mass closer to the rotation axis. His rate of rotation increases markedly, _ rotating system remains unchanged.
