378 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

5 Figure 13-25 shows three situations involving a point particle P
with mass m and a spherical shell with a uniformly distributed
mass M. The radii of the shells are given. Rank the situations ac-
cording to the magnitude of the gravitational force on particle P
due to the shell, greatest first.

 

(a) 0) (0)
Figure 13-25 Question 5.

6 In Fig. 13-26, three particles are
fixed in place. The mass of B is
greater than the mass of C. Can a
fourth particle (particle D) be placed
somewhere so that the net gravita-
tional force on particle A from parti-
cles B, G and D is zero? If so, in
which quadrant should it be placed
and which axis should it be near?

 

7 Rank the four systems of equal- Figure 13-26 Question 6.
mass particles shown in Checkpoint 2
according to the absolute value of the gravitational potential energy

of the system, greatest first.

8 Figure 13-27 gives the gravitational acceleration a, for four planets
as a function of the radial distance r from the center of the planet, start-
ing at the surface of the planet (at radius R;, Ro, r Ry). Plots 1 and 2
coincide for r = Ry;plots 3 and 4 coincide for r= Rs, Rank the four plan-
ets according to (a) mass and (b) mass per unit volume, greatest first.

 

4,
e

 

Figure 13-27 Question 8.

9 Figure 13-28 shows three parti-
cles initially fixed in place, with B
and C identical and positioned sym-
metrically about the y axis, at dis-
tance d from A. (a) In what direction
is the net gravitational force F,., on
A? (b) If we move C directly away
from the origin, does Fy. change in
direction? If so, how and what is the
limit of the change?

10 Figure 13-29 shows six paths by
which a rocket orbiting a moon might
move from point a to point b. Rank the
paths according to (a) the correspon-
ding change in the gravitational poten- G
tial energy of the rocket—moon system
and (b) the net work done on the
rocket by the gravitational force from
the moon, greatest first.

 

Figure 13-29 Question 10.

11 Figure 13-30 shows three uniform spherical planets that are
identical in size and mass. The periods of rotation T for the planets
are given, and six lettered points are indicated—three points are
on the equators of the planets and three points are on the north
poles. Rank the points according to the value of the free-fall accel-

eration g at them, greatest first.
48h
O

16h 24h
O O
Figure 13-30 Question 11.

12 In Fig, 13-31, a particle of mass m (which is not shown) is to
be moved from an infinite distance to one of the three possible
locations a, b, and c. Two other particles, of masses m and 2m, are
already fixed in place on the axis, as shown. Rank the three pos-
sible locations according to the work done by the net gravita-
tional force on the moving particle due to the fixed particles,
greatest first.

bd td td + i

a 2m b m ©

Figure 13-31 Question 12.

<Problems

©® __Tuioring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
SSM__Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual

“LW heres ctr =
+ Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty ILW Interactive solution is at

“RF Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 13-1 Newton’s Law of Gravitation *2 <= Moon effect. Some people believe that the Moon con-

*1 Iw A mass M is split into two parts, m and M — m, which are
then separated by a certain distance. What ratio m/M maximizes
the magnitude of the gravitational force between the parts?

trols their activities. If the Moon moves from being directly on the
opposite side of Earth from you to being directly overhead, by
what percent does (a) the Moon’s gravitational pull on you
