14-6 THE EQUATION OF CONTINUITY 399

Figure 14-13 The steady flow
ofa fluid around a cylin-
der, as revealed by a dye
tracer that was injected
into the fluid upstream of
the cylinder.

     

Courtesy D. H. Peregrine, University of Bristol

particles added to a gas flow (Fig. 14-12). Each bit of a tracer follows a stream-
line, which is the path that a tiny element of the fluid would take as the fluid
flows. Recall from Chapter 4 that the velocity of a particle is always tangent to
the path taken by the particle. Here the particle is the fluid element, and its ve-
locity ¥ is always tangent to a streamline (Fig. 14-14). For this reason, two
streamlines can never intersect; if they did, then an element arriving at
their intersection would have two different velocities simultaneously —an
impossibility.

The Equation of Continuity

‘You may have noticed that you can increase the speed of the water emerging
from a garden hose by partially closing the hose opening with your thumb.
Apparently the speed v of the water depends on the cross-sectional area A
through which the water flows.

Here we wish to derive an expression that relates v and A for the steady flow
of an ideal fluid through a tube with varying cross section, like that in Fig. 14-15.
The flow there is toward the right, and the tube segment shown (part of a longer
tube) has length L. The fluid has speeds v; at the left end of the segment and vy at
the right end. The tube has cross-sectional areas A, at the left end and A, at the
right end. Suppose that in a time interval At a volume AV of fluid enters the tube
segmentat its left end (that volume is colored purple in Fig. 14-15). Then, because
the fluid is incompressible, an identical volume AV must emerge from the right
end of the segment (it is colored green in Fig. 14-15).

The volume flow per
second here must
match ...

Figure 14-15 Fluid flows from left to right at a steady
rate through a tube segment of length L. The fluid’s
speed is v; at the left side and v, at the right side. The
tube’s cross-sectional area is A, at the left side and
A; at the right side. From time rin (a) to time t + At
in (b), the amount of fluid shown in purple enters at
the left side and the equal amount of fluid shown in
green emerges at the right side.

  
 
 

Streamline

   
  

Fluid
element

Figure 14-14 A fluid element traces out a
streamline as it moves. The velocity vector
of the element is tangent to the streamline
at every point.

... the volume flow
per second here.

() Time t+ At
