Gene Disorders Can Be Due to
Simple Alterations of Proteins

Sickle cell anemia is a heritable disorder first noted in
Chicago in 1904. Afflicted individuals have defective mol-
ecules of hemoglobin, the protein within red blood cells
that carries oxygen. Consequently, these individuals are
unable to properly transport oxygen to their tissues. The
defective hemoglobin molecules stick to one another,
forming stiff, rod-like structures and resulting in the for-
mation of sickle-shaped red blood cells (figure 13.27). As
a result of their stiffness and irregular shape, these cells
have difficulty moving through the smallest blood vessels;
they tend to accumulate in those vessels and form clots.
People who have large proportions of sickle-shaped red
blood cells tend to have intermittent illness and a short-
ened life span.

The hemoglobin in the defective red blood cells dif-
fers from that in normal red blood cells in only one of
hemoglobin’s 574 amino acid sub-
units. In the defective hemoglobin,
the amino acid valine replaces a glu-
tamic acid at a single position in the
protein. Interestingly, the position
of the change is far from the active
site of hemoglobin where the iron-
bearing heme group binds oxygen.
Instead, the change occurs on the
outer edge of the protein. Why then
is the result so catastrophic? The
sickle cell mutation puts a very non-
polar amino acid on the surface of
the hemoglobin protein, creating a
“sticky patch” that sticks to other
such patches—nonpolar amino acids
tend to associate with one another in
polar environments like water. As
one hemoglobin adheres to another,

Sickle cell
allele in Africa

Hi-sx
[is-10%

ever-longer chains of hemoglobin [10-20%
molecules form.
Individuals heterozygous for the FIGURE 13.28

sickle cell allele are generally indis-
tinguishable from normal persons.
However, some of their red blood
cells show the sickling characteristic
when they are exposed to low levels
of oxygen. The allele responsible for
sickle cell anemia is particularly
common among people of African descent; about 9% of
African Americans are heterozygous for this allele, and
about 0.2% are homozygous and therefore have the dis-
order. In some groups of people in Africa, up to 45% of
all individuals are heterozygous for this allele, and 6%
are homozygous. What factors determine the high fre-
quency of sickle cell anemia in Africa? It turns out that
heterozygosity for the sickle cell anemia allele increases

very serious disease.

260 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity

    

 

FIGURE 13.27

Sickle cell anemia. In individuals homozygous for the sickle cell
trait, many of the red blood cells have sickle or irregular shapes,
such as the cell on the far right.

J

    

P. falciparum
malaria in Africa

Malaria

‘The sickle cell allele increases resistance to malaria. The distribution of sickle cell
anemia closely matches the occurrence of malaria in central Africa. This is not a
coincidence. The sickle cell allele, when heterozygous, increases resistance to malaria, a

resistance to malaria, a common and serious disease in
central Africa (figure 13.28). We will discuss this situa-
tion in detail in chapter 21.

 

Sickle cell anemia is caused by a single-nucleotide
change in the gene for hemoglobin, producing a protein
with a nonpolar amino acid on its surface that tends to
make the molecules clump together.

 
