2.4 Water is the cradle of life.

 

FIGURE 2.11

Water takes many forms. As a liquid, water fills our rivers and runs down over the land to the sea. (a) The iceberg on which the penguins
are holding their meeting was formed in Antarctica from a huge block of ice that broke away into the ocean water. () When water cools
below 0°C, it forms beautiful crystals, familiar to us as snow and ice. However, water is not always plentiful. (¢) At Badwater, in Death
Valley, California, there is no hint of water except for the broken patterns of dried mud.

Chemistry of Water

Of all the molecules that are common on earth, only wa-
ter exists as a liquid at the relatively low temperatures that
prevail on the earth’s surface, three-fourths of which is
covered by liquid water (figure 2.11). When life was origi-
nating, water provided a medium in which other molecules
could move around and interact without being held in
place by strong covalent or ionic bonds. Life evolved as a
result of these interactions, and it is still inextricably tied
to water. Life began in water and evolved there for 3 bil-
lion years before spreading to land. About two-thirds of
any organism’s body is composed of water, and no organ-
ism can grow or reproduce in any but a water-rich envi-
ronment. It is no accident that tropical rain forests are
bursting with life, while dry deserts appear almost lifeless
except when water becomes temporarily plentiful, such as
after a rainstorm.

The Atomic Structure of Water

Water has a simple atomic structure. It consists of an oxy-
gen atom bound to two hydrogen atoms by two single cova-
lent bonds (figure 2.12a). The resulting molecule is stable: it
satisfies the octet rule, has no unpaired electrons, and carries
no net electrical charge.

The single most outstanding chemical property of wa-
ter is its ability to form weak chemical associations with
only 5 to 10% of the strength of covalent bonds. This

28 Part I The Origin of Living Things

 

o
Ball-and-stick model “~~
(a) (b)

Bohr model

FIGURE 2.12

Water has a simple molecular structure. (a) Each molecule is
composed of one oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms. The
oxygen atom shares one electron with each hydrogen atom. (b)
The greater electronegativity of the oxygen atom makes the water
molecule polar: water carries two partial negative charges (8-) near
the oxygen atom and two partial positive charges (6*), one on each
hydrogen atom.

property, which derives directly from the structure of wa-
ter, is responsible for much of the organization of living
chemistry.

 

The chemistry of life is water chemistry. The way in
which life first evolved was determined in large part by
the chemical properties of the liquid water in which
that evolution occurred.

 
