366 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

  

Actual path
fromAtoG
is irrelevant.

iy Earth

Figure 13-10 Near Earth, a baseball is moved
from point A to point G along a path

consisting of radial lengths and circular arcs.

180° for fand Eq. 13-1 for F(r), Eq. 13-24 becomes
GMm
Pr
where M is Earth’s mass and mis the mass of the ball.
Substituting this into Eq. 13-23 and integrating give us

w= -cum | sdr= [|
RP r R
GMm GMm
=0- RR (13-25)
where W is the work required to move the ball from point P (at distance R) to
infinity. Equation 8-1 (AU = —W) tells us that we can also write that work in terms
of potential energies as

 

F(r) «dF = - dr,

 

 

 

U,— U=—-W.
Because the potential energy U., at infinity is zero, U is the potential energy at P,
and Wis given by Eq. 13-25, this equation becomes
GMm
R

Switching R to r gives us Eq. 13-21, which we set out to prove.

U=W=-

 

Path Independence

In Fig. 13-10, we move a baseball from point A to point G along a path consisting
of three radial lengths and three circular arcs (centered on Earth). We are inter-
ested in the total work W done by Earth’s gravitational force F on the ball as it
moves from A to G. The work done along each circular arc is zero, because the
direction of F is perpendicular to the arc at every point. Thus, W is the sum of
only the works done by F along the three radial lengths.

Now, suppose we mentally shrink the arcs to zero. We would then be moving
the ball directly from A to G along a single radial length. Does that change W?
No. Because no work was done along the arcs, eliminating them does not change
the work. The path taken from A to G now is clearly different, but the work done
by F is the same.

We discussed such a result in a general way in Module 8-1. Here is the point:
The gravitational force is a conservative force. Thus, the work done by the grav-
itational force on a particle moving from an initial point i to a final point f is
independent of the path taken between the points. From Eq. 8-1, the change AU
in the gravitational potential energy from point i to point f is given by

AU = U,- U;=-W. (13-26)

Since the work W done by a conservative force is independent of the actual path
taken, the change AU in gravitational potential energy is also independent of the
path taken.

Potential Energy and Force
In the proof of Eq. 13-21, we derived the potential energy function U(r) from the
force function F(r). We should be able to go the other way —that is, to start from
the potential energy function and derive the force function. Guided by Eq. 8-22
(F(x) = —dU(x)/dx), we can write
— td (_oMim)
dr dr
GMm

= (13-27)

F=

 

r

 
