314 CHAPTER 11 ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

     

Her angular momentum
is fixed but she can still
control her spin rate.

Figure 11-17 The diver’s angular momentum
L is constant throughout the dive, being
represented by the tail @ of an arrow that
is perpendicular to the plane of the figure.
Note also that her center of mass (see the
dots) follows a parabolic path.

Figure 11-18 Windmill motion of the arms
during a long jump helps maintain body
orientation for a proper landing.

Figure 11-19 (a) Initial phase of a tour jeté:
large rotational inertia and small angular
speed. (b) Later phase: smaller rotational
inertia and larger angular speed.

from «; to w, The student can then slow down by extending his arms once more,
moving the dumbbells outward.

No net external torque acts on the system consisting of the student, stool,
and dumbbells. Thus, the angular momentum of that system about the rotation
axis must remain constant, no matter how the student maneuvers the dumb-
bells. In Fig. 11-16a, the student’s angular speed «; is relatively low and his ro-
tational inertia J; is relatively high. According to Eq. 11-34, his angular speed in
Fig. 11-16b must be greater to compensate for the decreased I.

2. The springboard diver Figure 11-17 shows a diver doing a forward one-and-a-
half-somersault dive. As you should expect, her center of mass follows a para-
bolic path. She leaves the springboard with a definite angular momentum L
about an axis through her center of mass, represented by a vector pointing into
the plane of Fig. 11-17, perpendicular to the page. When she is in the air, no net
external torque acts on her about her center of mass, so her angular momentum
about her center of mass cannot change. By pulling her arms and legs into the
closed tuck position, she can considerably reduce her rotational inertia about the
same axis and thus, according to Eq. 11-34, considerably increase her angular
speed. Pulling out of the tuck position (into the open layout position) at the end
of the dive increases her rotational inertia and thus slows her rotation rate so she
can enter the water with little splash. Even in a more complicated dive involving
both twisting and somersaulting, the angular momentum of the diver must be
conserved, in both magnitude and direction, throughout the dive. ee

3. Long jump When an athlete takes off from the ground in a running long jump,
the forces on the launching foot give the athlete an angular momentum with a
forward rotation around a horizontal axis. Such rotation would not allow the
jumper to land properly: In the landing, the legs should be together and extended
forward at an angle so that the heels mark the sand at the greatest distance. Once
airborne, the angular momentum cannot change (it is conserved) because no ex-
ternal torque acts to change it. However, the jumper can shift most of the angular
momentum to the arms by rotating them in windmill fashion (Fig. 11-18). Then
the body remains upright and in the proper orientation for landing. eS

4. Tour jeté Ina tour jeté, a ballet performer leaps with a small twisting motion
on the floor with one foot while holding the other leg perpendicular to the
body (Fig. 11-19a). The angular speed is so small that it may not be perceptible

 

F,

\e
J

-

(a) (d)
