Patterns of Inheritance Can Be
Deduced from Pedigrees

When a blood vessel ruptures, the blood in the immediate
area of the rupture forms a solid gel called a clot. The clot
forms as a result of the polymerization of protein fibers cir-
culating in the blood. A dozen proteins are involved in this
process, and all must function properly for a blood clot to
form. A mutation causing any of these proteins to lose their
activity leads to a form of hemophilia, a hereditary condi-
tion in which the blood is slow to clot or does not clot at all.

Hemophilias are recessive disorders, expressed only
when an individual does not possess any copy of the nor-
mal allele and so cannot produce one of the proteins nec-
essary for clotting. Most of the genes that encode the
blood-clotting proteins are on autosomes, but two (desig-
nated VIII and IX) are on the X chromosome. These two
genes are sex-linked: any male who inherits a mutant allele
of either of the two genes will develop hemophilia because
his other sex chromosome is a Y chromosome that lacks
any alleles of those genes.

The most famous instance of hemophilia, often called the
Royal hemophilia, is a sex-linked form that arose in one of
the parents of Queen Victoria of England (1819-1901; figure
13.25). In the five generations

 

FIGURE 13.25

Queen Victoria of England, surrounded by some of her
descendants in 1894. Of Victoria’s four daughters who lived to
bear children, two, Alice and Beatrice, were carriers of Royal
hemophilia. Two of Alice’s daughters are standing behind
Victoria (wearing feathered boas): Princess Irene of Prussia
(right), and Alexandra (left), who would soon become Czarina of
Russia. Both Irene and Alexandra were also carriers of
hemophilia.

 

since Queen Victoria, 10 of her

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

male descendants have had he- | George ll
mophilia. The present British | 2 Gao a
royal family has escaped the |° Duke of Kent FPevens Duke of Hesse
disorder because Queen Victo-
ss . : Prince Albert ‘Queen Viet oO Oo
ria’s son, King Edward VIL, did |! ed ae ro yu
not inherit the defective allele,
and all the subsequent rulers of | un Os, 2, b 2. &, Be 728s
England are his descendants. | _|Frseiet\Veind a (ace ae a a cea tos
Three of Victoria’s nine chil- No hemophilia No hemophilia
dren did receive the defective German King 3} é q a o 6 44, ia bd
, Mm Royal ‘7’ George V
allele, however, and they car- House Irene Czar _|Czarina Earl of |Princess Maurice Leopold Queen Alfonso
ried it by marriage into many Nicholas I! |Alexandra Athlone|Alice Eugenie “ae
of the other royal families of q g q 4 b 4 b 5646 a b a b 4 a
ner roy ~ o . 4 f
Europe (figure 13.26), where it Duke of King Earlof Waldemar Prince Henry ‘Alexis [Viscount Alfonso] Jamie jlan [Gonzalo
is still being passed to future Windsor George VI_| Mountbatten Sigismond Tremation
generations—except in Russia, aon
where all of the ive children of || oO. Reval S46
ety Jueen ince Margaret
Victoria’s granddaughter Elzabethit | Philp aad a
Alexandra were killed soon Q i No evidence | ['No evidence
after the Russian revolution in |VI| , orn 2 ew oars 5. oO cof hemophilia} | of hemophilia
. rincess | Prince Anne Andrew Edwar
1917. (Speculation that one Diana | Charles ‘Spanish Royal House
daughter, Anastasia, survived British Royal House
i vil
ended in 1999 when DNA a
analysis confirmed the identity
of her remains.
) FIGURE 13.26

Family pedigrees can
reveal the mode of
inheritance of a hereditary
trait.

The Royal hemophilia pedigree. Queen Victoria’s daughter Alice introduced hemophilia into the
Russian and Austrian royal houses, and Victoria’s daughter Beatrice introduced it into the Spanish
royal house. Victoria’s son Leopold, himself a victim, also transmitted the disorder ina third line of
descent. Half-shaded symbols represent carriers with one normal allele and one defective allele; fully

shaded symbols represent affected individuals.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 259

 
