#7 In 1654 Otto von Guericke, in-
ventor of the air pump, gave a
demonstration before the noble-
men of the Holy Roman Empire in
which two teams of eight horses
could not pull apart two evacuated
brass hemispheres. (a) Assuming
the hemispheres have (strong) thin
walls, so that R in Fig. 14-29 may be considered both the inside
and outside radius, show that the force F required to pull apart
the hemispheres has magnitude F = 7R? Ap, where Ap is the dif-
ference between the pressures outside and inside the sphere.
(b) Taking R as 30 cm, the inside pressure as 0.10 atm, and the out-
side pressure as 1.00 atm, find the force magnitude the teams of
horses would have had to exert to pull apart the hemispheres.
(c) Explain why one team of horses could have proved the
point just as well if the hemispheres were attached to a sturdy wall.

Module 14-2 Fluids at Rest

*8 <8 The bends during flight. Anyone who scuba dives is
advised not to fly within the next 24 h because the air mixture
for diving can introduce nitrogen to the bloodstream. Without
allowing the nitrogen to come out of solution slowly, any sudden
air-pressure reduction (such as during airplane ascent) can result
in the nitrogen forming bubbles in the blood, creating the bends,
which can be painful and even fatal. Military special operation
forces are especially at risk. What is the change in pressure on
such a special-op soldier who must scuba dive at a depth of 20 m
in seawater one day and parachute at an altitude of 7.6 km the
next day? Assume that the average air density within the altitude
range is 0.87 kg/m’.

PSS Blood pressure in Argentinosaurus. (a) If this long-
necked, gigantic sauropod had a head height of 21 m and a heart
height of 9.0 m, what (hydrostatic) gauge pressure in its blood
was required at the heart such that the blood pressure at the
brain was 80 torr (just enough to perfuse the brain with blood)?
Assume the blood had a density of 1.06 x 10° kg/m*. (b) What
was the blood pressure (in torr or mm Hg) at the feet?

*10 The plastic tube in Fig, 14-30 has a

cross-sectional area of 5.00 cm’. The tube is

filled with water until the short arm (of -
length d = 0.800 m) is full. Then the short arm d
is sealed and more water is gradually poured 4

 

Figure 14-29 Problem 7.

into the long arm. If the seal will pop off when Figure 14-30
the force on it exceeds 9.80N, what total Problems 10
height of water in the long arm will put the seal and 81.

on the verge of popping?

DSSS Giraffe bending to drink. Ina giraffe with its head 2.0 m
above its heart, and its heart 2.0 m above its feet, the (hydrostatic)
gauge pressure in the blood at its heart is 250 torr. Assume that the gi-
raffe stands upright and the blood density is 1.06 X 10° kg/m} In torr
(or mm Hg), find the (gauge) blood pressure (a) at the brain (the
pressure is enough to perfuse the brain with blood, to keep the giraffe
from fainting) and (b) at the feet (the pressure must be countered by
tight-fitting skin acting like a pressure stocking). (c) If the giraffe
were to lower its head to drink from a pond without splaying its legs
and moving slowly, what would be the increase in the blood pressure
in the brain? (Such action would probably be lethal.)

12 <= The maximum depth d,,,, that a diver can snorkel is set
by the density of the water and the fact that human lungs can func-

PROBLEMS 407

tion against a maximum pressure difference (between inside and
outside the chest cavity) of 0.050 atm. What is the difference in dy...
for fresh water and the water of the Dead Sea (the saltiest natural
water in the world, with a density of 1.5 X 103 kg/m)?

*13° At a depth of 10.9km, the Challenger Deep in the
Marianas Trench of the Pacific Ocean is the deepest site in any
ocean. Yet, in 1960, Donald Walsh and Jacques Piccard reached
the Challenger Deep in the bathyscaph Trieste. Assuming that
seawater has a uniform density of 1024 kg/m’, approximate the
hydrostatic pressure (in atmospheres) that the Trieste had to
withstand. (Even a slight defect in the Trieste structure would
have been disastrous.)

°14 Calculate the hydrostatic difference in blood pressure be-
tween the brain and the foot in a person of height 1.83 m. The den-
sity of blood is 1.06 X 105 kg/m}.

°15 What gauge pressure must a machine produce in order to suck
mud of density 1800 kg/m’ up a tube by a height of 1.5 m?

SG Snorkeling by humans

and elephants. When a_ person
snorkels, the lungs are connected
directly to the atmosphere through
the snorkel tube and thus are at at-
mospheric pressure. In atmo-
spheres, what is the difference Ap
between this internal air pressure
and the water pressure against the
body if the length of the snorkel
tube is (a) 20 cm (standard situation) and (b) 4.0 m (probably
lethal situation)? In the latter, the pressure difference causes
blood vessels on the walls of the lungs to rupture, releasing blood
into the lungs. As depicted in Fig, 14-31, an elephant can safely
snorkel through its trunk while swimming with its lungs 4.0 m be-
low the water surface because the membrane around its lungs
contains connective tissue that holds and protects the blood ves-
sels, preventing rupturing.

Figure 14-31 Problem 16.

°17 SSM <= Crew members attempt to escape from a dam-
aged submarine 100 m below the surface. What force must be ap-
plied to a pop-out hatch, which is 1.2 m by 0.60 m, to push it out at
that depth? Assume that the density of the ocean water is 1024
kg/m? and the internal air pressure is at 1.00 atm.

18 In Fig, 14-32, an open tube of length
L=1.8m and cross-sectional area A=
4.6 cm’ is fixed to the top of a cylindrical bar-
rel of diameter D = 1.2 m and height H =
1.8m. The barrel and tube are filled with
water (to the top of the tube). Calculate
the ratio of the hydrostatic force on the
bottom of the barrel to the gravitational
force on the water contained in the barrel.
Why is that ratio not equal to 1.0? (You need
not consider the atmospheric pressure.)

19 @ A large aquarium of height 5.00
m is filled with fresh water to a depth of
2.00 m. One wall of the aquarium consists
of thick plastic 8.00 m wide. By how much
does the total force on that wall increase
if the aquarium is next filled to a depth of
4.00 m?

 

| —_

Figure 14-32
Problem 18.
