Angular Momentum of a Particle The angular momentum €
ofa particle with linear momentum J, mass m, and linear velocity V is,
a vector quantity defined relative to a fixed point (usually an origin) as

C=7X p=m(FX v). (11-18)
The magnitude of (is given by
€=rmvsing (11-19)
=p. =rmv, (11-20)
=r.p=rmv, (11-21)

where ¢ is the angle between 7 and i, p, and v, are the compo-
nents of p and perpendicular to 7, and r, is the perpendicular
distance between the fixed point and the extension of jp’. The direc-
tion of @ is given by the right-hand rule for cross products.

Newton’s Second Law in Angular Form = Newton’s second
law for a particle can be written in angular form as
_ at
tet dt (11-23)
where 7,,; is the net torque acting on the particle and @ is the angu-
lar momentum of the particle.

Angular Momentum of a System of Particles The angu-
lar momentum L of a system of particles is the vector sum of the
angular momenta of the individual particles:

L=G4+6+--4+6,=> 6.

(11-26)

<Questions

1 Figure 11-23 shows three particles
of the same mass and the same constant
speed moving as indicated by the veloc-
ity vectors. Points a, b, c, and d form a
square, with point ¢ at the center. Rank
the points according to the magnitude
of the net angular momentum of the
three-particle system when measured
about the points, greatest first.

Figure 11-23 Question 1.

2 Figure 11-24 shows two parti-
cles A and B at xyz coordinates
(1m, 1m, 0) and (1m, 0, 1m).
Acting on each particle are three
numbered forces, all of the same
magnitude and each directed paral-
lel to an axis. (a) Which of the
forces produce a torque about the
origin that is directed parallel to y?
(b) Rank the forces according to
the magnitudes of the torques they
produce on the particles about the ori-
gin, greatest first.

3 What happens to the initially sta-
tionary yo-yo in Fig. 11-25 ifyou pullit
via its string with (a) force F; (the line
of action passes through the point of
contact on the table, as indicated),
(b) force F (the line of action passes

Figure 11-25 Question 3.

 

 

 

QUESTIONS 319

The time rate of change of this angular momentum is equal to the
net external torque on the system (the vector sum of the torques
due to interactions with particles external to the system):

(11-29)

Fret = (system of particles).

dL
dt
Angular Momentum of a Rigid Body For a rigid body
rotating about a fixed axis, the component of its angular
momentum parallel to the rotation axis is
L=Iw (rigid body, fixed axis). (11-31)
Conservation of Angular Momentum The angular mo-
mentum L of a system remains constant if the net external torque

acting on the system is zero:
TE = aconstant (11-32)

(11-33)

(isolated system)

or L, =, (isolated system).

This is the law of conservation of angular momentum.

Precession of a Gyroscope A spinning gyroscope can pre-
cess about a vertical axis through its support at the rate

Mer

a= 5
Tw

(11-46)
where M is the gyroscope’s mass, r is the moment arm, /is the rota-
tional inertia, and w is the spin rate.

above the point of contact), and (c) force F (the line of action
passes to the right of the point of contact)?

4 The position vector 7 of a particle relative to a certain point
has a magnitude of 3 m, and the force F on the particle has a mag-
nitude of 4 N. What is the angle between the directions of and F
if the magnitude of the associated torque equals (a) zero and (b) 12
N-m?

5 In Fig. 11-26, three forces of the
same magnitude are applied to a par-
ticle at the origin (F, acts directly into
the plane of the figure). Rank the
forces according to the magnitudes of
the torques they create about (a)
point P;,(b) point P;,and (c) point P3,
greatest first.

 

6 The angular momenta ¢(f) of a
particle in four situations are (1)
€ = 30 + 4; (2) € = —6r: (3) € = 2; (4) € = 4/t. In which situation
is the net torque on the particle (a) zero, (b) positive and con-
stant, (c) negative and increasing in magnitude (t > 0), and (d)
negative and decreasing in magnitude (t > 0)?

Figure 11-26 Question 5.

7 A rhinoceros beetle rides the rim of a horizontal disk rotating
counterclockwise like a merry-go-round. If the beetle then walks
along the rim in the direction of the rotation, will the magnitudes
of the following quantities (each measured about the rotation axis)
increase, decrease, or remain the same (the disk is still rotating in
the counterclockwise direction): (a) the angular momentum of the
