The gauge pressure can be positive or negative, depending on whether
P>pPpo or p<pp. In inflated tires or the human circulatory system, the
(absolute) pressure is greater than atmospheric pressure, so the gauge pressure is a
positive quantity, sometimes called the overpressure. If you suck on a straw to pull
fluid up the straw, the (absolute) pressure in your lungs is actually less than atmo-
spheric pressure. The gauge pressure in your lungs is then a negative quantity.

14-4 pascars PRINCIPLE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

14.08 Identify Pascal's principle.

14.09 For a hydraulic lift, apply the relationship between the displacement.

Key Idea

14-4 PASCAL’S PRINCIPLE

393

input area and displacement and the output area and

@ Pascal's principle states that a change in the pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to every por-

tion of the fluid and to the walls of the containing vessel.

Pascal’s Principle

‘When you squeeze one end of a tube to get toothpaste out the other end, you are
watching Pascal’s principle in action. This principle is also the basis for the Heimlich
maneuver, in which a sharp pressure increase properly applied to the abdomen is
transmitted to the throat, forcefully ejecting food lodged there. The principle was
first stated clearly in 1652 by Blaise Pascal (for whom the unit of pressure is named):

oO A change in the pressure applied to an enclosed incompressible fluid is transmit-
ted undiminished to every portion of the fluid and to the walls of its container.

Demonstrating Pascal's Principle

Consider the case in which the incompressible fluid is a liquid contained in a tall
cylinder, as in Fig. 14-7. The cylinder is fitted with a piston on which a container of
lead shot rests. The atmosphere, container, and shot exert pressure p.. on the pis-
ton and thus on the liquid. The pressure p at any point P in the liquid is then

P= Pex + pgh. (14-11)

Let us add a little more lead shot to the container to increase p.., by an amount
Apex. The quantities p, g, and h in Eq. 14-11 are unchanged, so the pressure
change at Pis

Ap = Apexe (14-12)

This pressure change is independent of h, so it must hold for all points within the
liquid, as Pascal's principle states.

Pascal's Principle and the Hydraulic Lever

Figure 14-8 shows how Pascal’s principle can be made the basis of a hydraulic lever.
In operation, let an external force of magnitude F; be directed downward on the left-
hand (or input) piston, whose surface area is A;. An incompressible liquid in the de-
vice then produces an upward force of magnitude F, on the right-hand (or output)
piston, whose surface area is A,. To keep the system in equilibrium, there must be a
downward force of magnitude F, on the output piston from an external load (not

‘Lead shot

 

Figure 14-7 Lead shot (small balls of lead)
loaded onto the piston create a pressure Pex
at the top of the enclosed (incompressible)
liquid. If p.. is increased, by adding more
lead shot, the pressure increases by the same
amount at all points within the liquid.

.. a large output
force.

Asmall input ouput TF
force produces ... °

   

Input

Figure 4-8 A hydraulic arrangement that
can be used to magnify a force F,, The work
done is, however,not magnified and is the
same for both the input and output forces.
