12-2 SOME EXAMPLES OF STATIC EQUILIBRIUM

337

Sample Problem 12.04 Balancing the leaning Tower of Pisa

Let’s assume that the Tower of Pisa is a uniform hollow
cylinder of radius R = 9.8 m and height h = 60 m. The
center of mass is located at height h/2, along the cylin-
der’s central axis. In Fig. 12-8a, the cylinder is upright. In
Fig. 12-8), it leans rightward (toward the tower’s south-
ern wall) by @ = 5.5°, which shifts the com by a distance d.
Let’s assume that the ground exerts only two forces on
the tower. A normal force > Fy acts on the left (northern)
wall, and a normal force Fy acts on the right (southern)
wall. By what percent does the magnitude Fyp increase
because of the leaning?

KEY IDEA

 

Because the tower is still standing, it is in equilibrium and
thus the sum of torques calculated around any point must
be zero.

Calculations: Because we want to calculate Fyg on the
right side and do not know or want Fy; on the left side, we
use a pivot point on the left side to calculate torques. The
forces on the upright tower are represented in Fig. 12-8c.
The gravitational force mg’, taken to act at the com, has a
vertical line of action and a moment arm of R (the per-
pendicular distance from the pivot to the line of action).
About the pivot, the torque associated with this force
would tend to create clockwise rotation and thus is nega-
tive. The normal force Fyp on the southern wall also has a
vertical line of action, and its moment arm is 2R. About
the pivot, the torque associated with this force would
tend to create counterclockwise rotation and thus is posi-
tive. We now can write the torque-balancing equation
(Taetz = 0) as
—(R)(mg) + (2R)(Fivz) = 0,
which yields
Fryp = 5g.
We should have been able to guess this result: With the
center of mass located on the central axis (the cylinder’s
line of symmetry), the right side supports half the cylin-
der’s weight.
In Fig. 12-8), the com is shifted rightward by distance
d= 4h tan 6.

The only change in the balance of torques equation is that
the moment arm for the gravitational force is now R + d
and the normal force at the right has a new magnitude Fyp
(Fig. 12-8d). Thus, we write

—(R + d)(mg) + (2R)(Fxr) = 0,

RWILEY

 

Oe
rk!

| a,

Tort

 

©
Figure 12-8 A cylinder modeling the Tower of Pisa: (a) upright and
(b) leaning, with the center of mass shifted rightward. The forces
and moment arms to find torques about a pivot at point O for
the cylinder (c) upright and (d) leaning.

which gives us

(R +d) Pe

Fyr = 2R

Dividing this new result for the normal force at the right by
the original result and then substituting for d, we obtain

Fyre — R+d _ d

0.5h tan 6
=14+—=1+———.
Fyr R R

R

Substituting the values of h = 60 m, R = 9.8 m, and @ = 5.5°
leads to

Fyr

= 1.29,
Fryr

Thus, our simple model predicts that, although the tilt is
modest, the normal force on the tower’s southern wall has
increased by about 30%. One danger to the tower is that the
force may cause the southern wall to buckle and explode
outward. The cause of the leaning is the compressible soil
beneath the tower, which worsened with each rainfall.
Recently engineers have stabilized the tower and partially
reversed the leaning by installing a drainage system.

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
