Review & Summary

Density The density p of any material is defined as the material’s

mass per unit volume:
Am

AV’
Usually, where a material sample is much larger than atomic
dimensions, we can write Eq. 14-1 as

p (14-1)

m

=—. 14-2)
pry (14-2)
Fluid Pressure A fluid is a substance that can flow; it conforms
to the boundaries of its container because it cannot withstand shear-
ing stress. It can, however, exert a force perpendicular to its surface.
That force is described in terms of pressure p:

AF

AA’
in which AFis the force acting on a surface element of area AA. If the
force is uniform over a flat area, Eq. 14-3 can be written as

F

p=

The force resulting from fluid pressure at a particular point in a
fluid has the same magnitude in all directions. Gauge pressure is the
difference between the actual pressure (or absolute pressure) at a
point and the atmospheric pressure.

Pressure Variation with Height and Depth Pressure ina fluid
at rest varies with vertical position y. For y measured positive upward,

Po = Pit pg(yi— Ya) (14-7)
The pressure in a fluid is the same for all points at the same level. If

his the depth of a fluid sample below some reference level at which
the pressure is po, then the pressure in the sample is

P=Po* gh.
<Questions

1 We fully submerge an irregular 3 kg lump of material in a cer-
tain fluid. The fluid that would have been in the space now occu-
pied by the lump has a mass of 2 kg, (a) When we release the lump,
does it move upward, move downward, or remain in place? (b) If
we next fully submerge the lump in a less dense fluid and again re-
lease it, what does it do?

P (143)

(14-4)

(14-8)

2. Figure 14-21 shows four situations in which a red liquid and a gray
liquid are in a U-tube. In one situation the liquids cannot be in static
equilibrium. (a) Which situation is that? (b) For the other three sit-

| ee ee ee

qd) (2) (3) 4)
Figure 14-21 Question 2.

QUESTIONS 405

Pascal’s Principle A change in the pressure applied to an en-
closed fluid is transmitted undiminished to every portion of the
fluid and to the walls of the containing vessel.

Archimedes’ Principle When a body is fully or partially sub-
merged in a fluid, a buoyant force F, from the surrounding fluid
acts on the body. The force is directed upward and has a magni-
tude given by

Fi= mg, (14-16)

where m; is the mass of the fluid that has been displaced by the body
(that is, the fluid that has been pushed out of the way by the body).
When a body floats in a fluid, the magnitude F, of the (upward)
buoyant force on the body is equal to the magnitude F, of the (down-
ward) gravitational force on the body. The apparent weight of a body
on which a buoyant force acts is related to its actual weight by
weight,

= weight — F,, (14-19)

app
Flow of Ideal Fluids An ideal fluid is incompressible and
lacks viscosity, and its flow is steady and irrotational. A streamline
is the path followed by an individual fluid particle. A tube of flow is
a bundle of streamlines. The flow within any tube of flow obeys the
equation of continuity:

Ry = Av = aconstant, (14-24)

in which Ry is the volume flow rate, A is the cross-sectional area of
the tube of flow at any point, and v is the speed of the fluid at that
point. The mass flow rate R,, is

Ry, = pRy = pAv = aconstant. (14-25)
Bernoulli's Equation Applying the principle of conservation
of mechanical energy to the flow of an ideal fluid leads to
Bernoulli's equation along any tube of flow:

Pp +3pv" + pgy = aconstant. ~
ipv? 14-29

uations, assume static equilibrium. For each of them, is the density
of the red liquid greater than, less than, or equal to the density of
the gray liquid?

3 + A boat with an anchor on board floats in a swimming
pool that is somewhat wider than the boat. Does the pool water
level move up, move down, or remain the same if the anchor is
(a) dropped into the water or (b) thrown onto the surrounding
ground? (c) Does the water level in the pool move upward,
move downward, or remain the
same if, instead, a cork is dropped
from the boat into the water,
where it floats?

4 Figure 14-22 shows a tank filled
with water. Five horizontal floors
and ceilings are indicated; all have
the same area and are located at
distances L, 2L, or 3L below the
top of the tank. Rank them accord-
ing to the force on them due to the
water, greatest first.

 

Figure 14-22 Question 4.
