Disorder

Cystic fibrosis
Sickle cell anemia
Tay-Sachs disease
Phenylketonuria
Hemophilia
Huntington’s disease
Muscular dystrophy

(Duchenne)
Hypercholesterolemia

Table 13.2 Some Important Genetic Disorders

Symptom

‘Mucus clogs lungs, liver,
and pancreas

Poor blood circulation

Deterioration of central
nervous system in infancy

Brain fails to develop in
infancy
Blood fails to clot

Brain tissue gradually
deteriorates in middle age

Muscles waste away

Excessive cholesterol levels
in blood, leading to heart

Dominant/ Frequency among
Defect Recessive Human Births
Failure of chloride ion Recessive 1/2500

transport mechanism (Caucasians)
Abnormal hemoglobin Recessive 1/625

molecules (African Americans)
Defective enzyme Recessive 1/3500
(hexosaminidase A) (Ashkenazi Jews)
Defective enzyme Recessive 1/12,000
(phenylalanine hydroxylase)

Defective blood clotting factor Sex-linked 1/10,000

VII recessive (Caucasian males)
Production of an inhibitor of Dominant 1/24,000

brain cell metabolism

Degradation of myelin coating Sex-linked 1/3700

of nerves stimulating muscles recessive (males)

Abnormal form of cholesterol Dominant 1/500

cell surface receptor

disease

Some Defects May Soon Be Curable

Some of the most common and serious gene defects result
from single recessive mutations, including many of the
defects listed in table 13.2. Recent developments in gene
technology have raised the hope that this class of disor-
ders may be curable. Perhaps the best example is cystic
fibrosis (CF), the most common fatal genetic disorder
among Caucasians.

Cystic fibrosis is a fatal disease in which the body cells
of affected individuals secrete a thick mucus that clogs the
airways of the lungs. These same secretions block the
ducts of the pancreas and liver so that the few patients who
do not die of lung disease die of liver failure. There is no
known cure.

Cystic fibrosis results from a defect in a single gene,
called cf, that is passed down from parent to child. One in
20 individuals possesses at least one copy of the defective
gene. Most carriers are not afflicted with the disease; only
those children who inherit a copy of the defective gene
from each parent succumb to cystic fibrosis—about 1 in
2500 infants.

The function of the of gene has proven difficult to study.
In 1985 the first clear clue was obtained. An investigator,
Paul Quinton, seized on a commonly observed characteris-
tic of cystic fibrosis patients, that their sweat is abnormally
salty, and performed the following experiment. He isolated
a sweat duct from a small piece of skin and placed it in a so-
lution of salt (NaCl) that was three times as concentrated as
the NaCl inside the duct. He then monitored the move-
ment of ions. Diffusion tends to drive both the sodium
(Na*) and the chloride (Cl) ions into the duct because of
the higher outer ion concentrations. In skin isolated from

normal individuals, Na* and Cl ions both entered the duct,
as expected. In skin isolated from cystic fibrosis individuals,
however, only Na* ions entered the duct—no Cl ions en-
tered. For the first time, the molecular nature of cystic fi-
brosis became clear. Cystic fibrosis is a defect in a plasma
membrane protein called CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmem-
brane conductance regulator) that normally regulates pas-
sage of Cl ions into and out of the body’s cells. CFTR
does not function properly in cystic fibrosis patients (see
figure 4.8).

The defective cf gene was isolated in 1987, and its posi-
tion on a particular human chromosome (chromosome 7)
was pinpointed in 1989. In 1990 a working ¢f gene was suc-
cessfully transferred via adenovirus into human lung cells
growing in tissue culture. The defective cells were “cured,”
becoming able to transport chloride ions across their
plasma membranes. Then in 1991, a team of researchers
successfully transferred a normal human ¢f gene into the
lung cells of a living animal—a rat. The of gene was first in-
serted into a cold virus that easily infects lung cells, and the
virus was inhaled by the rat. Carried piggyback, the cf gene
entered the rat lung cells and began producing the normal
human CFTR protein within these cells! Tests of gene
transfer into CF patients were begun in 1993, and while a
great deal of work remains to be done (the initial experi-
ments were not successful), the future for cystic fibrosis pa-
tients for the first time seems bright.

 

 

Cystic fibrosis, and other genetic disorders, are
potentially curable if ways can be found to successfully
introduce normal alleles of the genes into affected
individuals.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 261
