312 CHAPTER 11 ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

Table 11-1 More Corresponding Variables and Relations for Translational
and Rotational Motion’

 

Translational Rotational

Force F Torque F(=7 x F)
Linear momentum B Angular momentum €(=F Xp)
Linear momentum? P (= Sp,) Angular momentum? L(= 7)
Linear momentum’ P= M¥coy Angular momentum® L=lo

= dP a dL
Newton’s second law? Fret = 7 Newton’s second law? Tot = GE
Conservation law! P= aconstant | Conservation law! L = aconstant

“See also Table 10-3.
’For systems of particles, including rigid bodies.

‘For arigid body about a fixed axis, with L being the component along that axis.
“For a closed, isolated system.

We have dropped the subscript z, but you must remember that the angular
momentum defined by Eq. 11-31 is the angular momentum about the rotation
axis. Also, Jin that equation is the rotational inertia about that same axis.

Table 11-1, which supplements Table 10-3, extends our list of corresponding
linear and angular relations.

lv] Checkpoint 6

In the figure, a disk, a

hoop, and asolid sphere i. Hoop sphere
are made to spin about

fixed central axes (like a — — —

top) by means of strings a a a

wrapped around them, with the strings producing the same constant tangential force
F onall three objects. The three objects have the same mass and radius, and they are
initially stationary. Rank the objects according to (a) their angular momentum about
their central axes and (b) their angular speed, greatest first, when the strings have
been pulled for a certain time ¢.

11-8 conseRVATION OF ANGULAR MOMENTUM

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

11.25 When no external net torque acts on a system along a specified axis, apply the conservation of angular momentum to
relate the initial angular momentum value along that axis to the value at a later instant.

 

Key Idea

@ The angular momentum Lota system remains constant if the net external torque acting on the system is zero:
L = aconstant (isolated system)

or L, =; (isolated system).

This is the law of conservation of angular momentum.

 

Conservation of Angular Momentum

So far we have discussed two powerful conservation laws, the conservation of
energy and the conservation of linear momentum. Now we meet a third law of
this type, involving the conservation of angular momentum. We start from
