14-55 ARCHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE 395

Archimedes’ Principle

Figure 14-9 shows a student in a swimming pool, manipulating a very thin plastic
sack (of negligible mass) that is filled with water. She finds that the sack and its
contained water are in static equilibrium, tending neither to rise nor to sink.
The downward gravitational force E on the contained water must be balanced
by a net upward force from the water “surrounding the sack.

This net upward force is a buoyant force F,. It exists because the pressure in
the surrounding water increases with depth below the surface. Thus, the pressure
near the bottom of the sack is greater than the pressure near the top, which
means the forces on the sack due to this pressure are greater in magnitude near
the bottom of the sack than near the top. Some of the forces are represented in
Fig. 14-10a, where the space occupied by the sack has been left empty. Note that the
force vectors drawn near the bottom of that space (with upward components) have
longer lengths than those drawn near the top of the sack (with downward compo-
nents). If we vectorially add all the forces on the sack from the water, the horizontal
components cancel and the vertical components add to yield the upward buoyant
force F, on the sack. (Force F, is shown to the right of the pool in Fig, 14-10a.)

Because the sack of water is in static equilibrium, the magnitude of F,, is equal to
the magnitude myg of the gravitational force E on the sack of water: F, = myg.
(Subscript f refers to fluid, here the water.) In words, the magnitude of the buoyant
force is equal to the weight of the water in the sack.

In Fig. 14-10, we have replaced the sack of water with a stone that exactly fills
the hole in Fig. 14-10a. The stone is said to displace the water, meaning that the stone
occupies space that would otherwise be occupied by water. We have changed nothing
about the shape of the hole, so the forces at the hole’s surface must be the same as
when the water-filled sack was in place. Thus, the same upward buoyant force that
acted on the water-filled sack now acts on the stone; that is, the magnitude F, of the
buoyant force is equal to m;g, the weight of the water displaced by the stone.

Unlike the water-filled sack, the stone is not in static equilibrium. The down-
ward gravitational force RK on the stone is greater in magnitude than the upward
buoyant force (Fig. 14-10b).The stone thus accelerates downward, sinking.

Let us next exactly fill the hole in Fig. 14-10a with a block of lightweight
wood, as in Fig. 14-10c. Again, nothing has changed about the forces at the hole’s
surface, so the magnitude F, of the buoyant force is still equal to m;g, the weight

The buoyant force
is due to the
pressure of the
surrounding water.

 

(d)

Figure 14-10 (a) The watersurrounding the hole in the water pro-

duces a net upward buoyant force on whatever fills the hole.

(b) For a stone of the same volume as the hole, the gravita-

tional force exceeds the buoyant force in magnitude. (c) For a

lump of wood of the same volume, the gravitational force is

less than the buoyant force in magnitude. (

 

The upward buoyant
force on this sack of
water equals the

weight of the water.

 

Figure 14-9 A thin-walled plastic sack of water
is in static equilibrium in the pool. The gravita-
tional force on the sack must be balanced by
anet upward force on it from the surrounding
water.

f, .
, The net force is
Stone
downward, so the
i stone accelerates
downward.
A
Wood The net force
— is upward, so the
E,
. wood accelerates

upward.
