338 CHAPTER 12 EQUILIBRIUM AND ELASTICITY

12-3 ELasticity

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

12.07 Explain what an indeterminate situation is.

12.08 For tension and compression, apply the equation that
relates stress to strain and Young's modulus.

12.09 Distinguish between yield strength and ultimate strength.

Key Ideas

12.10 For shearing, apply the equation that relates stress to
strain and the shear modulus.

12.11 For hydraulic stress, apply the equation that relates
fluid pressure to strain and the bulk modulus.

 

@ Three elastic moduli are used to describe the elastic behav-
ior (deformations) of objects as they respond to forces that act
on them. The strain (fractional change in length) is linearly re-
lated to the applied stress (force per unit area) by the proper
modulus, according to the general stress-strain relation

stress = modulus * strain.

@ When an object is under tension or compression, the
stress-strain relation is written as

where AL/L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object,
Fis the magnitude of the applied force F causing the strain,
Ais the cross-sectional area over which F is applied (per-
pendicular to A), and E is the Young's modulus for the ob-
ject. The stress is F/A.

@ When an object is under a shearing stress, the stress-strain
relation is written as

FF Ax

A” L’
where Ax/L is the shearing strain of the object, Ax is the
displacement of one end of the object in the direction of the
applied force F, and G is the shear modulus of the object.
The stress is F/A.

@ When an object undergoes hydraulic compression due to a
stress exerted by a surrounding fluid, the stress-strain relation
is written as
AV

p=B-;,
where p is the pressure (hydraulic stress) on the object due
to the fluid, AV/V (the strain) is the absolute value of the frac-
tional change in the object's volume due to that pressure, and
Bis the bulk modulus of the object.

 

Indeterminate Structures

For the problems of this chapter, we have only three independent equations at
our disposal, usually two balance of forces equations and one balance-of-torques
equation about a given rotation axis. Thus, if a problem has more than three
unknowns, we cannot solve it.

Consider an unsymmetrically loaded car. What are the forces—all different—
on the four tires? Again, we cannot find them because we have only three inde-
pendent equations. Similarly, we can solve an equilibrium problem for a table
with three legs but not for one with four legs. Problems like these, in which there
are more unknowns than equations, are called indeterminate.

Yet solutions to indeterminate problems exist in the real world. If you rest
the tires of the car on four platform scales, each scale will register a definite read-
ing, the sum of the readings being the weight of the car. What is eluding us in our
efforts to find the individual forces by solving equations?

The problem is that we have assumed —without making a great point of
it—that the bodies to which we apply the equations of static equilibrium are
perfectly rigid. By this we mean that they do not deform when forces are ap-
plied to them. Strictly, there are no such bodies. The tires of the car, for ex-
ample, deform easily under load until the car settles into a position of static
equilibrium.

We have all had experience with a wobbly restaurant table, which we usually
level by putting folded paper under one of the legs. If a big enough elephant sat
on such a table, however, you may be sure that if the table did not collapse, it
