 

Epistasis

In the tests of Mendel’s ideas that
followed the rediscovery of his work,
scientists had trouble obtaining
Mendel’s simple ratios particularly
with dihybrid crosses. Recall that
when individuals heterozygous for
two different genes mate (a dihybrid
cross), four different phenotypes are
possible among the progeny: off-
spring may display the dominant
phenotype for both genes, cither one
of the genes, or for neither gene.
Sometimes, however, it is not possi-
ble for an investigator to identify
successfully each of the four pheno-
typic classes, because two or more of
the classes look alike. Such situations
proved confusing to investigators
following Mendel.

One example of such difficulty in
identification is seen in the analysis of
particular varieties of corn, Zea mays.
Some commercial varieties exhibit a
purple pigment called anthocyanin in
their seed coats, while others do not.
In 1918, geneticist R. A. Emerson
crossed two pure-breeding corn vari-
eties, neither exhibiting anthocyanin

White
(AAbb)

l@

Sperm

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

White
(aaBB)
F, generation
All purple
(AaBb)
AABB | AABb | AaBB | AaBb
AABb | AAbb | AaBb | Aabb Fe generation
9/16 purple
AaBB | AaBb | aaBB | aaBb | 7/16 white
AaBb | Aabb | aaBb | aabb

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

pigment. Surprisingly, all of the F,
plants produced purple seeds.

When two of these pigment-
producing F; plants were crossed to
produce an F) generation, 56% were
pigment producers and 44% were
not. What was happening? Emerson
correctly deduced that two genes
were involved in producing pigment,
and that the second cross had thus been a dihybrid cross.
Mendel had predicted 16 equally possible ways gametes
could combine. How many of these were in each of the
two types Emerson obtained? He multiplied the fraction
that were pigment producers (0.56) by 16 to obtain 9, and
multiplied the fraction that were not (0.44) by 16 to ob-
tain 7. Thus, Emerson had a modified ratio of 9:7 in-
stead of the usual 9:3:3:1 ratio.

FIGURE 13.20

Why Was Emerson’s Ratio Modified? When genes
act sequentially, as in a biochemical pathway, an allele ex-
pressed as a defective enzyme early in the pathway blocks
the flow of material through the rest of the pathway.
This makes it impossible to judge whether the later steps
of the pathway are functioning properly. Such gene inter-
action, where one gene can interfere with the expression
of another gene, is the basis of the phenomenon called
epistasis.

How epistasis affects grain color. The purple pigment found in some varieties of corn is
the product of a two-step biochemical pathway. Unless both enzymes are active (the plant
has a dominant allele for each of the two genes, A and B), no pigment is expressed.

The pigment anthocyanin is the product of a two-step
biochemical pathway:

Enzyme 1 Enzyme 2
Starting molecule —> Intermediate — Anthocyanin
(Colorless) (Colorless) (Purple)

To produce pigment, a plant must possess at least one
functional copy of each enzyme gene (figure 13.20). The
dominant alleles encode functional enzymes, but the reces-
sive alleles encode nonfunctional enzymes. Of the 16 geno-
types predicted by random assortment, 9 contain at least
one dominant allele of both genes; they produce purple
progeny. The remaining 7 genotypes lack dominant alleles
at either or both loci (3 + 3 + 1 = 7) and so are phenotypi-
cally the same (nonpigmented), giving the phenotypic ratio
of 9:7 that Emerson observed. The inability to see the ef-
fect of enzyme 2 when enzyme | is nonfunctional is an ex-
ample of epistasis.

Chapter 13. Patterns of Inheritance 255
