318 CHAPTER 11 ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

Review & Summary

Rolling Bodies For a wheel of radius R rolling smoothly,

Veom = OR,

where Vo, is the linear speed of the wheel’s center of mass and wis

According to Eq. 11-41, torque 7 causes an incremental change dL in the
angular momentum of the gyroscope in an incremental time interval dt; that is,

dL = 7dt. (11-44)

However, for a rapidly spinning gyroscope, the magnitude of L is fixed by
Eq. 11-43. Thus the torque can change only the direction of L, not its magnitude.

From Eq. 11-44 we see that the direction of dL is in the direction of 7, per-
pendicular to L. The only way that LT can be > changed in the direction of 7
without the magnitude L being changed is for L to rotate around the z axis as
shown in Fig. 11-22c. TE maintains its magnitude, the head of the Ly vector follows
a circular path, and 7 is always tangent to that path. Since T must always
point along the shaft, the shaft must rotate about the z axis in the direction of 7.
Thus we have precession. Because the spinning gyroscope must obey Newton’s
law in angular form in response to any change in its initial angular momentum, it
must precess instead of merely toppling over.

Precession. We can find the precession rate © by first using Eqs. 11-44 and

11-42 to get the magnitude of aL:
dL = rdt=

Mgr dt. (11-45)

AsL . changes by an incremental amount in an incremental time interval dt, the shaft
and precess around the z axis through incremental angle d¢. (In Fig. 11-22c, angle
d¢ is exaggerated for clarity.) With the aid of Eqs. 11-43 and 11-45, we find that dd is
given by
dL Mgr dt
dé = —— = —_.
° L Iw
Dividing this expression by dt and setting the rate Q = dd/dt, we obtain

Mgr

a

 

(11-46)

(precession rate).

This result is valid under the assumption that the spin rate wis rapid. Note that 0
decreases as w is increased. Note also that there would be no precession if the
gravitational force Mg did not act on the gyroscope, but because / is a function of
M,mass cancels from Eq. 11-46; thus 0 is independent of the mass.

Equation 11-46 also applies if the shaft of a spinning gyroscope is at an angle
to the horizontal. It holds as well for a spinning top, which is essentially a spinning
gyroscope at an angle to the horizontal. =

If the wheel rolls smoothly down a ramp of angle 6, its acceleration

the angular speed of the wheel about its center. The wheel may
also be viewed as rotating instantaneously about the point P of the
“road” that is in contact with the wheel. The angular speed of the
wheel about this point is the same as the angular speed of
the wheel about its center. The rolling wheel has kinetic energy

K = dhom@? + 3MV2 5m, (11-5)
where J,,m is the rotational inertia of the wheel about its center of
mass and M is the mass of the wheel. If the wheel is being accelerated
butis still rolling smoothly, the acceleration of the center of mass Gy,
is related to the angular acceleration a about the center with

don = aR (11-6)

(11-2) along an x axis extending up the ramp is
Geom, = ~——8 829 (11-10)
coms TE Lo (MR

Torque as a Vector In three dimensions, torque 7 is a vector
quantity defined relative to a fixed point (usually an origin); it is

F=FXF, (11-14)

where F is a force applied to a particle and 7 is a position vector lo-
cating the particle relative to the fixed point. The magnitude of 7 is

r=1Fsin@=rF, =F, (11-15, 11-16, 11-17)

 

where ¢ is the angle between F and ¥, F, is the component of F
perpendicular to 7, and r, is the moment arm of F. The direction
of 7s given by the right-hand rule.
