14-2 FLUIDS AT REST 389

 

Key Ideas
@ Pressure in a fluid at rest varies with vertical position y. For where p is the pressure in the sample.
y measured positive upward, @ The pressure in a fluid is the same for all points at the same
P2= Pit pg (yi ~ Y2)- level.
If h is the depth of a fluid sample below some reference level @ Gauge pressure is the difference between the actual pres-
at which the pressure is po, this equation becomes sure (or absolute pressure) at a point and the atmospheric
P=Pot pgh, pressure.

Fluids at Rest

Figure 14-2a shows a tank of water —or other liquid—open to the atmosphere.
As every diver knows, the pressure increases with depth below the air—water
interface. The diver’s depth gauge, in fact, is a pressure sensor much like that of
Fig. 14-1b. As every mountaineer knows, the pressure decreases with altitude as
one ascends into the atmosphere. The pressures encountered by the diver and the
mountaineer are usually called hydrostatic pressures, because they are due to flu-
ids that are static (at rest). Here we want to find an expression for hydrostatic
pressure as a function of depth or altitude.

Let us look first at the increase in pressure with depth below the water’s
surface. We set up a vertical y axis in the tank, with its origin at the air—water
interface and the positive direction upward. We next consider a water sample con-

This downward force is due to the water \¢
Three forces act on this sample of water. y pressure pushing on the top surface.

Air y=0

  

(Y)

This upward force is due to the water

pressure pushing on the bottom surface. ea ea Ree eka ae

y
RE y=0 "
The three forces
balance.
sample
mg
i) ) w@ YA

  

Figure 14-2 (a) A tank of waterin which a sample of water is contained in an imaginary cylinder of horizontal base area A.
(b)-(d) Force F, acts at the top surface of the cylinder; force F, acts at the bottom surface of the cylinder; the gravitational
force on the water in the cylinder is represented by mg. (e) A free-body diagram of the water sample. In WileyPLUS, this,
figure is available as an animation with voiceover.

 

 
