360 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

Table 13-1 Variation of a, with Altitude

Altitude
(km)

Density (10° kg/m?)

oN Row

ool

4,
lg
(m/s?)

9.83
9.80

971
8.70

0.225

 

2 3

Altitude.
Example

Mean Earth
surface

Mt. Everest

Highest crewed
balloon

Space shuttle
orbit

Communications
satellite

Surface

Mande

4°95 6 7

Distance from center (10° m)

Figure 13-5 The density of Earth as a func-
tion of distance from the center. The limits
of the solid inner core, the largely liquid
outer core, and the solid mantle are shown,
but the crust of Earth is too thin to show
clearly on this plot.

Gravitation Near Earth’s Surface

Let us assume that Earth is a uniform sphere of mass M. The magnitude of the
gravitational force from Earth on a particle of mass m, located outside Earth a
distance r from Earth’s center, is then given by Eq. 13-1 as

Mm
F=G->. (13-9)

If the particle is released, it will fall toward the center of Earth, as a result of the
gravitational force F', with an acceleration we shall call the gravitational accelera-
tion 7,. Newton’s second law tells us that magnitudes F and a, are related by

F=ma,. (13-10)
Now, substituting F from Eq. 13-9 into Eq. 13-10 and solving for a,, we find
GM
a, = (13-11)

Table 13-1 shows values of a, computed for various altitudes above Earth’s
surface. Notice that a, is significant even at 400 km.

Since Module 5-1, we have assumed that Earth is an inertial frame by ne-
glecting its rotation. This simplification has allowed us to assume that the free-fall
acceleration g of a particle is the same as the particle’s gravitational acceleration
(which we now call a,). Furthermore, we assumed that g has the constant value
9.8 m/s” any place on Earth’s surface. However, any g value measured at a given
location will differ from the a, value calculated with Eq. 13-11 for that location
for three reasons: (1) Earth’s mass is not distributed uniformly, (2) Earth is not a
perfect sphere, and (3) Earth rotates. Moreover, because g differs from a,, the
same three reasons mean that the measured weight mg of a particle differs from
the magnitude of the gravitational force on the particle as given by Eq. 13-9. Let
us now examine those reasons.

1. Earth’s mass is not uniformly distributed. The density (mass per unit volume)
of Earth varies radially as shown in Fig. 13-5, and the density of the crust
(outer section) varies from region to region over Earth’s surface. Thus, g varies
from region to region over the surface.

2. Earth is not a sphere. Earth is approximately an ellipsoid, flattened at the
poles and bulging at the equator. Its equatorial radius (from its center point
out to the equator) is greater than its polar radius (from its center point out
to either north or south pole) by 21 km. Thus, a point at the poles is closer to
the dense core of Earth than is a point on the equator. This is one reason the
free-fall acceleration g increases if you were to measure it while moving at sea
level from the equator toward the north or south pole. As you move, you are
actually getting closer to the center of Earth and thus, by Newton’s law of
gravitation, g increases.

3. Earth is rotating. The rotation axis runs through the north and south poles of
Earth. An object located on Earth’s surface anywhere except at those poles
must rotate in a circle about the rotation axis and thus must have a centripetal
acceleration directed toward the center of the circle. This centripetal accelera-
tion requires a centripetal net force that is also directed toward that center.

To see how Earth’s rotation causes g to differ from a,, let us analyze a simple
situation in which a crate of mass m is on a scale at the equator. Figure 13-6a
shows this situation as viewed from a point in space above the north pole.

Figure 13-6b, a free-body diagram for the crate, shows the two forces on
the crate, both acting along a radial r axis that extends from Earth’s center. The
normal force Fy on the crate from the scale is directed outward, in the positive
direction of the r axis. The gravitational force, represented with its equivalent
may, is directed inward. Because it travels in a circle about the center of Earth
