13-5 GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL ENERGY

on Earth’s surface, the gravitational potential energy decreased when the separa-
tion between the particle and Earth decreased.

Here, we broaden our view and consider the gravitational potential energy U
of two particles, of masses m and M, separated by a distance r. We again choose a
reference configuration with U equal to zero. However, to simplify the equations,
the separation distance r in the reference configuration is now large enough to be
approximated as infinite. As before, the gravitational potential energy decreases
when the separation decreases. Since U = 0 for r = ~, the potential energy is neg-
ative for any finite separation and becomes progressively more negative as the
particles move closer together.

With these facts in mind and as we shall justify next, we take the gravitational
potential energy of the two-particle system to be

GMm
r

U=-—

 

(13-21)

(gravitational potential energy).

Note that U(r) approaches zero as r approaches infinity and that for any finite
value of r, the value of U(r) is negative.

Language. The potential energy given by Eq. 13-21 is a property of the sys-
tem of two particles rather than of either particle alone. There is no way to di-
vide this energy and say that so much belongs to one particle and so much to
the other. However, if M > m, as is true for Earth (mass M) and a baseball
(mass m), we often speak of “the potential energy of the baseball.” We can get
away with this because, when a baseball moves in the vicinity of Earth, changes
in the potential energy of the baseball—Earth system appear almost entirely as
changes in the kinetic energy of the baseball, since changes in the kinetic en-
ergy of Earth are too small to be measured. Similarly, in Module 13-7 we shall
speak of “the potential energy of an artificial satellite” orbiting Earth, because
the satellite’s mass is so much smaller than Earth’s mass. When we speak of the
potential energy of bodies of comparable mass, however, we have to be careful
to treat them as a system.

Multiple Particles. If our system contains more than two particles, we con-
sider each pair of particles in turn, calculate the gravitational potential energy of
that pair with Eq. 13-21 as if the other particles were not there, and then alge-
braically sum the results. Applying Eq. 13-21 to each of the three pairs of Fig. 13-8,
for example, gives the potential energy of the system as

Gmymn Gmym.
U= -( Su + Sms
rn Ns Me

Grams (13-22)

Proof of Equation 13-21

Let us shoot a baseball directly away from Earth along the path in Fig. 13-9. We
want to find an expression for the gravitational potential energy U of the ball at
point P along its path, at radial distance R from Earth’s center. To do so, we first
find the work W done on the ball by the gravitational force as the ball travels
from point P to a great (infinite) distance from Earth. Because the gravitational
force Fir) is a variable force (its magnitude depends on r), we must use the tech-
niques of Module 7-5 to find the work. In vector notation, we can write
w= I F(r)- dr. (13-23)
R
The integral contains the scalar (or dot) product of the force F(r) and the differential
displacement vector d7 along the ball’s path. We can expand that product as

F(r)-d? = F(r)drcos ¢, (13-24)

where ¢ is the angle between the directions of F(r) and d?’. When we substitute

365

 

 

This pair has ms
potential energy.

ng 5, Here too.
n@ ha Om

Here too.

Figure 13-8 A system consisting of three par-
ticles. The gravitational potential energy of
the system is the sum of the gravitational
potential energies of all three pairs of
particles.

r

dr
Work is done
as the baseball
FF Moves upward.

P

|

Figure 13-9 A baseball is shot directly away
from Earth, through point P at radial dis-
tance R from Earth’s center. The gravita-
tional force F on the ball and a differential
displacement vector d7 are shown, both di-
rected along a radial r axis.
