Lack of Complete Dominance

Not all alternative alleles are fully
dominant or fully recessive in het-
erozygotes. Some pairs of alleles in-
stead produce a heterozygous pheno-
type that is either intermediate

between those of the parents (incom- CRCR
plete dominance), or representative of

both parental phenotypes (codomi-

nance). For example, in the cross of red » §

and white flowering Japanese four o’-
clocks described in figure 13.18, all the
F; offspring had pink flowers—indicat-
ing that neither red nor white flower
color was dominant. Does this example
of incomplete dominance argue that

 

 

 

 

 

 

cicr cicw
> Sperm
@| € ‘
F; generation
All CRC” cow cw
F. generation
1:2:1
CROP: CRCW.cWCW

Incomplete dominance. In a cross between a red-flowered Japanese four o'clock,

genotype C8C8, and a white-flowered one (C"’C"), neither allele is dominant. The
heterozygous progeny have pink flowers and the genotype C®C”. If two of these

Mendel was wrong? Not at all. When een
two of the F; pink flowers were

crossed, they produced red-, pink-, and

white-flowered plants in a 1:2:1 ratio.

Heterozygotes are simply intermediate pIGURE 13.18

in color.

Environmental Effects

‘The degree to which an allele is ex- Tet pinkwhite).

pressed may depend on the environ-

ment. Some alleles are heat-sensitive, for example. Traits
influenced by such alleles are more sensitive to temperature
or light than are the products of other alleles. The arctic
foxes in figure 13.19, for example, make fur pigment only
when the weather is warm. Similarly, the ch allele in Hi-
malayan rabbits and Siamese cats encodes a heat-sensitive
version of tyrosinase, one of the enzymes mediating the
production of melanin, a dark pigment. The ch version of
the enzyme is inactivated at temperatures above about
33°C. At the surface of the body and head, the temperature
is above 33°C and the tyrosinase enzyme is inactive, while
it is more active at body extremities such as the tips of the
ears and tail, where the temperature is below 33°C. The
dark melanin pigment this enzyme produces causes the
ears, snout, feet, and tail of Himalayan rabbits and Siamese
cats to be black.

FIGURE 13.19

Environmental effects on an allele. (a) An arctic fox in winter
has a coat that is almost white, so it is difficult to see the fox
against a snowy background. (}) In summer, the same fox’s fur
darkens to a reddish brown, so that it resembles the color of the
surrounding tundra. Heat-sensitive alleles control this color
change.

254 PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

heterozygotes are crossed, the phenotypes of their progeny occur in a ratio of 1:2:1

 

 

(b)
