12-2 SOME EXAMPLES OF STATIC EQUILIBRIUM

Sample Problem 12.01

In Fig. 12-5a, a uniform beam, of length L and mass
m= 18 kg, is at rest on two scales. A uniform block, with
mass M = 2.7 kg, is at rest on the beam, with its center a dis-
tance L/4 from the beam’s left end. What do the scales read?

KEY IDEAS

 

The first steps in the solution of any problem about static equi-
librium are these: Clearly define the system to be analyzed
and then draw a free-body diagram of it, indicating all the
forces on the system. Here, let us choose the system as the
beam and block taken together. Then the forces on the system
are shown in the free-body diagram of Fig. 12-5. (Choosing
the system takes experience, and often there can be more than
one good choice.) Because the system is in static equilibrium,
we can apply the balance of forces equations (Eqs. 12-7 and
12-8) and the balance of torques equation (Eq. 12-9) to it.

Calculations: The normal forces on the beam from the scales
are F,on the left and F on the right. The scale readings that we
want are equal to the magnitudes of those forces. The gravita-
tional force oe on the beam acts at the beam’s center of
mass and is equal to mg. Similarly, the gravitational force F. joa.
on the block acts at the block’s center of mass and is equal to
Mg. However, to simplify Fig. 12-5b, the block is repre-
sented by a dot within the boundary of the beam and vector
hee is drawn with its tail on that dot. (This shift of the
vector Fe btock_along its line of action does not alter the
torque due to Fj. about any axis perpendicular to the figure.)

The forces have no x components, so Eq. 12-7
(Fyet,x = 0) provides no information. For the y components,
Eq. 12-8 (Frey = 0) gives us

F,+ F,— Mg— mg =0. (12-18)

This equation contains two unknowns, the forces F;
and F,, so we also need to use Eq. 12-9, the balance of
torques equation. We can apply it to any rotation axis per-
pendicular to the plane of Fig. 12-5. Let us choose a rota-
tion axis through the left end of the beam. We shall also
use our general rule for assigning signs to torques: If a
torque would cause an initially stationary body to rotate
clockwise about the rotation axis, the torque is negative. If
the rotation would be counterclockwise, the torque is posi-
tive. Finally, we shall write the torques in the form r,F,
where the moment arm r, is 0 for F), L/4 for M&, L/2 for mg,
and L for F..

We now can write the balancing equation (Tj... = 0) as

(0)(F) — (L/4)(Mg) — (L2)(mg) + (L)(F,) = 0,

WILEY

Balancing a horizontal beam

333

System ~_

 

 

 

 

 

    
   

The vertical forces balance
but that is not enough.

_ Beam

F,peam = ™E

We must also balance
Ls . torques, with a wise
Foti ™M& choice of rotation axis.
(4)

Figure 12-5 (a) A beam of mass m supports a block of mass M.
(b) A free-body diagram, showing the forces that act on the
system beam + block.

which gives us
F, = 7Mg + 37mg
= 4(2.7kg)(9.8 mis?) + $(1.8 kg)(9.8 m/s)
= 1544N ~15N. (Answer)

Now, solving Eq. 12-18 for F, and substituting this result, we find
F,=(M+m)g—F,
= (2.7 kg + 1.8 kg)(9.8 m/s?) — 15.44N

= 28.66 N = 29 N. (Answer)

Notice the strategy in the solution: When we wrote an equa-
tion for the balance of force components, we got stuck with two
unknowns. If we had written an equation for the balance of
torques around some arbitrary axis, we would have again got-
ten stuck with those two unknowns. However, because we
chose the axis to pass through the point of application of one of
the unknown forces, here F, we did not get stuck. Our choice
neatly eliminated that force from the torque equation, allowing
us to solve for the other unknown force magnitude F,. Then we
returned to the equation for the balance of force components
to find the remaining unknown force magnitude.

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 
