Gravitation Within a Spherical Shell A uniform shell of
matter exerts no net gravitational force on a particle located inside
it. This means that if a particle is located inside a uniform solid
sphere at distance r from its center, the gravitational force exerted
on the particle is due only to the mass that lies inside a sphere of
radius r (the inside sphere). The force magnitude is given by

F= GmM

   

(13-19)
where M is the sphere’s mass and R is its radius.

Gravitational Potential Energy The gravitational potential
energy U(r) of a system of two particles, with masses M and m and
separated by a distance r, is the negative of the work that would be
done by the gravitational force of either particle acting on the other
if the separation between the particles were changed from infinite
(very large) to r. This energy is

__GMm
r

u= (13-21)

(gravitational potential energy).

Potential Energy of a System If a system contains more
than two particles, its total gravitational potential energy U is the
sum of the terms representing the potential energies of all the pairs.
Asan example, for three particles, of masses m;,m , and m3,

u- -( 4 Grums Grams ). (1322)

Mp ns Ns

Escape Speed An object will escape the gravitational pull of
an astronomical body of mass M and radius R (that is, it will reach
an infinite distance) if the object’s speed near the body’s surface is
at least equal to the escape speed, given by

(13-28)

 

<Questions

1 In Fig. 13-21, a central particle of 2M) 4M
2 M
mass M is surrounded by a square ar-

ray of other particles, separated by ei- 7 5M
ther distance d or distance d/2 along 4 y,, é
the perimeter of the square. What are M
the magnitude and direction of the 5. 7M
net gravitational force on the central M
particle due to the other particles? 4M 2M

Figure 13-21 Question 1.

CEG

°
(b) (
Figure 13-22 Question 2.

2 Figure 13-22. shows three
arrangements of the same identical
particles, with three of them placed
on a circle of radius 0.20 m and the
fourth one placed at the center of
the circle. (a) Rank the arrange-
ments according to the magnitude of
the net gravitational force on the
central particle due to the other
three particles, greatest first. (b)
Rank them according to the gravitational potential energy of the
four-particle system, least negative first.

3 In Fig. 13-23, a central particle is surrounded by two circular

QUESTIONS 377

Kepler’s Laws = The motion of satellites, both natural and artifi-
cial,is governed by these laws:

1. The law of orbits. All planets move in elliptical orbits with the
Sun at one focus.

2. The law of areas. A line joining any planet to the Sun sweeps
out equal areas in equal time intervals. (This statement is equiv-
alent to conservation of angular momentum.)

3. The law of periods. The square of the period T of any planet is
proportional to the cube of the semimajor axis a of its orbit. For
circular orbits with radius r,

4r
T=
( GM
where M is the mass of the attracting body—the Sun in the case

of the solar system. For elliptical planetary orbits, the semi-
major axis ais substituted for r.

 

)r (law of periods), (13-34)

Energy in Planetary Motion When a planet or satellite with
mass m moves in a circular orbit with radius r, its potential energy
Vand kinetic energy K are given by

GMm GMm
~~ =.

U=-—
2r

and K= (13-21, 13-38)

The mechanical energy E = K + Uis then
__GMm

 

E= 13-40
oF ( )
For an elliptical orbit of semimajor axis a,
GMm
E=-- . 13-42)
a ( )

Einstein’s View of Gravitation Einstein pointed out that gravi-
tation and acceleration are equivalent. This principle of equivalence
led him to a theory of gravitation (the general theory of relativity) that
explains gravitational effects in terms ofa curvature of space.

rings of particles, at radii r and R,
with R>r. All the particles have
mass m. What are the magnitude
and direction of the net gravita-
tional force on the central particle
due to the particles in the rings?

4 In Fig. 13-24, two particles, of
masses m and 2m, are fixed in place
on an axis. (a) Where on the axis can 7

a third particle of mass 3m be placed

(other than at infinity) so that the Figure 13-23 Question 3.
net gravitational force on it from the
first two particles is zero: to the left
of the first two particles, to their
right, between them but closer to
the more massive particle, or be-
tween them but closer to the less
massive particle? (b) Does the an-
swer change if the third particle has, instead, a mass of 16m? (c) Is
there a point off the axis (other than infinity) at which the net force
on the third particle would be zero?

 

—_—__o——_
m 2m

Figure 13-24 Question 4.
