376 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

Paths of light
Figure 13-20 (a) Light from a distant quasar from quasar
follows curved paths around a galaxy or

a large black hole because the mass of the ‘
galaxy or black hole has curved the adja- \
cent space. If the light is detected, it ap-

pears to have originated along the back-

ward extensions of the final paths (dashed

lines). (b) The Einstein ring known as
MG1131+0456 on the computer screen of a
telescope.The source of the light (actually,

radio waves, which are a form of invisible

light) is far behind the large, unseen galaxy

that produces the ring; a portion of the

source appears as the two bright spots seen

along the ring.

Apparent
quasar directions

Galaxy or
large black hole

Final paths

   

>
§
3
g
2
3
e
g
2
g
zg
S
3
g
2
3
g
g
3
Zz
>
g
8
5

Earth detector

(@ o

 

can bend around the massive structure and toward us (Fig. 13-20a). Then, because
the light seems to be coming to us from a number of slightly different directions
in the sky, we see the same quasar in all those different directions. In some situa-
tions, the quasars we see blend together to form a giant luminous arc, which is
called an Einstein ring (Fig. 13-20b).

Should we attribute gravitation to the curvature of spacetime due to the
presence of masses or to a force between masses? Or should we attribute it to
the actions of a type of fundamental particle called a graviton, as conjectured in
some modern physics theories? Although our theories about gravitation have
been enormously successful in describing everything from falling apples to plane-
tary and stellar motions, we still do not fully understand it on either the cosmo-
logical scale or the quantum physics scale.

Review & Summary

The Law of Gravitation Any particle in the universe attracts _ particle from an extended body is found by dividing the body into

any other particle with a gravitational force whose magnitude is units of differential mass dm, each of which produces a differential
en force dF on the particle, and then integrating to find the sum of

P= or (Newton’s law of gravitation), (13-1) _ those forces:
where m and m) are the masses of the particles, is their separation, R= Je (13-6)

and G (= 6.67 X 10-'! N-m’/kg’) is the gravitational constant.

Gravitational Acceleration § The gravitational acceleration a,
of a particle (of mass m) is due solely to the gravitational force acting
on it. When the particle is at distance r from the center of a uniform,
spherical body of mass M, the magnitude F of the gravitational force
on the particle is given by Eq. 13-1. Thus, by Newton’s second law,

Gravitational Behavior of Uniform Spherical Shells
The gravitational force between extended bodies is found by
adding (integrating) the individual forces on individual particles
within the bodies. However, if either of the bodies is a uniform
spherical shell or a spherically symmetric solid, the net gravita-

 

tional force it exerts on an external object may be computed as if F=ma,, (13-10)
all the mass of the shell or body were located at its center. which gives

. GM
Superposition Gravitational forces obey the principle of su- a, =— (13-11)

perposition; that is, if n particles interact, the net force Fj y.,ona
particle labeled particle 1 is the sum of the forces on it from all the Free-Fall Acceleration and Weight Because Earth’s mass

other particles taken one at a time: is not distributed uniformly, because the planet is not perfectly
= Bo . spherical, and because it rotates, the actual free-fall acceleration g°
Fina = 2 Fn (13-5) of a particle near Earth differs slightly from the gravitational accel-

_ eration @,, and the particle’s weight (equal to mg) differs from the
in which the sum is a vector sum of the forces Fi; on particle — magnitude of the gravitational force on it as calculated by

1 from particles 2, 3,..., n. The gravitational force F; on a Newton's law of gravitation (Eq. 13-1).
