88 With what speed would mail pass through the center of Earth
if falling in a tunnel through the center?

89 SSM The orbit of Earth around the Sun is a/most circular: The
closest and farthest distances are 1.47 x 10° km and 1.52 X 10° km
respectively. Determine the corresponding variations in (a) total
energy, (b) gravitational potential energy, (c) kinetic energy, and
(d) orbital speed. (Hint: Use conservation of energy and conserva-
tion of angular momentum.)

90 A SOkg satellite circles planet Cruton every 6.0 h. The magni-
tude of the gravitational force exerted on the satellite by Cruton is
80N. (a) What is the radius of the orbit? (b) What is the kinetic en-
ergy of the satellite? (c) What is the mass of planet Cruton?

91 We watch two identical astronomical bodies A and B,each of
mass m, fall toward each other from rest because of the gravita-
tional force on each from the other. Their initial center-to-center
separation is R;. Assume that we are in an inertial reference frame
that is stationary with respect to the center of mass of this two-
body system. Use the principle of conservation of mechanical
energy (K;+ U;= K; + U;) to find the following when the center-
to-center separation is 0.5R;: (a) the total kinetic energy of the sys-
tem, (b) the kinetic energy of each body, (c) the speed of each body
relative to us, and (d) the speed of body B relative to body A.

Next assume that we are in a reference frame attached to
body A (we ride on the body). Now we see body B fall from rest to-
ward us. From this reference frame, again use K, + U;= K; + U; to
find the following when the center-to-center separation is 0.5R;:(e)
the kinetic energy of body B and (f) the speed of body B relative
to body A. (g) Why are the answers to (d) and (f) different? Which
answer is correct?

92 A 150.0kg rocket moving radially outward from Earth has a
speed of 3.70 km/s when its engine shuts off 200 km above Earth’s
surface. (a) Assuming negligible air drag acts on the rocket, find
the rocket’s kinetic energy when the rocket is 1000 km above
Earth’s surface. (b) What maximum height above the surface is
reached by the rocket?

93 Planet Roton, with a mass of 7.0 X 10™ kg and a radius of 1600
km, gravitationally attracts a meteorite that is initially at rest relative
to the planet, at a distance great enough to take as infinite. The mete-
orite falls toward the planet. Assuming the planet is airless, find the
speed of the meteorite when it reaches the planet’s surface.

94 Two 20kg spheres are fixed in place on a y axis, one at
y =0.40 m and the other at y = —0.40m. A 10kg ball is then
released from rest at a point on the x axis that is at a great dis-
tance (effectively infinite) from the spheres. If the only forces
acting on the ball are the gravitational forces from the spheres,
then when the ball reaches the (x, y) point (0.30 m, 0), what are
(a) its kinetic energy and (b) the net force on it from the spheres,
in unit-vector notation?

95. Sphere A with mass 80 kg is located at the origin of an xy coordi-
nate system; sphere B with mass 60kg is located at coordinates
(0.25 m, 0); sphere C with mass 0.20 kg is located in the first quadrant
0.20 m from A and 0.15 m from B. In unit-vector notation, what is the
gravitational force on C due to A and B?

96 <%= In his 1865 science fiction novel From the Earth to the
Moon, Jules Verne described how three astronauts are shot to the
Moon by means of a huge gun. According to Verne, the aluminum
capsule containing the astronauts is accelerated by ignition of

PROBLEMS 385

nitrocellulose to a speed of 11 km/s along the gun barrel’s length of
220 m. (a) In g units, what is the average acceleration of the capsule
and astronauts in the gun barrel? (b) Is that acceleration tolerable
or deadly to the astronauts?

A modern version of such gun-launched spacecraft (although
without passengers) has been proposed. In this modern version,
called the SHARP (Super High Altitude Research Project) gun,
ignition of methane and air shoves a piston along the gun’s tube,
compressing hydrogen gas that then launches a rocket. During this
launch, the rocket moves 3.5 km and reaches a speed of 7.0 km/s.
Once launched, the rocket can be fired to gain additional speed. (c)
In g units, what would be the average acceleration of the rocket
within the launcher? (d) How much additional speed is needed
(via the rocket engine) if the rocket is to orbit Earth at an altitude
of 700 km?

97 An object of mass m is initially held in place at radial distance
r = 3R; from the center of Earth, where R; is the radius of Earth.
Let Mg be the mass of Earth. A force is applied to the object to
move it toa radial distance r = 4R, where it again is held in place.
Calculate the work done by the applied force during the move by
integrating the force magnitude.

98 To alleviate the traffic congestion between two cities such as
Boston and Washington, D.C., engineers have proposed building a
rail tunnel along a chord line connecting the cities (Fig. 13-55). A
train, unpropelled by any engine and starting from rest, would fall
through the first half of the tunnel and then move up the second
half, Assuming Earth is a uniform sphere and ignoring air drag and
friction, find the city-to-city travel time.

Figure 13-55 Problem 98.

99 A thin rod with mass M = 5.00 kg is bent

in a semicircle of radius R = 0.650 m (Fig. 13-56). R
(a) What is its gravitational force (both magni-
tude and direction on a particle with mass
m = 3.0 X 10-3 kg at P, the center of curva-
ture? (b) What would be the force on the parti-
cle if the rod were a complete circle?

100 In Rig. 13-57, identical blocks with identical
masses m = 2.00 kg hang from strings of different
lengths on a balance at Earth’s surface. The strings
have negligible mass and differ in length by h =
5.00 cm. Assume Earth is spherical with a uniform
density p = 5.50 g/cm’. What is the difference in the
weight of the blocks due to one being closer to
Earth than the other?

Figure 13-56
Problem 99.

 

 

Figure 13-57
Problem 100.

101 A spaceship is on a straight-line path between Earth and the
Moon. At what distance from Earth is the net gravitational force
on the spaceship zero?
