11-7 ANGULAR MOMENTUM OF A RIGID BODY 311

which is Newton’s second law in angular form. It says:

Oo The net external torque 7,,., acting on a system of particles is equal to the time
rate of change of the system’s total angular momentum L.

Equation 11-29 is analogous to Fg, = dPidt (Eg. 9-27) but requires extra
caution: Torques and the system’s angular momentum must be measured relative
to the same origin. If the center of mass of the system is not accelerating relative
to an inertial frame, that origin can be any point. However, if it is accelerating,
then it must be the origin. For example, consider a wheel as the system of parti-
cles. If it is rotating about an axis that is fixed relative to the ground, then the ori-
gin for applying Eq. 11-29 can be any point that is stationary relative to the
ground. However, if it is rotating about an axis that is accelerating (such as when
it rolls down a ramp), then the origin can be only at its center of mass.

The Angular Momentum of a Rigid Body
Rotating About a Fixed Axis

‘We next evaluate the angular momentum of a system of particles that form a rigid
body that rotates about a fixed axis. Figure 11-15a shows such a body. The fixed axis
of rotation is a z axis, and the body rotates about it with constant angular speed w.
‘We wish to find the angular momentum of the body about that axis.

We can find the angular momentum by summing the z components of the an-
gular momenta of the mass elements in the body. In Fig. 11-15a, a typical mass el-
ement, of mass Am;,moves around the z axis in a circular path. The position of the
mass element is located relative to the origin O by position vector 7;. The radius
of the mass element's circular path is r, ;, the perpendicular distance between the
element and the z axis.

The magnitude of the angular momentum {, of this mass element, with
respect to O,is given by Eq. 11-19:

£1 = (ri)(pi(sin 90°) = (r))(Ami vi),

where p; and v; are the linear momentum and linear speed of the mass element,
and 90° is the angle between 7; and p;. The angular momentum vector {; for the
mass element in Fig. 11-15a is shown in Fig. 11-155; its direction must be perpen-
dicular to those of F; and p;.

The z Components. We are interested in the component of Y, that is parallel
to the rotation axis, here the z axis. That z component is

€, = sin 6 = (r; sin 0)(Am; v;) = r,; Am; v;-

The z component of the angular momentum for the rotating rigid body as a
whole is found by adding up the contributions of all the mass elements that make
up the body. Thus, because v = wr,, we may write

n n n
Ble = D Ami vin = B Amor dni
i= i=

i=

n
= o( Am; ri).
i=l

We can remove w from the summation here because it has the same value for all
points of the rotating rigid body.

The quantity SAm;r7; in Eq. 11-30 is the rotational inertia J of the body
about the fixed axis (see Eq. 10-33). Thus Eq. 11-30 reduces to

 

(11-30)

L=TIw (rigid body, fixed axis). (11-31)

 

(b)

Figure 11-15 (a) A rigid body rotates about a
z axis with angular speed w.A mass ele-
ment of mass Am, within the body moves
about the z axis ina circle with radius r, ;.
The mass element has linear momentum
f;, and it is located relative to the origin

O by position vector 7;. Here the mass
element is shown when r, is parallel to the
x axis. (b) The angular momentum €,, with
respect to O, of the mass element in (a). The
zcomponent ¢;, is also shown.
