13.3. Genes are on chromosomes.

Chromosomes: The Vehicles
of Mendelian Inheritance

Chromosomes are not the only kinds of structures that seg-
regate regularly when eukaryotic cells divide. Centrioles
also divide and segregate in a regular fashion, as do the mi-
tochondria and chloroplasts (when present) in the cyto-
plasm. Therefore, in the early twentieth century it was by
no means obvious that chromosomes were the vehicles of
hereditary information.

The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance

A central role for chromosomes in heredity was first sug-
gested in 1900 by the German geneticist Karl Correns, in
one of the papers announcing the rediscovery of Mendel’s
work. Soon after, observations that similar chromosomes
paired with one another during meiosis led directly to the
chromosomal theory of inheritance, first formulated by
the American Walter Sutton in 1902.

Several pieces of evidence supported Sutton’s theory. One
was that reproduction involves the initial union of only two
cells, egg and sperm. If Mendel’s model were correct, then
these two gametes must make equal hereditary contribu-
tions. Sperm, however, contain little cytoplasm, suggesting
that the hereditary material must reside within the nuclei of
the gametes. Furthermore, while diploid individuals have
two copies of each pair of homologous chromosomes, ga-
metes have only one. This observation was consistent with
Mendel’s model, in which diploid individuals have two
copies of each heritable gene and gametes have one. Finally,
chromosomes segregate during meiosis, and each pair of ho-
mologues orients on the metaphase plate independently of
every other pair. Segregation and independent assortment
were two characteristics of the genes in Mendel’s model.

A Problem with the Chromosomal Theory

However, investigators soon pointed out one problem with
this theory. If Mendelian characters are determined by
genes located on the chromosomes, and if the independent
assortment of Mendelian traits reflects the independent as-
sortment of chromosomes in meiosis, why does the number
of characters that assort independently in a given kind of
organism often greatly exceed the number of chromosome
pairs the organism possesses? This seemed a fatal objec-
tion, and it led many early researchers to have serious
reservations about Sutton’s theory.

Morgan’s White-Eyed Fly

The essential correctness of the chromosomal theory of
heredity was demonstrated long before this paradox was re-

262 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

 

FIGURE 13.29

Red-eyed (normal) and white-eyed (mutant) Drosophila. The
white-eyed defect is hereditary, the result of a mutation in a gene
located on the X chromosome. By studying this mutation,
Morgan first demonstrated that genes are on chromosomes.

solved. A single small fly provided the proof. In 1910
Thomas Hunt Morgan, studying the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster, detected a mutant male fly, one that differed
strikingly from normal flies of the same species: its eyes
were white instead of red (figure 13.29).

Morgan immediately set out to determine if this new
trait would be inherited in a Mendelian fashion. He first
crossed the mutant male to a normal female to see if red or
white eyes were dominant. All of the F, progeny had red
eyes, so Morgan concluded that red eye color was domi-
nant over white. Following the experimental procedure
that Mendel had established long ago, Morgan then
crossed the red-eyed flies from the F; generation with each
other. Of the 4252 F) progeny Morgan examined, 782
(18%) had white eyes. Although the ratio of red eyes to
white eyes in the F) progeny was greater than 3:1, the re-
sults of the cross nevertheless provided clear evidence that
eye color segregates. However, there was something about
the outcome that was strange and totally unpredicted by
Mendel’s theory—all of the white-eyed Fy flies were males!

How could this result be explained? Perhaps it was im-
possible for a white-eyed female fly to exist; such individu-
als might not be viable for some unknown reason. To test
this idea, Morgan testcrossed the female F; progeny with
the original white-eyed male. He obtained both white-eyed
and red-eyed males and females in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, just as
Mendelian theory predicted. Hence, a female could have
white eyes. Why, then, were there no white-eyed females
among the progeny of the original cross?
