364 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

Equation 13-19 can also be written in terms of the force vector F and the
capsule’s position vector F along a radial axis extending from Earth’s center.
Letting K represent the collection of constants in Eq. 13-19, we can rewrite the
force in vector form as

F =~Kkr, (13-20)

in which we have inserted a minus sign to indicate that F and 7 have opposite
directions. Equation 13-20 has the form of Hooke’s law (Eq. 7-20, F = —kd).
Thus, under the idealized conditions of the story, the capsule would oscillate like a
block on a spring, with the center of the oscillation at Earth’s center. After the cap-
sule had fallen from the south pole to Earth’s center, it would travel from the center
to the north pole (as Griffith said) and then back again, repeating the cycle forever.

For the real Earth, which certainly has a nonuniform distribution of mass
(Fig. 13-5), the force on the capsule would initially increase as the capsule de-
scends. The force would then reach a maximum at a certain depth, and only then
would it begin to decrease as the capsule further descends.

13-5 GRAVITATIONAL POTENTIAL ENERGY

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to. . .

 

place), calculate the work done by the force when the

13.11 Calculate the gravitational potential energy of a system
of particles (or uniform spheres that can be treated as
particles).

13.12 Identify that if a particle moves from an initial point to
a final point while experiencing a gravitational force, the
work done by that force (and thus the change in gravita-
tional potential energy) is independent of which path is
taken.

13.13 Using the gravitational force on a particle near an as-
tronomical body (or some second body that is fixed in

Key Ideas
@ The gravitational potential energy U(r) of a system of two
particles, with masses M and m and separated by a distance
r, is the negative of the work that would be done by the gravi-
tational force of either particle acting on the other if the sepa-
ration between the particles were changed from infinite (very
large) to r. This energy is

GMm

r

 

U=-—

(gravitational potential energy).

@ If a system contains more than two particles, its total

gravitational potential energy U is the sum of the terms rep-

body moves.

13.14 Apply the conservation of mechanical energy (includ-
ing gravitational potential energy) to a particle moving rela-
tive to an astronomical body (or some second body that is
fixed in place).

13.15 Explain the energy requirements for a particle to es-
cape from an astronomical body (usually assumed to be a
uniform sphere).

13.16 Calculate the escape speed of a particle in leaving an
astronomical body.

resenting the potential energies of all the pairs. As an
example, for three particles, of masses 7, mM, and mm,
U= -( Gnymy, Gmym,

4, Gms Gon
rn M3 Ms

@ An object will escape the gravitational pull of an astronomi-

cal body of mass M and radius R (that is, it will reach an infi-

nite distance) if the object's speed near the body's surface is

at least equal to the escape speed, given by

»__ 2GM.
a

Gravitational Potential Energy

In Module 8-1, we discussed the gravitational potential energy of a particle—
Earth system. We were careful to keep the particle near Earth’s surface, so that
we could regard the gravitational force as constant. We then chose some reference
configuration of the system as having a gravitational potential energy of zero.
Often, in this configuration the particle was on Earth’s surface. For particles not
