330

CHAPTER 12 EQUILIBRIUM AND ELASTICITY

the z axis. With this assumption, we eliminate one force equation and two torque equa-
tions from Egs. 12-6, leaving

Feet, = 0 (balance of forces), (12-7)
Footy = 0 (balance of forces), (128)
Taet.z = 0 — (balance of torques). (12-9)

Here, T,.:,, is the net torque that the external forces produce either about the
z axis or about any axis parallel to it.

A hockey puck sliding at constant velocity over ice satisfies Eqs. 12-7, 12-8,
and 12-9 and is thus in equilibrium but not in static equilibrium. For static equilib-
rium, the linear momentum P of the puck must be not only constant but also
zero; the puck must be at rest on the ice. Thus, there is another requirement for
static equilibrium:

Oo 3. The linear momentum P of the body must be zero.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

The figure gives six overhead views of a uniform rod on which two or more forces act
perpendicularly to the rod. Ifthe magnitudes of the forces are adjusted properly (but kept
nonzero), in which situations can the rod be in static equilibrium?

= T- TP

(C)

ot ot

 

The Center of Gravity

The gravitational force on an extended body is the vector sum of the gravita-
tional forces acting on the individual elements (the atoms) of the body. Instead of
considering all those individual elements, we can say that

o The gravitational force F, on a body effectively acts at a single point, called the
center of gravity (cog) of the body.

Here the word “effectively” means that if the gravitational forces on the individual
elements were somehow turned off and the gravitational force F, at the center of
gravity were turned on, the net force and the net torque (about any point) acting on
the body would not change.

Until now, we have assumed that the gravitational force F, acts at the center
of mass (com) of the body. This is equivalent to assuming that the center of grav-
ity is at the center of mass. Recall that, for a body of mass M, the force F, is equal
to Mg, where g is the acceleration that the force would produce if the body were
