394

CHAPTER 14 FLUIDS

shown).The force E applied on the left and the downward force E, from the load on
the right produce a change Ap in the pressure of the liquid that is given by

 

FE EF,
Ap =—t=—2
PA AS
Ay
so hk (14-13)

Equation 14-13 shows that the output force F, on the load must be greater than
the input force F; if A, > A;,as is the case in Fig. 14-8.

If we move the input piston downward a distance dj, the output piston moves
upward a distance d,, such that the same volume V of the incompressible liquid is
displaced at both pistons. Then

 

V= Aid; = Ado,
which we can write as
A
d, = d; A, : (14-14)

This shows that, if A, > A; (as in Fig. 14-8), the output piston moves a smaller
distance than the input piston moves.
From Egs. 14-13 and 14-14 we can write the output work as

> A,
w= has= (J AN (a, A). Fd,

which shows that the work W done on the input piston by the applied force is
equal to the work W done by the output piston in lifting the load placed on it.
The advantage of a hydraulic lever is this:

 

 

(14-15)

oO With a hydraulic lever, a given force applied over a given distance can be
transformed to a greater force applied over a smaller distance.

The product of force and distance remains unchanged so that the same work is
done. However, there is often tremendous advantage in being able to exert the
larger force. Most of us, for example, cannot lift an automobile directly but can
with a hydraulic jack, even though we have to pump the handle farther than
the automobile rises and in a series of small strokes.

14-5 arcHIMEDES’ PRINCIPLE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

14.10 Describe Archimedes’ principle.

14.13 For a floating body, relate the gravitational force to the

14.11 Apply the relationship between the buoyant force ona
body and the mass of the fluid displaced by the body.

14.12 For a floating body, relate the buoyant force to the
gravitational force.

Key Ideas

mass of the fluid displaced by the body.
14.14 Distinguish between apparent weight and actual weight.
14.15 Calculate the apparent weight of a body that is fully or
partially submerged.

 

@ Archimedes’ principle states that when a body is fully or
partially submerged in a fluid, the fluid pushes upward with a
buoyant force with magnitude

Fy = myg,
where m,is the mass of the fluid that has been pushed out of
the way by the body.

@ When a body floats in a fluid, the magnitude F, of the
(upward) buoyant force on the body is equal to the magnitude
F, of the (downward) gravitational force on the body.
@ The apparent weight of a body on which a buoyant force
acts is related to its actual weight by

weight,,) = weight — Fy.
