ee
No dark pigment in fur

Yellow Lab

f

eebb eeB_

Yellow fur,
brown nose,
lips, eye rims

Yellow fur,
black nose,
lips, eye rims

E

Dark pigment in fur

f

E bb EBL
Chocolate Lab Black Lab

Brown fur, Black fur,
nose, lips, nose, lips,
eye rims eye rims

 

FIGURE 13.21

The effect of epistatic interactions on coat color in dogs. The coat color seen in Labrador retrievers is an example of the interaction of
two genes, each with two alleles. The E gene determines if the pigment will be deposited in the fur, and the B gene determines how dark

the pigment will be.

Other Examples of Epistasis

In many animals, coat color is the result of epistatic inter-
actions among genes. Coat color in Labrador retrievers, a
breed of dog, is due primarily to the interaction of two
genes. The E gene determines if dark pigment (eumelanin)
will be deposited in the fur or not. If a dog has the geno-
type ee, no pigment will be deposited in the fur, and it will
be yellow. Ifa dog has the genotype EE or Ee (E_), pigment
will be deposited in the fur.

A second gene, the B gene, determines how dark the
pigment will be. This gene controls the distribution of
melanosomes in a hair. Dogs with the genotype E_bb will
have brown fur and are called chocolate labs. Dogs with the
genotype E_B_ will have black fur. But, even in yellow
dogs, the B gene does have some effect. Yellow dogs with

256 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

the genotype eebb will have brown pigment on their nose,
lips, and eye rims, while yellow dogs with the genotype
eeB_will have black pigment in these areas. The interaction
among these alleles is illustrated in figure 13.21. The genes
for coat color in this breed have been found, and a genetic
test is available to determine the coat colors in a litter of

puppies.

A variety of factors can disguise the Mendelian
segregation of alleles. Among them are the continuous
variation that results when many genes contribute to a
trait, incomplete dominance and codominance that
produce heterozygotes unlike either parent,
environmental influences on the expression of
phenotypes, and gene interactions that produce
epistasis.

 

 
