12-2 SOME EXAMPLES OF STATIC EQUILIBRIUM

335

Sample Problem 12.03 Balancing a leaning ladder

In Fig. 12-7a, a ladder of length L = 12m and mass m=
45 kg leans against a slick wall (that is, there is no friction
between the ladder and the wall). The ladder’s upper end is
at height h = 9.3 m above the pavement on which the lower
end is supported (the pavement is not frictionless). The
ladder’s center of mass is L/3 from the lower end, along the
length of the ladder. A firefighter of mass M = 72 kg climbs
the ladder until her center of mass is L/2 from the lower
end. What then are the magnitudes of the forces on the lad-
der from the wall and the pavement?

KEY IDEAS

 

First, we choose our system as being the firefighter and lad-
der, together, and then we draw the free-body diagram of
Fig. 12-7b to show the forces acting on the system. Because
the system is in static equilibrium, the balancing equations
for both forces and torques (Eqs. 12-7 through 12-9) can be
applied to it.

Calculations: In Fig, 12-7b, the firefighter is represented with
a dot within the boundary of the ladder. The gravitational
force on her is represented with its equivalent expression Mg,
and that vector has been shifted along its line of action (the

Frictionless

 

(a)

(d)

line extending through the force vector), so that its tail is on
the dot. (The shift does not alter a torque due to Mg about
any axis perpendicular to the figure. Thus, the shift does not af-
fect the torque balancing equation that we shall be using.)

The only force on the ladder from the wall is the hori-
zontal force F,, (there cannot be a frictional force along a
frictionless wall, so there is no vertical force on the ladder
from the wall). The force EB on the ladder from the pave-
ment has two components: a horizontal component Be that
is a static frictional force and a vertical component Ry that is
anormal force.

To apply the balancing equations, let’s start with the
torque balancing of Eq. 12-9 (Tpet,2 = 0). To choose an axis
about which to calculate the torques, note that we have
unknown forces (F, and ra) at the two ends of the ladder. To
eliminate, say, /, from the calculation, we place the axis at
point O, perpendicular to the figure (Fig. 12-7b). We also
place the origin of an xy coordinate system at O. We can find
torques about O with any of Eqs. 10-39 through 10-41, but
Eq. 10-41 (r=r,F) is easiest to use here. Making a wise
choice about the placement of the origin can make our torque
calculation much easier.

To find the moment arm r, of the horizontal force Fy,
from the wall, we draw a line of action through that vector

 

  
     
 

Here are all
the forces.

Fire-
fighter

Figure 12-7 (a) A firefighter climbs halfway up a ladder that is leaning against a frictionless
wall. The pavement beneath the ladder is not frictionless. (b) A free-body diagram, showing
the forces that act on the firefighter + ladder system. The origin O of a coordinate system is
placed at the point of application of the unknown force F; (whose vector components F,, and
F, are shown). (Figure 12-7 continues on following page.)
