402 CHAPTER 14 FLUIDS

 

yy Input}
1

 

 

(d)

Figure 14-19 Fluid flows at a steady rate
through a length L of a tube, from the
input end at the left to the output end at
the right. From time fin (a) to time t + At
in (b), the amount of fluid shown in
purple enters the input end and the
equal amount shown in green emerges
from the output end.

colored green in Fig. 14-19, emerges at the right (or output) end. The emerging
volume must be the same as the entering volume because the fluid is incompress-
ible, with an assumed constant density p.

Let y;, v;, and p, be the elevation, speed, and pressure of the fluid entering at
the left, and y>, v2, and p> be the corresponding quantities for the fluid emerging
at the right. By applying the principle of conservation of energy to the fluid, we
shall show that these quantities are related by

Pi + 3pVt + poy = Pr + 3pV3 + pBy>- (14-28)

In general, the term 5pv? is called the fluid’s kinetic energy density (kinetic en-
ergy per unit volume). We can also write Eq. 14-28 as

p + 4pv? + pgy = aconstant — (Bernoulli’s equation). (14-29)

Equations 14-28 and 14-29 are equivalent forms of Bernoulli's equation,
after Daniel Bernoulli, who studied fluid flow in the 1700s.* Like the equation of
continuity (Eq. 14-24), Bernoulli’s equation is not a new principle but simply
the reformulation of a familiar principle in a form more suitable to fluid
mechanics. As a check, let us apply Bernoulli’s equation to fluids at rest, by put-
ting v) = v2 = 0 in Eq. 14-28. The result is Eq. 14-7:

P2= Pi + psi ~ Yo):

A major prediction of Bernoulli's equation emerges if we take y to be a
constant (y = 0, say) so that the fluid does not change elevation as it flows. Equation
14-28 then becomes

Pit 30V7 = pot 303, (14-30)
which tells us that:

o If the speed of a fluid element increases as the element travels along a horizontal
streamline, the pressure of the fluid must decrease, and conversely.

Put another way, where the streamlines are relatively close together (where the
velocity is relatively great), the pressure is relatively low, and conversely.

The link between a change in speed and a change in pressure makes sense
if you consider a fluid element that travels through a tube of various widths.
Recall that the element’s speed in the narrower regions is fast and its speed in the
wider regions is slow. By Newton’s second law, forces (or pressures) must cause
the changes in speed (the accelerations). When the element nears a narrow re-
gion, the higher pressure behind it accelerates it so that it then has a greater
speed in the narrow region. When it nears a wide region, the higher pressure
ahead of it decelerates it so that it then has a lesser speed in the wide region.

Bernoulli’s equation is strictly valid only to the extent that the fluid is ideal. If
viscous forces are present, thermal energy will be involved, which here we neglect.

Proof of Bernoulli’s Equation

Let us take as our system the entire volume of the (ideal) fluid shown in
Fig. 14-19. We shall apply the principle of conservation of energy to this system as
it moves from its initial state (Fig. 14-19a) to its final state (Fig. 14-19b). The fluid
lying between the two vertical planes separated by a distance L in Fig. 14-19 does
not change its properties during this process; we need be concerned only with
changes that take place at the input and output ends.

*For irrotational flow (which we assume), the constant in Eq. 14-29 has the same value for all
points within the tube of flow; the points do not have to lie along the same streamline. Similarly,
the points 1 and 2 in Eq. 14-28 can lie anywhere within the tube of flow.
