H A P T CE

Equilibrium and Elasticity

12-1 eEquitisrium

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

12.01 Distinguish between equilibrium and static equilibrium.
12.02 Specify the four conditions for static equilibrium.

Key Ideas

12.03 Explain center of gravity and how it relates to center of
mass.

12.04 For a given distribution of particles, calculate the coor-
dinates of the center of gravity and the center of mass.

 

@ A rigid body at rest is said to be in static equilibrium. For
such a body, the vector sum of the external forces acting on it
is zero:

Fou =0

If all the forces lie in the xy plane, this vector equation is
equivalent to two component equations:

Feet = 9 and Frey = 0

@ Static equilibrium also implies that the vector sum of the
external torques acting on the body about any point is zero, or

(balance of forces).

(balance of forces).

Fret = 0 (balance of torques).

If the forces lie in the xy plane, all torque vectors are parallel
to the z axis, and the balance-of-torques equation is equiva-
lent to the single component equation

Toot,z = 0 (balance of torques).

@ The gravitational force acts individually on each element of
a body. The net effect of all individual actions may be found by
imagining an equivalent total gravitational force F, acting at
the center of gravity. If the gravitational acceleration g is the
same for all the elements of the body, the center of gravity is
at the center of mass.

 

What Is Physics?

Human constructions are supposed to be stable in spite of the forces that act on them.
A building, for example, should be stable in spite of the gravitational force and wind
forces on it, and a bridge should be stable in spite of the gravitational force pulling it
downward and the repeated jolting it receives from cars and trucks.

One focus of physics is on what allows an object to be stable in spite of any
forces acting on it. In this chapter we examine the two main aspects of stability:
the equilibrium of the forces and torques acting on rigid objects and the elasticity
of nonrigid objects, a property that governs how such objects can deform. When
this physics is done correctly, it is the subject of countless articles in physics and
engineering journals; when it is done incorrectly, it is the subject of countless

articles in newspapers and legal journals.

Equilibrium

Consider these objects: (1) a book resting on a table, (2) a hockey puck sliding
with constant velocity across a frictionless surface, (3) the rotating blades of a
ceiling fan, and (4) the wheel of a bicycle that is traveling along a straight path at

constant speed. For each of these four objects,

327
