13.2 Human genetics follows Mendelian principles.

Random changes in genes, called mutations, occur in any
population. These changes rarely improve the functioning
of the proteins those genes encode, just as randomly chang-
ing a wire in a computer rarely improves the computer’s
functioning. Mutant alleles are usually recessive to other al-
leles. When two seemingly normal individuals who are het-
erozygous for such an allele produce offspring homozygous
for the allele, the offspring suffer the detrimental effects of
the mutant allele. When a detrimental allele occurs at a sig-
nificant frequency in a population, the harmful effect it
produces is called a gene disorder.

Most Gene Disorders Are Rare

Tay-Sachs disease is an incurable hereditary disorder in
which the nervous system deteriorates. Affected children
appear normal at birth and usually do not develop symp-
toms until about the eighth month, when signs of mental
deterioration appear. The children are blind within a year
after birth, and they rarely live past five years of age.

Tay-Sachs disease is rare in most human populations,
occurring in only 1 of 300,000 births in the United States.
However, the disease has a high incidence among Jews of
Eastern and Central Europe (Ashkenazi), and among
American Jews, 90% of whom trace their ancestry to East-
ern and Central Europe. In these populations, it is esti-
mated that | in 28 individuals is a heterozygous carrier of
the disease, and approximately 1 in 3500 infants has the
disease. Because the disease is caused by a recessive allele,
most of the people who carry the defective allele do not
themselves develop symptoms of the disease.

The Tay-Sachs allele produces the disease by encoding a
dase A. This
enzyme breaks down gangliosides, a class of lipids occurring
within the lysosomes of brain cells (figure 13.22). As a re-
sult, the lysosomes fill with gangliosides, swell, and eventu-

 

 

nonfunctional form of the enzyme hexosamii

ally burst, releasing oxidative enzymes that kill the cells.
There is no known cure for this disorder.

Not All Gene Defects Are Recessive

Not all hereditary disorders are recessive. Huntington’s
disease is a hereditary condition caused by a dominant al-
lele that leads to the progressive deterioration of brain cells
(figure 13.23). Perhaps I in 24,000 individuals develops the
disorder. Because the allele is dominant, every individual
that carries the allele expresses the disorder. Nevertheless,
the disorder persists in human populations because its
symptoms usually do not develop until the affected individ-
uals are more than 30 years old, and by that time most of
those individuals have already had children. Consequently,
the allele is often transmitted before the lethal condition
develops. A person who is heterozygous for Huntington’s

 

8

Percent of normal enzyme function
8
=

 

 

 

 

 

0
Tay-Sachs Carrier Normal
(homozygous (heterozygous) (homozygous
recessive) dominant)
FIGURE 13.22

Tay-Sachs disease. Homozygous individuals (left bar) typically
have less than 10% of the normal level of hexosaminidase A (right
bar), while heterozygous individuals (middle bar) have about 50%
of the normal level—enough to prevent deterioration of the
central nervous system.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

100

Pa

2

s

€@75p

3

Bs Huntington's

23 disease

zg 50r

=

bs

3

53)

os

2

2 0 10 2 30 40 50 60 70 80
Age in years

FIGURE 13.23

Huntington’s disease is a dominant genetic disorder. It is
because of the late age of onset of this disease that it persists
despite the fact that it is dominant and fatal.

disease has a 50% chance of passing the disease to his or her
children (even though the other parent does not have the
disorder). In contrast, the carrier of a recessive disorder
such as cystic fibrosis has a 50% chance of passing the allele
to offspring and must mate with another carrier to risk
bearing a child with the disease.

 

Most gene defects are rare recessives, although some
are dominant.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 257
