372

 

Figure 13-15 Four orbits with different eccen-
tricities e about an object of mass M. All
four orbits have the same semimajor axis a
and thus correspond to the same total me-
chanical energy E.

This is a plot of a
satellite's energies
versus orbit radius.

Energy

 
    
  

The kinetic energy
is positive.

The potential energy
and total energy
are negative.

Figure 13-16 The variation of kinetic energy
K, potential energy U, and total energy E
with radius r for a satellite in a circular or-
bit. For any value of r,the values of Uand
E are negative, the value of K is positive,
and E= —K.Asr—>~, all three energy
curves approach a value of zero.

CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

The potential energy of the system is given by Eq. 13-21:

GMm
r

 

U=--—

(with U = 0 for infinite separation). Here r is the radius of the satellite’s orbit,
assumed for the time being to be circular, and M and m are the masses of Earth
and the satellite, respectively.

To find the kinetic energy of a satellite in a circular orbit, we write Newton’s
second law (F = ma) as

GMm v
=m— 13-37
Pr me ( )

where v’/ris the centripetal acceleration of the satellite. Then, from Eq. 13-37, the
kinetic energy is

 

 

 

 

 

GMm
K = ba = Gin (13-38)
which shows us that for a satellite in a circular orbit,

K= -2 (circular orbit). (13-39)

The total mechanical energy of the orbiting satellite is

E=KiU= GMm _ GMm

2r r

or E=- ane (circular orbit). (13-40)
r

This tells us that for a satellite in a circular orbit, the total energy E is the negative of
the kinetic energy K:

E=-K (13-41)

For a satellite in an elliptical orbit of semimajor axis a, we can substitute a for rin
Eg. 13-40 to find the mechanical energy:

(circular orbit).

GMm
2a

 

h== (elliptical orbit). (13-42)

Equation 13-42 tells us that the total energy of an orbiting satellite de-
pends only on the semimajor axis of its orbit and not on its eccentricity e. For
example, four orbits with the same semimajor axis are shown in Fig. 13-15; the
same satellite would have the same total mechanical energy E in all four or-
bits. Figure 13-16 shows the variation of K, U, and E with r for a satellite mov-
ing in a circular orbit about a massive central body. Note that as r is increased,
the kinetic energy (and thus also the orbital speed) decreases.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

In the figure here, a space shuttle is initially in a cir-
cular orbit of radius r about Earth. At point P,

the pilot briefly fires a forward-pointing thruster
to decrease the shuttle’s kinetic energy K and me-
chanical energy E. (a) Which of the dashed ellipti-
cal orbits shown in the figure will the shuttle then
take? (b) Is the orbital period Tof the shuttle (the
time to return to P) then greater than, less than, or
the same as in the circular orbit?

 
