320 CHAPTER 11

beetle—disk system, (b) the angular momentum and angular veloc-
ity of the beetle, and (c) the angular momentum and angular velocity
of the disk? (d) What are your answers if the beetle walks in the di-
rection opposite the rotation?

 

8 Figure 11-27 shows an overhead
view of a rectangular slab that can
spin like a merry-go-round about its

 

Q7

 

center at O. Also shown are seven
paths along which wads of bubble
gum can be thrown (all with the
same speed and mass) to stick onto
the stationary slab. (a) Rank the paths according to the angular
speed that the slab (and gum) will have after the gum sticks, great-
est first. (b) For which paths will the angular momentum of the slab
(and gum) about O be negative from

the view of Fig. 11-27? L

 

 

Figure 11-27 Question 8.

9 Figure 11-28 gives the angular mo-
mentum magnitude L of a wheel ver-
sus time ¢. Rank the four lettered time t
intervals according to the magnitude ; 4 ! B ! C ID,
of the torque acting on the wheel,

greatest first. Figure 11-28 Question 9.

10 Figure 11-29 shows a particle moving at constant velocity ¥
and five points with their xy coordinates. Rank the points accord-

<Problems

ROLLING, TORQUE, AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM

ing to the magnitude of the angular momentum of the particle
measured about them, greatest first.

 

Figure 11-29 Question 10.

11 A cannonball and a marble roll smoothly from rest down an
incline. Is the cannonball’s (a) time to the bottom and (b) transla-
tional kinetic energy at the bottom more than, less than, or the
same as the marble’s?

12 A solid brass cylinder and a solid wood cylinder have the
same radius and mass (the wood cylinder is longer). Released to-
gether from rest, they roll down an incline. (a) Which cylinder reaches
the bottom first, or do they tie? (b) The wood cylinder is then short-
ened to match the length of the brass cylinder, and the brass cylinder
is drilled out along its long (central) axis to match the mass of the
wood cylinder. Which cylinder now wins the race, or do they tie?

© __ Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM _ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
+--+ Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

WWW Worked-out solution is at
LW

Interactive solution is at | htip/ miley. com/colege/haliy

“SS Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 11-1 Rolling as Translation and Rotation Combined
°1 Acar travels at 80 km/h ona level road in the positive direction
of an x axis. Each tire has a diameter of 66 cm. Relative to a woman
riding in the car and in unit-vector notation, what are the velocity ¥
at the (a) center, (b) top, and (c) bottom of the tire and the magni-
tude a of the acceleration at the (d) center, (e) top, and (f) bottom
of each tire? Relative to a hitchhiker sitting next to the road and in
unit-vector notation, what are the velocity ¥ at the (g) center,
(h) top, and (i) bottom of the tire and the magnitude a of the
acceleration at the (j) center, (k) top, and (1) bottom of each tire?

°2 An automobile traveling at 80.0 km/h has tires of 75.0 cm di-
ameter. (a) What is the angular speed of the tires about their axles?
(b) If the car is brought to a stop uniformly in 30.0 complete turns
of the tires (without skidding), what is the magnitude of the angu-
lar acceleration of the wheels? (c) How far does the car move dur-
ing the braking?

Module 11-2 Forces and Kinetic Energy of Rolling

*3 SSM A 140kg hoop rolls along a horizontal floor so that the
hoop’s center of mass has a speed of 0.150 m/s. How much work
must be done on the hoop to stop it?

°4 A uniform solid sphere rolls down an incline. (a) What must be
the incline angle if the linear acceleration of the center of the
sphere is to have a magnitude of 0.10g? (b) If a frictionless block
were to slide down the incline at that angle, would its acceleration
magnitude be more than, less than, or equal to 0.10g? Why?

*5 ttw A 1000kg car has four 10 kg wheels. When the car is mov-
ing, what fraction of its total kinetic energy is due to rotation of the
wheels about their axles? Assume.
that the wheels are uniform disks
of the same mass and size. Why do
you not need to know the radius
of the wheels?

v (m/s)

6 Figure 11-30 gives the speed
v versus time ft for a 0.500 kg ob-
ject of radius 6.00cm that rolls
smoothly down a 30° ramp. The 0 02°04 06 08 1
scale on the velocity axis is set by 43)

v, = 4.0 m/s What is the rota- Figure 11-30 Problem 6.
tional inertia of the object?

°°7 tw In Fig. 11-31, a solid cylin-
der of radius 10cm and mass 12 kg
starts from rest and rolls without
slipping a distance L = 6.0m down
a roof that is inclined at angle @=
30°. (a) What is the angular speed of
the cylinder about its center as it
leaves the roof? (b) The roof's edge
is at height H = 5.0 m. How far hori-
zontally from the roof’s edge does
the cylinder hit the level ground?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 11-31 Problem 7.
