398 CHAPTER 14 FLUIDS

14-6 THE EQUATION OF CONTINUITY

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...
14.16 Describe steady flow, incompressible flow, nonviscous

cross-sectional area and flow speed at one point in a tube

flow, and irrotational flow.
14.17 Explain the term streamline.

14.18 Apply the equation of continuity to relate the

Key Ideas

@ An ideal fluid is incompressible and lacks viscosity, and its

flow is steady and irrotational.

@ A streamline is the path followed by an individual fluid particle.

@ A tube of flowis a bundle of streamlines.

@ The flow within any tube of flow obeys the equation of continuity:
Ry=A

v = a constant,

   

1.
2.
Will MeIntyre/Photo Researchers, Inc. 3
Figure 14-12 At a certain point, the rising flow
of smoke and heated gas changes from
steady to turbulent.
4,

to those quantities at a different point.
14.19 Identify and calculate volume flow rate.
14.20 Identify and calculate mass flow rate.

in which Ry is the volume flow rate, A is the cross-sectional
area of the tube of flow at any point, and v is the speed of the
fluid at that point.

@ The mass flow rate R,, is
Ry = pRy = pAv =a constant.

Ideal Fluids in Motion

The motion of real fluids is very complicated and not yet fully understood.
Instead, we shall discuss the motion of an ideal fluid, which is simpler to handle
mathematically and yet provides useful results. Here are four assumptions that
we make about our ideal fluid; they all are concerned with flow:

Steady flow In steady (or laminar) flow, the velocity of the moving fluid at any
fixed point does not change with time. The gentle flow of water near the center
of a quiet stream is steady; the flow in a chain of rapids is not. Figure 14-12 shows
a transition from steady flow to nonsteady (or nonlaminar or turbulent) flow
for a rising stream of smoke. The speed of the smoke particles increases as
they rise and, at a certain critical speed, the flow changes from steady to non-
steady.

Incompressible flow We assume, as for fluids at rest, that our ideal fluid is
incompressible; that is, its density has a constant, uniform value.

Nonviscous flow Roughly speaking, the viscosity of a fluid is a measure of how
resistive the fluid is to flow. For example, thick honey is more resistive to flow than
water, and so honey is said to be more viscous than water. Viscosity is the fluid
analog of friction between solids; both are mechanisms by which the kinetic en-
ergy of moving objects can be transferred to thermal energy. In the absence of fric-
tion, a block could glide at constant speed along a horizontal surface. In the same
way, an object moving through a nonviscous fluid would experience no viscous
drag force—that is, no resistive force due to viscosity; it could move at constant
speed through the fluid. The British scientist Lord Rayleigh noted that in an ideal
fluid a ship’s propeller would not work, but, on the other hand, in an ideal fluid a
ship (once set into motion) would not need a propeller!

Trrotational flow Although it need not concern us further, we also assume
that the flow is irrotational. To test for this property, let a tiny grain of dust
move with the fluid. Although this test body may (or may not) move in a circu-
lar path, in irrotational flow the test body will not rotate about an axis through
its own center of mass. For a loose analogy, the motion of a Ferris wheel is ro-
tational; that of its passengers is irrotational.

We can make the flow of a fluid visible by adding a tracer. This might

be a dye injected into many points across a liquid stream (Fig. 14-13) or smoke
