400 CHAPTER 14 FLUIDS

1
pe
r

eo
po

(a) Time t

I
je

' co

I

ee
(0) Time t+ At

Figure 14-16 Fluid flows at a constant speed v
through a tube. (a) At time f, fluid element e
is about to pass the dashed line. (b) At time
t+ At,element ¢ isa distance Av = v At
from the dashed line.

The volume
flow per
second here
must match ...

 
 
  
 
  
 

   

Ay

 
 

A ... the volume flow

per second here.

Figure 4-17 A tube of flow is defined by the
streamlines that form the boundary of the
tube. The volume flow rate must be the same.
for all cross sections of the tube of flow.

‘We can use this common volume AV to relate the speeds and areas. To do
so, we first consider Fig. 14-16, which shows a side view of a tube of uniform
cross-sectional area A. In Fig. 14-16a, a fluid element e is about to pass through
the dashed line drawn across the tube width. The element’s speed is v, so dur-
ing a time interval Af, the element moves along the tube a distance Ax = v At.
The volume AV of fluid that has passed through the dashed line in that time
interval Aris

AV = AAx = Av At. (14-22)
Applying Eq. 14-22 to both the left and right ends of the tube segment in
Fig. 14-15, we have

AV = Aqy; At = Ayv) At

or Av, = Avy (14-23)

This relation between speed and cross-sectional area is called the equation of
continuity for the flow of an ideal fluid. It tells us that the flow speed increases
when we decrease the cross-sectional area through which the fluid flows.

Equation 14-23 applies not only to an actual tube but also to any so-called
tube of flow, or imaginary tube whose boundary consists of streamlines. Such
a tube acts like a real tube because no fluid element can cross a streamline;
thus, all the fluid within a tube of flow must remain within its boundary.
Figure 14-17 shows a tube of flow in which the cross-sectional area increases
from area A, to area A, along the flow direction. From Eq. 14-23 we know
that, with the increase in area, the speed must decrease, as is indicated by the
greater spacing between streamlines at the right in Fig. 14-17. Similarly, you
can see that in Fig. 14-13 the speed of the flow is greatest just above and just
below the cylinder.

‘We can rewrite Eq. 14-23 as

(equation of continuity).

Ry = Av = aconstant (14-24)

(volume flow rate, equation of continuity),

in which Ry is the volume flow rate of the fluid (volume past a given point per
unit time). Its SI unit is the cubic meter per second (m/s). If the density p of the
fluid is uniform, we can multiply Eq. 14-24 by that density to get the mass flow
rate R,,, (mass per unit time):

Ry = pRy = pAv = aconstant (14-25)

(mass flowrate).

The SI unit of mass flow rate is the kilogram per second (kg/s). Equation 14-25
says that the mass that flows into the tube segment of Fig. 14-15 each second must
be equal to the mass that flows out of that segment each second.

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure shows a pipe and
gives the volume flow rate

(in cm’/s) and the direction of
flow for all but one section.
What are the volume flow
rate and the direction of flow
for that section?

 

iq Fie
