356 CHAPTER 13 GRAVITATION

This is the pull on .
particle 1 due to o
particle 2.

 

Draw the vector with
its tail on particle 1 20,
to show the pulling. _e—

F
1
»

Aunit vector points Zur
along the radial axis. -

 

(©)
Figure 13-2. (a) The gravitational force F
on particle 1 due to particle 2 is an at-
tractive force because particle 1 is at-
tracted to particle 2. (b) Force F is di-
rected along a radial coordinate axis r
extending from particle 1 through par-
ticle 2. (c) F isin the direction of a unit
vector f along the r axis.

 

Figure 13-3 The apple pulls up on Earth
just as hard as Earth pulls down on the

apple.

In Fig. 13-2a, F is the gravitational force acting on particle 1 (mass 1m) due to
particle 2 (mass mm). The force is directed toward particle 2 and is said to be an
attractive force because particle | is attracted toward particle 2. The magnitude
of the force is given by Eq. 13-1. We can describe F as being in the positive direc-
tion of an r axis extending radially from particle 1 through particle 2 (Fig. 13-2).
We can also describe F by using a radial unit vector 7 (a dimensionless vector of
magnitude 1) that is directed away from particle 1 along the r axis (Fig. 13-2c).
From Eq. 13-1, the force on particle 1 is then

Fao. (133)
r

The gravitational force on particle 2 due to particle 1 has the same magnitude
as the force on particle 1 but the opposite direction. These two forces form a
third-law force pair, and we can speak of the gravitational force between the two
particles as having a magnitude given by Eq. 13-1. This force between two parti-
cles is not altered by other objects, even if they are located between the particles.
Put another way, no object can shield either particle from the gravitational force
due to the other particle.

The strength of the gravitational force—that is, how strongly two particles
with given masses at a given separation attract each other—depends on the
value of the gravitational constant G. If G—by some miracle—were suddenly
multiplied by a factor of 10, you would be crushed to the floor by Earth’s
attraction. If G were divided by this factor, Earth’s attraction would be so weak
that you could jump over a building.

Nonparticles. Although Newton’s law of gravitation applies strictly to particles,
we can also apply it to real objects as long as the sizes of the objects are small relative
to the distance between them. The Moon and Earth are far enough apart so that, to
a good approximation, we can treat them both as particles— but what about an apple
and Earth? From the point of view of the apple, the broad and level Earth, stretching
out to the horizon beneath the apple, certainly does not look like a particle.

Newton solved the apple -Earth problem with the shell theorem:

 

o A uniform spherical shell of matter attracts a particle that is outside the shell as if
all the shell’s mass were concentrated at its center.

Earth can be thought of as a nest of such shells, one within another and each shell at-
tracting a particle outside Earth’s surface as if the mass of that shell were at the cen-
ter of the shell. Thus, from the apple’s point of view, Earth does behave like a parti-
cle, one that is located at the center of Earth and has a mass equal to that of Earth.

Third-Law Force Pair. Suppose that, as in Fig. 13-3, Earth pulls down on an
apple with a force of magnitude 0.80 N. The apple must then pull up on Earth
with a force of magnitude 0.80 N, which we take to act at the center of Earth. In
the language of Chapter 5, these forces form a force pair in Newton’s third law.
Although they are matched in magnitude, they produce different accelerations
when the apple is released. The acceleration of the apple is about 9.8 m/s’, the fa-
miliar acceleration of a falling body near Earth’s surface. The acceleration of
Earth, however, measured in a reference frame attached to the center of mass of
the apple—Earth system, is only about 1 x 10-7 m/s”.

lv] Checkpoint 1

A particle is to be placed, in turn, outside four objects, each of mass m: (1) a large uni-
form solid sphere, (2) a large uniform spherical shell, (3) a small uniform solid sphere,
and (4) a small uniform shell. In each situation, the distance between the particle and
the center of the object is d. Rank the objects according to the magnitude of the gravi-
tational force they exert on the particle, greatest first.
