332

CHAPTER 12 EQUILIBRIUM AND ELASTICITY

The right side of this equation gives the coordinate X,q, of the body’s center of
mass (Eq. 9-4). We now have what we sought to prove. If the acceleration of grav-
ity is the same at all locations of the elements in a body, then the coordinates of
the body’s com and cog are identical:

Keog = Kean (12-17)

12-2 soME EXAMPLES OF STATIC EQUILIBRIUM

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

12.05 Apply the force and torque conditions for static
equilibrium.
12.06 Identify that a wise choice about the placement of the

Key Ideas

origin (about which to calculate torques) can simplify the
calculations by eliminating one or more unknown forces
from the torque equation.

 

@ A rigid body at rest is said to be in static equilibrium. For
such a body, the vector sum of the external forces acting on it
is zero:

Faq = 0 (balance of forces).

If all the forces lie in the xy plane, this vector equation is
equivalent to two component equations:

@ Static equilibrium also implies that the vector sum of the
external torques acting on the body about any point is zero, or

Fact = 0 (balance of torques).

If the forces lie in the xy plane, all torque vectors are parallel
to the z axis, and the balance-of-torques equation is equiva-
lent to the single component equation

Foo =O and Fay = 0

(balance of forces).

Tret =O (balance of torques).

 

Some Examples of Static Equilibrium

Here we examine several sample problems involving static equilibrium. In
each, we select a system of one or more objects to which we apply the equa-
tions of equilibrium (Eqs. 12-7, 12-8, and 12-9). The forces involved in the equi-
librium are all in the xy plane, which means that the torques involved are par-
allel to the z axis. Thus, in applying Eq. 12-9, the balance of torques, we select
an axis parallel to the z axis about which to calculate the torques. Although
Eq. 12-9 is satisfied for any such choice of axis, you will see that certain choices
simplify the application of Eq. 12-9 by eliminating one or more unknown force
terms.

Vv] Checkpoint 2

The figure gives an overhead view of a uniform rod in static equilibrium. (a) Can you
find the magnitudes of unknown forces F; and F, by balancing the forces? (b) If you
wish to find the magnitude of force F) by using a balance of torques equation, where
should you place a rotation axis to eliminate F; from the equation? (c) The magnitude
of F, turns out to be 65 N. What then is the magnitude of F,?

20N

 

10N A 30N
