13-6 PLANETS AND SATELLITES: KEPLER’S LAWS

Planets and Satellites: Kepler’s Laws

The motions of the planets, as they seemingly wander against the background of
the stars, have been a puzzle since the dawn of history. The “loop-the-loop”
motion of Mars, shown in Fig. 13-11, was particularly baffling. Johannes Kepler
(1571-1630), after a lifetime of study, worked out the empirical laws that govern
these motions. Tycho Brahe (1546-1601), the last of the great astronomers to
make observations without the help of a telescope, compiled the extensive data
from which Kepler was able to derive the three laws of planetary motion that
now bear Kepler’s name. Later, Newton (1642-1727) showed that his law of
gravitation leads to Kepler’s laws.

In this section we discuss each of Kepler’s three laws. Although here we
apply the laws to planets orbiting the Sun, they hold equally well for satellites,
either natural or artificial, orbiting Earth or any other massive central body.

Oo 1. THE LAW OF ORBITS: All planets move in elliptical orbits, with the Sun at one focus.

Figure 13-12 shows a planet of mass m moving in such an orbit around the Sun,
whose mass is M. We assume that M > m, so that the center of mass of the
planet—Sun system is approximately at the center of the Sun.

The orbit in Fig. 13-12 is described by giving its semimajor axis a and its
eccentricity ¢, the latter defined so that ea is the distance from the center of the
ellipse to either focus F or F’. An eccentricity of zero corresponds to a circle, in
which the two foci merge to a single central point. The eccentricities of the plane-
tary orbits are not large; so if the orbits are drawn to scale, they look circular. The
eccentricity of the ellipse of Fig. 13-12, which has been exaggerated for clarity, is
0.74. The eccentricity of Earth’s orbit is only 0.0167.

o 2. THE LAW OF AREAS: A line that connects a planet to the Sun sweeps out
equal areas in the plane of the planet’s orbit in equal time intervals; that is, the
rate dA/dt at which it sweeps out area A is constant.

Qualitatively, this second law tells us that the planet will move most slowly when
it is farthest from the Sun and most rapidly when it is nearest to the Sun. As it
turns out, Kepler’s second law is totally equivalent to the law of conservation of
angular momentum. Let us prove it.

The area of the shaded wedge in Fig. 13-13a closely approximates the area
swept out in time Af by a line connecting the Sun and the planet, which are
separated by distance r. The area AA of the wedge is approximately the area of

These are the
two momentum
components.

   

The planet sweeps out
this area. rA@

   

(a) @Sesll sees" (d) Teese aeas*
Figure 13-13 (a) In time Ar, the line r connecting the planet to the Sun moves through an
angle Ad,sweeping out an area AA (shaded). (b) The linear momentum 7p of the planet
and the components of p.

369

 

Figure 13-11 The path seen from Earth for the
planet Mars as it moved against a back-
ground of the constellation Capricorn during
1971. The planet’s position on four daysis
marked. Both Mars and Earth are moving in
orbits around the Sun so that we see the
position of Mars relative to us; this relative
motion sometimes results in an apparent

loop in the path of Mars.

 

one of the two
focal points.

Figure 13-12 A planet of mass m moving in

an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The Sun,
of mass M,is at one focus F of the ellipse.
The other focus is F', which is located in
empty space. The semimajor axis a of the
ellipse, the perihelion (nearest the Sun)
distance R,, and the aphelion (farthest
from the Sun) distance R, are also shown.
