13-1 NEWTON'S LAW OF GRAVITATION 355

This force is also responsible for some of the most mysterious structures in
the universe: black holes. When a star considerably larger than our Sun burns
out, the gravitational force between all its particles can cause the star to collapse
in on itself and thereby to form a black hole. The gravitational force at the surface
of such a collapsed star is so strong that neither particles nor light can escape
from the surface (thus the term “black hole”). Any star coming too near a black
hole can be ripped apart by the strong gravitational force and pulled into the
hole. Enough captures like this yields a supermassive black hole. Such mysterious
monsters appear to be common in the universe. Indeed, such a monster lurks at
the center of our Milky Way galaxy—the black hole there, called Sagittarius A*,
has a mass of about 3.7 X 10° solar masses. The gravitational force near this black
hole is so strong that it causes orbiting stars to whip around the black hole, com-
pleting an orbit in as little as 15.2 y.

Although the gravitational force is still not fully understood, the starting
point in our understanding of it lies in the /aw of gravitation of Isaac Newton.

Newton’s Law of Gravitation

Before we get to the equations, let’s just think for a moment about something
that we take for granted. We are held to the ground just about right, not so
strongly that we have to crawl to get to school (though an occasional exam may
leave you crawling home) and not so lightly that we bump our heads on the ceil-
ing when we take a step. It is also just about right so that we are held to the
ground but not to each other (that would be awkward in any classroom) or to the
objects around us (the phrase “catching a bus” would then take on a new mean-
ing). The attraction obviously depends on how much “stuff” there is in ourselves
and other objects: Earth has lots of “stuff” and produces a big attraction but an-
other person has less “stuff” and produces a smaller (even negligible) attraction.
Moreover, this “stuff” always attracts other “stuff,” never repelling it (or a hard
sneeze could put us into orbit).

In the past people obviously knew that they were being pulled downward
(especially if they tripped and fell over), but they figured that the downward
force was unique to Earth and unrelated to the apparent movement of astro-
nomical bodies across the sky. But in 1665, the 23-year-old Isaac Newton recog-
nized that this force is responsible for holding the Moon in its orbit. Indeed he
showed that every body in the universe attracts every other body. This tendency
of bodies to move toward one another is called gravitation, and the “stuff” that
is involved is the mass of each body. If the myth were true that a falling apple
inspired Newton to his law of gravitation, then the attraction is between the
mass of the apple and the mass of Earth. It is appreciable because the mass of
Earth is so large, but even then it is only about 0.8 N. The attraction between
two people standing near each other on a bus is (thankfully) much less (less than
1 uN) and imperceptible.

The gravitational attraction between extended objects such as two people
can be difficult to calculate. Here we shall focus on Newton’s force law between
two particles (which have no size). Let the masses be m, and m) and r be their
separation. Then the magnitude of the gravitational force acting on each due to
the presence of the other is given by

F=G os (ariectalreligenitztinn), (13-1)

 

Gis the gravitational constant:
G = 6.67 X 10°" N-m/kg?
= 6.67 X 107! mi/kg -s*. (13-2)

 

Courtesy NASA.

Figure 13-1 The Andromeda Galaxy.

Located 2.3 X 10° light-years from us, and
faintly visible to the naked eye, it is ver
similar to our home galaxy, the Milky Way.

 
