344

magnitude): (a) the normal force on the ladder from the ground,
(b) the force on the ladder from the wall, (c) the static frictional
force on the ladder from the ground, and (d) the maximum value
fimax Of the static frictional force.

5 Figure 12-18 shows a mobile of toy penguins hanging from a
ceiling. Each crossbar is horizontal, has negligible mass, and ex-
tends three times as far to the right of the wire supporting it as to
the left. Penguin 1 has mass m,; = 48 kg. What are the masses of
(a) penguin 2, (b) penguin 3, and (c) penguin 4?

 

Figure 12-18 Question 5.

6 Figure 12-19 shows an overhead °c
view of a uniform stick on which
four forces act. Suppose we choose
a rotation axis through point O, cal-
culate the torques about that axis
due to the forces, and find that these
torques balance. Will the torques
balance if, instead, the rotation axis is chosen to be at (a) point A
(on the stick), (b) point B (on line with the stick), or (c) point C
(off to one side of the stick)? (d) Suppose, instead, that we find
that the torques about point O do not balance. Is there another
point about which the torques will balance?

7 In Fig. 12-20,a stationary 5 kg rod AC is held
against a wall by a rope and friction between rod
and wall. The uniform rod is 1 m long, and angle
@ = 30°. (a) If you are to find the magnitude of
the force T on the rod from the rope with a sin-
gle equation, at what labeled point should a rota-
tion axis be placed? With that choice of axis and
counterclockwise torques positive, what is the
sign of (b) the torque 7, due to the rod’s weight
and (c) the torque 7, due to the pull on the rod
by the rope? (d) Is the magnitude of 7, greater
than, less than, or equal to the magnitude of r,,?

Figure 12-19 Question 6.

 

Figure 12-20
Question 7.

8 Three pifiatas hang from the
(stationary) assembly of massless
pulleys and cords seen in Fig, 12-21.
One long cord runs from the ceiling
at the right to the lower pulley at
the left, looping halfway around all
the pulleys. Several shorter cords
suspend pulleys from the ceiling or
pifiatas from the pulleys. The
weights (in newtons) of two piiiatas
are given. (a) What is the weight of
the third pifiata? (Hint: A cord that
loops halfway around a pulley pulls
on the pulley with a net force that
is twice the tension in the cord.) (b)

 

Figure 12-21 Question 8.

CHAPTER 12 EQUILIBRIUM AND ELASTICITY

What is the tension in the short cord
labeled with T?

9 In Fig, 12-22, a vertical rod is
hinged at its lower end and attached
toa cable at its upper end. A horizon-
tal force F, is to be applied to the rod
as shown. If the point at which the
force is applied is moved up the rod,
does the tension in the cable increase,
decrease, or remain the same?

Bort

Figure 12-22 Question 9.

10 Figure 12-23 shows a horizon-
tal block that is suspended by two
wires, A and B, which are identical
except for their original lengths. The
center of mass of the block is closer
to wire B than to wire A. (a)
Measuring torques about the
block’s center of mass, state whether
the magnitude of the torque due to wire A is greater than, less
than, or equal to the magnitude of the torque due to wire B. (b)
Which wire exerts more force on the block? (c) If the wires are now
equal in length, which one was originally shorter (before the block
was suspended)?

 

Figure 12-23 Question 10.

11 The table gives the initial lengths of three rods and the
changes in their lengths when forces are applied to their ends to
put them under strain. Rank the rods according to their strain,
greatest first.

Initial Length Change in Length

Rod A 2Ly AL,
RodB 4Ly 2ALy
Rod C 10Ly 4ALy

12 A physical therapist gone wild has constructed the (station-
ary) assembly of massless pulleys and cords seen in Fig. 12-24.
One long cord wraps around all the pulleys, and shorter cords
suspend pulleys from the ceiling or weights from the pulleys.
Except for one, the weights (in newtons) are indicated. (a) What
is that last weight? (Hint: When a cord loops halfway around a
pulley as here, it pulls on the pulley with a net force that is twice
the tension in the cord.) (b) What is the tension in the short cord
labeled T?

 

5 34 23
° 15

Figure 12-24 Question 12.
