13-8 EINSTEIN AND GRAVITATION

rest on Earth (and subject only to Earth’s gravitational force), as in Fig. 13-184,
or accelerating through interstellar space at 9.8 m/s* (and subject only to the
force producing that acceleration), as in Fig. 13-18). In both situations he would
feel the same and would read the same value for his weight on a scale. Moreover,
if he watched an object fall past him, the object would have the same acceleration
relative to him in both situations.

Curvature of Space

We have thus far explained gravitation as due to a force between masses. Einstein
showed that, instead, gravitation is due to a curvature of space that is caused by
the masses. (As is discussed later in this book, space and time are entangled, so
the curvature of which Einstein spoke is really a curvature of spacetime, the
combined four dimensions of our universe.)

Picturing how space (such as vacuum) can have curvature is difficult. An
analogy might help: Suppose that from orbit we watch a race in which two boats
begin on Earth’s equator with a separation of 20km and head due south
(Fig. 13-19a). To the sailors, the boats travel along flat, parallel paths. However,
with time the boats draw together until, nearer the south pole, they touch. The
sailors in the boats can interpret this drawing together in terms of a force acting
on the boats. Looking on from space, however, we can see that the boats draw
together simply because of the curvature of Earth’s surface. We can see this
because we are viewing the race from “outside” that surface.

Figure 13-19b shows a similar race: Two horizontally separated apples are
dropped from the same height above Earth. Although the apples may appear to
travel along parallel paths, they actually move toward each other because they
both fall toward Earth’s center. We can interpret the motion of the apples in
terms of the gravitational force on the apples from Earth. We can also interpret
the motion in terms of a curvature of the space near Earth, a curvature due to the
presence of Earth’s mass. This time we cannot see the curvature because we
cannot get “outside” the curved space, as we got “outside” the curved Earth in
the boat example. However, we can depict the curvature with a drawing like Fig.
13-19c; there the apples would move along a surface that curves toward Earth
because of Earth’s mass.

‘When light passes near Earth, the path of the light bends slightly because of
the curvature of space there, an effect called gravitational lensing. When light
passes a more massive structure, like a galaxy or a black hole having large mass,
its path can be bent more. If such a massive structure is between us and a quasar
(an extremely bright, extremely distant source of light), the light from the quasar

   
  

N
Flat space
far from
Earth
Converging
paths
(a) Ss (d) Ss (o

Figure 13-19 (a) Two objects moving along lines of longitude toward the south pole converge
because of the curvature of Earth’s surface. (b) Two objects falling freely near Earth move
along lines that converge toward the center of Earth because of the curvature of space

near Earth. (c) Far from Earth (and other masses), space is flat and parallel paths remain
parallel. Close to Earth, the parallel paths begin to converge because space is curved by
Earth’s mass.

Parallel paths

375
