328 CHAPTER 12 EQUILIBRIUM AND ELASTICITY

 

Kanwarjit Singh Boparai/Shutterstock

Figure 12-1 A balancing rock. Although its
perch seems precarious, the rock is in static
equilibrium.

Figure 12-2 (a) A domino balanced on one
edge, with its center of mass vertically above
that edge. The gravitational force E on the
dominois directed through the supporting
edge. (b) If the domino is rotated even slightly
from the balanced orientation, then F,, causes
a torque that increases the rotation. (c) A
domino upright on a narrow side is
somewhat more stable than the domino in
(a). (a) A square block is even more stable.

1. The linear momentum P of its center of mass is constant.

2. Its angular momentum L about its center of mass, or about any other point, is
also constant.

We say that such objects are in equilibrium. The two requirements for
equilibrium are then

P=aconstant and L = aconstant. (12-1)

Our concern in this chapter is with situations in which the constants in
Eg. 12-1 are zero; that is, we are concerned largely with objects that are not mov-
ing in any way—either in translation or in rotation—in the reference frame
from which we observe them. Such objects are in static equilibrium. Of the four
objects mentioned near the beginning of this module, only one—the book rest-
ing on the table—is in static equilibrium.

The balancing rock of Fig. 12-1 is another example of an object that, for the
present at least, is in static equilibrium. It shares this property with countless
other structures, such as cathedrals, houses, filing cabinets, and taco stands, that
remain stationary over time.

As we discussed in Module 8-3, if a body returns to a state of static equilib-
rium after having been displaced from that state by a force, the body is said to be
in stable static equilibrium. A marble placed at the bottom of a hemispherical
bowl is an example. However, if a small force can displace the body and end the
equilibrium, the body is in unstable static equilibrium.

A Domino. For example, suppose we balance a domino with the domino’s
center of mass vertically above the supporting edge, as in Fig. 12-2a. The torque
about the supporting edge due to the gravitational force F, on the domino is
zero because the line of action of Ri is through that edge. Thus, the domino is in
equilibrium. Of course, even a slight force on it due to some chance distur-
bance ends the equilibrium. As the line of action of E moves to one side of
the supporting edge (as in Fig. 12-2), the torque due to Ri increases the rota-
tion of the domino. Therefore, the domino in Fig. 12-2a is in unstable static
equilibrium.

The domino in Fig. 12-2c is not quite as unstable. To topple this domino,
a force would have to rotate it through and then beyond the balance position of
Fig. 12-2a, in which the center of mass is above a supporting edge. A slight force
will not topple this domino, but a vigorous flick of the finger against the domino
certainly will. (If we arrange a chain of such upright dominos, a finger flick
against the first can cause the whole chain to fall.) a

A Block. The child’s square block in Fig. 12-2d is even more stable because
its center of mass would have to be moved even farther to get it to pass above a
supporting edge. A flick of the finger may not topple the block. (This is why you

To tip the block, the center of mass must
pass over the supporting edge.

=

Supporting
edge

(a) (d) ( (a
