to fall freely. In the proof that follows, we show that

ke] If gis the same for all elements of a body, then the body’s center of gravity (cog)
is coincident with the body’s center of mass (com).

This is approximately true for everyday objects because g varies only a little
along Earth’s surface and decreases in magnitude only slightly with altitude.
Thus, for objects like a mouse or a moose, we have been justified in assuming that
the gravitational force acts at the center of mass. After the following proof, we
shall resume that assumption.

Proof

First, we consider the individual elements of the body. Figure 12-4a shows an
extended body, of mass M, and one of its elements, of mass m;. A gravitational
force Fy acts on each such element and is equal to mjg;. The subscript on g;
means ; is the gravitational acceleration at the location of the element i (it can be
different for other elements).

For the body in Fig. 12-4a, each force E, acting on an element produces a
torque 7; on the element about the origin O, with a moment arm x;. Using Eq. 10-
41 (r= r,F) asa guide, we can write each torque 7; as

7 = Fe (12-10)
The net torque on all the elements of the body is then
Tet = LH = LDF yi (12-11)

Next, we consider the body as a whole. Figure 12-4b shows the gravitational
force F, acting at the body’s center of gravity. This force produces a torque 7on
the body about O, with moment arm X,o.. Again using Eq. 10-41, we can write this
torque as

 

T= Keogh. (12-12)

The gravitational force EB on the body is equal to the sum of the gravitational
forces E; on all its elements, so we can substitute =F; for F, in Eq. 12-12 to write

7 = Xeog DF (12-13)

Now recall that the torque due to force F; acting at the center of gravity
is equal to the net torque due to all the forces F, acting on all the elements of
the body. (That is how we defined the center of gravity.) Thus, rin Eq. 12-13 is
equal to 7,.; in Eq. 12-11. Putting those two equations together, we can write

Xeog DF = LIF.
Substituting m;g; for F,; gives us
Xeog DIMiSi = LXIMSi- (12-14)

Now here is a key idea: If the accelerations g; at all the locations of the elements
are the same, we can cancel g; from this equation to write

Xap Ym; = Sami (12-15)

The sum =m; of the masses of all the elements is the mass M of the body.
Therefore, we can rewrite Eq. 12-15 as

1
Xcog = tne (12-16)

12-1 EQUILIBRIUM 331

   
  

i

1
}/-Line of
7 action

  

Line of
Moment action

(4)

Figure 12-4 (a) An element of mass m;in an
extended body. The gravitational force F;
on the element has moment arm x; about
the origin O of the coordinate system. (b)
The gravitational force F, ona body is said
to act at the center of gravity (cog) of the
body. Here F, has moment arm x,,, about
origin O.
