Mendelian Inheritance Is Not
Always Easy to Analyze

Although Mendel’s results did not receive much notice
during his lifetime, three different investigators indepen-
dently rediscovered his pioneering paper in 1900, 16 years
after his death. They came across it while searching the lit-
erature in preparation for publishing their own findings,
which closely resembled those Mendel had presented more
than three decades earlier. In the decades following the re-
discovery of Mendel, many investigators set out to test
Mendel’s ideas. However, scientists attempting to confirm
Mendel’s theory often had trouble obtaining the same sim-
ple ratios he had reported. Often, the expression of the
genotype is not straightforward. Most phenotypes reflect
the action of many genes that act sequentially or jointly,
and the phenotype can be affected by alleles that lack com-
plete dominance and the environment.

Continuous Variation

Few phenotypes are the result of the action of only one
gene. Instead, most characters reflect the action of poly-
genes, many genes that act sequentially or jointly. When
multiple genes act jointly to influence a character such as
height or weight, the character often shows a range of small
differences. Because all of the genes that play a role in de-
termining phenotypes such as height or weight segregate
independently of one another, one sees a gradation in the
degree of difference when many individuals are examined
(figure 13.17). We call this gradation continuous varia-
tion. The greater the number of genes that influence a
character, the more continuous the expected distribution of
the versions of that character.

How can one describe the variation in a character such
as the height of the individuals in figure 13.17? Individuals
range from quite short to very tall, with average heights
more common than either extreme. What one often does is
to group the variation into categories—in this case, by
measuring the heights of the individuals in inches, round-
ing fractions of an inch to the nearest whole number. Each
height, in inches, is a separate phenotypic category. Plot-
ting the numbers in each height category produces a his-
togram, such as that in figure 13.17. The histogram ap-
proximates an idealized bell-shaped curve, and the variation
can be characterized by the mean and spread of that curve.

Pleiotropic Effects

Often, an individual allele will have more than one effect
on the phenotype. Such an allele is said to be pleiotropic.
When the pioneering French geneticist Lucien Cuenot
studied yellow fur in mice, a dominant trait, he was unable
to obtain a true-breeding yellow strain by crossing individ-
ual yellow mice with each other. Individuals homozygous
for the yellow allele died, because the yellow allele was

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30
a =
gs
= 2+
£
S
3 10-4
€
5
a
0 T — T T =
510" 516" 60"
Height
FIGURE 13.17

Height is a continuously varying trait. The photo shows
variation in height among students of the 1914 class of the
Connecticut Agricultural College. Because many genes
contribute to height and tend to segregate independently of one
another, the cumulative contribution of different combinations
of alleles to height forms a continuous distribution of possible
height, in which the extremes are much rarer than the
intermediate values.

 

pleiotropic: one effect was yellow coat color, but another
was a lethal developmental defect. A pleiotropic allele may
be dominant with respect to one phenotypic consequence
(yellow fur) and recessive with respect to another (lethal
developmental defect). In pleiotropy, one gene affects
many traits, in marked contrast to polygeny, where many
genes affect one trait. Pleiotropic effects are difficult to
predict, because the genes that affect a trait often perform
other functions we may know nothing about.

Pleiotropic effects are characteristic of many inherited
disorders, such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia, both
discussed later in this chapter. In these disorders, multiple
symptoms can be traced back to a single gene defect. In cys-
tic fibrosis, patients exhibit clogged blood vessels, overly
sticky mucus, salty sweat, liver and pancreas failure, and a
battery of other symptoms. All are pleiotropic effects of a
single defect, a mutation in a gene that encodes a chloride
ion transmembrane channel. In sickle cell anemia, a defect
in the oxygen-carrying hemoglobin molecule causes anemia,
heart failure, increased susceptibility to pneumonia, kidney
failure, enlargement of the spleen, and many other symp-
toms. It is usually difficult to deduce the nature of the pri-
mary defect from the range of a gene’s pleiotropic effects.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 253
