Multiple Alleles: The ABO
Blood Groups

Agene may have more than two alleles in a population, and
most genes possess several different alleles. Often, no single
allele is dominant; instead, each allele has its own effect,
and the alleles are considered codominant.

A human gene with more than one codominant allele is
the gene that determines ABO blood type. This gene en-
codes an enzyme that adds sugar molecules to lipids on the
surface of red blood cells. These sugars act as recognition
markers for the immune system. The gene that encodes the
enzyme, designated J, has three common alleles: J’, whose
product adds galactose; I4, whose product adds galac-
tosamine; and i, which codes for a protein that does not add
a sugar.

Different combinations of the three I gene alleles occur
in different individuals because each person possesses two
copies of the chromosome bearing the I gene and may be
homozygous for any allele or heterozygous for any two. An
individual heterozygous for the I‘ and I alleles produces
both forms of the enzyme and adds both galactose and
galactosamine to the surfaces of red blood cells. Because
both alleles are expressed simultaneously in heterozygotes,
the /* and J alleles are codominant. Both I‘ and 8 are
dominant over the i allele because both [ or P alleles lead
to sugar addition and the / allele does not. The different
combinations of the three alleles produce four different

phenotypes (figure 13.24):

1. Type A individuals add only galactosamine. They are
either Al4 homozygotes or Hi heterozygotes.

2. Type B individuals add only galactose. They are ei-
ther 78 homozygotes or I®j heterozygotes.

3. Type AB individuals add both sugars and are F® het-
erozygotes.

4. Type O individuals add neither sugar and are ii’ ho-
mozygotes.

These four different cell surface phenotypes are called
the ABO blood groups or, less commonly, the Land-
steiner blood groups, after the man who first described
them. As Landsteiner noted, a person’s immune system
can distinguish between these four phenotypes. If a type A
individual receives a transfusion of type B blood, the recip-
ient’s immune system recognizes that the type B blood
cells possess a “foreign” antigen (galactose) and attacks the
donated blood cells, causing the cells to clump, or aggluti-
nate. This also happens if the donated blood is type AB.
However, if the donated blood is type O, no immune at-
tack will occur, as there are no galactose antigens on the
surfaces of blood cells produced by the type O donor. In
general, any individual’s immune system will tolerate a
transfusion of type O blood. Because neither galactose nor
galactosamine is foreign to type AB individuals (whose red
blood cells have both sugars), those individuals may re-
ceive any type of blood.

258 PartIV Reproduction and Heredity

Possible alleles from female

@®-@-o0

    
 

 

 

 

2
%
E
— or
g
38 ® BB Bi
3
Ss
2
2 or
3
@ w |

 

 

 

 

 

 

Blood types [AM [28] B °

FIGURE 13.24

Multiple alleles control the ABO blood groups. Different
combinations of the three J gene alleles result in four different
blood type phenotypes: type A (either ‘J homozygotes or [i
heterozygotes), type B (either 2/8 homozygotes or i
heterozygotes), type AB (‘8 heterozygotes), and type O

(i homozygotes).

 

 

 

 

The Rh Blood Group

Another set of cell surface markers on human red blood
cells are the Rh blood group antigens, named for the rhe-
sus monkey in which they were first described. About 85%
of adult humans have the Rh cell surface marker on their
red blood cells, and are called Rh-positive. Rh-negative
persons lack this cell surface marker because they are ho-
mozygous for the recessive gene encoding it.

If an Rh-negative person is exposed to Rh-positive
blood, the Rh surface antigens of that blood are treated like
foreign invaders by the Rh-negative person’s immune sys-
tem, which proceeds to make antibodies directed against
the Rh antigens. This most commonly happens when an
Rh-negative woman gives birth to an Rh-positive child
(whose father is Rh-positive). At birth, some fetal red blood
cells cross the placental barrier and enter the mother’s
bloodstream, where they induce the production of “anti-
Rh” antibodies. In subsequent pregnancies, the mother’s
antibodies can cross back to the new fetus and cause its red
blood cells to clump, leading to a potentially fatal condition
called erythroblastosis fetalis.

 

Many blood group genes possess multiple alleles,
several of which may be common.

 
