11-9 PRECESSION OF A GYROSCOPE 317

11-9 PRECESSION OF A GYROSCOPE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

11.26 Identify that the gravitational force acting on a spinning 11.27 Calculate the precession rate of a gyroscope.
gyroscope causes the spin angular momentum vector (and 11.28 Identify that a gyroscope's precession rate is
thus the gyroscope) to rotate about the vertical axis in a independent of the gyroscope’s mass.

motion called precession.

 

 

Key Idea

@ A spinning gyroscope can precess about a vertical axis through its support at the rate
_ Mgr
Tw?

where M is the gyroscope's mass, r is the moment arm, / is the rotational inertia, and w is the spin rate.

Precession of a Gyroscope

A simple gyroscope consists of a wheel fixed to a shaft and free to spin about the
axis of the shaft. If one end of the shaft of a nonspinning gyroscope is placed on a
support as in Fig. 11-22a and the gyroscope is released, the gyroscope falls by rotat-
ing downward about the tip of the support. Since the fall involves rotation, it is gov-
erned by Newton’s second law in angular form, which is given by Eq. 11-29:
aL

dt*
This equation tells us that the torque causing the downward rotation (the fall)
changes the angular momentum L of the gyroscope from its initial value of zero.
The torque 7 is due to the gravitational force Mg acting at the gyroscope’s center
of mass, which we take to be at the center of the wheel. The moment arm relative to
the support tip, located at O in Fig. 11-22a,is F. The magnitude of 7 is

t= Mersin 90° = Mgr (11-42)

(because the angle between Mg and F is 90°), and its direction is as shown in
Fig. 11-22a.

A rapidly spinning gyroscope behaves differently. Assume it is released with
the shaft angled slightly upward. It first rotates slightly downward but then, while
it is still spinning about its shaft, it begins to rotate horizontally about a vertical
axis through support point O in a motion called precession.

Why Not Just Fall Over? Why does the spinning gyroscope stay aloft instead
of falling over like the nonspinning gyroscope? The clue is that when the spinning
gyroscope is released, the torque due to Mg must change not an initial angular mo-
mentum of zero but rather some already existing nonzero angular momentum due
to the spin.

To see how this nonzero initial angular momentum leads to precession, we first
consider the angular momentum L of the gyroscope due to its spin. To simplify the
situation, we assume the spin rate is so rapid that the angular momentum due to pre-
cession is negligible relative to L. We also assume the shaft is horizontal when pre-
cession begins, as in Fig, 11-22b. The magnitude of L is given by Eq. 11-31:

L=Ie, (11-43)

where J is the rotational moment of the gyroscope about its shaft and w is the an-
gular speed at which the wheel spins about the shaft. The vector L points along

the shaft, as in Fig. 11-22b. Since L is parallel to 7, torque 7 must be
perpendicular to L.

7=

(11-41)

   

Mg Support
(a)

 

Gircular path
taken by head
of Lyector

 

iC)

Figure 11-22 (a) Anonspinning gyroscope
falls by rotating in an xz plane because of
torque 7.(b) A rapidly spinning gyroscope,
with angular momentum L, precesses
around the z axis. Its precessional motion is
in the xy plane. (c) The change dZ/dtin
angular momentum leads to a rotation of L.
about O.
