15-1 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION 417

The amplitudes are different, The amplitudes are the
but the frequency and same, but the frequencies

Displacement
2
Displacement

(@) (0)

Figure 15-5 In all three cases, the blue curve is obtained
from Eq. 15-3 with ¢ = 0. (a) The red curve differs from x
the blue curve only in that the red-curve amplitude x’, is
greater (the red-curve extremes of displacement are high-
er and lower). (b) The red curve differs from the blue
curve only in that the red-curve period is T’ = T/2 (the red
curve is compressed horizontally). (c) The red curve dif-
fers from the blue curve only in that for the red curve

= —7/4 rad rather than zero (the negative value of 4
shifts the red curve to the right).

Displacement

 

‘We've had a lot of quantities here, quantities that we could experimentally
change to see the effects on the particle’s SHM. Figure 15-5 gives some examples.
The curves in Fig. 15-5a show the effect of changing the amplitude. Both curves
have the same period. (See how the “peaks” line up?) And both are for ¢ = 0. (See
how the maxima of the curves both occur at t = 0?) In Fig. 15-5b, the two curves
have the same amplitude x,, but one has twice the period as the other (and thus half
the frequency as the other). Figure 15-5c is probably more difficult to understand.
The curves have the same amplitude and same period but one is shifted relative to
the other because of the different ¢ values. See how the one with ¢ = 0 is just a reg-
ular cosine curve? The one with the negative ¢is shifted rightward from it. That isa
general result: negative ¢ values shift the regular cosine curve rightward and posi-
tive values shift it leftward. (Try this on a graphing calculator.)

Vv Checkpoint 1

A particle undergoing simple harmonic oscillation of period T (like that in Fig. 15-2) is
at —x,, at time ¢ = 0. Isit at —x,,, at +x,,, at 0,between —x,, and 0, or between 0 and
+Xm when (a) t = 2.00T, (b) t = 3.507, and (c) t = 5.25T?

The Velocity of SHM

We briefly discussed velocity as shown in Fig. 15-2b, finding that it varies in magni-
tude and direction as the particle moves between the extreme points (where the
speed is momentarily zero) and through the central point (where the speed is maxi-
mum). To find the velocity v(t) as a function of time, let’s take a time derivative of
the position function x(¢) in Eq. 15-3:

109) = BO. = © frp costar + 0)]
or V(t) = — aX, sin(wt + b) (velocity). (15-6)

The velocity depends on time because the sine function varies with time,
between the values of +1 and —1. The quantities in front of the sine function

 

period are the same. x and periods are different.

 

This negative value
shifts the cosine
curve rightward.

This zero gives a
() regular cosine curve.
