498 CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

Sample Problem 17.06 Beat frequencies and penguins finding one another

‘When an emperor penguin returns from a search for food,
how can it find its mate among the thousands of penguins
huddled together for warmth in the harsh Antarctic
weather? It is not by sight, because penguins all look alike,
even to a penguin.

The answer lies in the way penguins vocalize. Most birds
vocalize by using only one side of their two-sided vocal or-
gan, called the syrinx. Emperor penguins, however, vocalize
by using both sides simultaneously. Each side sets up
acoustic standing waves in the bird’s throat and mouth,
much like in a pipe with two open ends. Suppose that the
frequency of the first harmonic produced by side A is f4, =
432 Hz and the frequency of the first harmonic produced by
side B is fg, = 371 Hz. What is the beat frequency between
those two first-harmonic frequencies and between the two
second-harmonic frequencies? =

KEY IDEA

 

The beat frequency between two frequencies is their differ-
ence, as given by Eq. 17-46 (fieat = fi — f)-
Calculations: For the two first-harmonic frequencies f4;
and fp), the beat frequency is

Foeata = far — fn = 432 Hz — 371 Hz

= 61 Hz. (Answer)

17-7 THE DOPPLER EFFECT

Learning Objectives

Because the standing waves in the penguin are effec-
tively in a pipe with two open ends, the resonant frequencies
are given by Eq. 17-39 (f=nv/2L), in which L is the
(unknown) length of the effective pipe. The first-harmonic
frequency is f, = v/2L, and the second-harmonic frequency
is fy = 2v/2L. Comparing these two frequencies, we see that,
in general,

f= fr

For the penguin, the second harmonic of side A has
frequency f49 = 2f4; and the second harmonic of side B has
frequency fg. = 2fg. Using Eq. 17-46 with frequencies
fs. and fy, we find that the corresponding beat frequency as-
sociated with the second harmonics is

Foeat2 = fa2 — feo = 2far — 2fer
= 2(432 Hz) — 2(371 Hz)

= 122 Hz. (Answer)

Experiments indicate that penguins can perceive such large
beat frequencies. (Humans cannot hear a beat frequency
any higher than about 12 Hz — we perceive the two sepa-
rate frequencies.) Thus, a penguin’s cry can be rich with dif-
ferent harmonics and different beat frequencies, allowing
the voice to be recognized even among the voices of thou-
sands of other, closely huddled penguins.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

After reading this module, you should be able to.

17.31 Identify that the Doppler effect is the shift in the de-
tected frequency from the frequency emitted by a sound
source due to the relative motion between the source and
the detector.

17.32 Identify that in calculating the Doppler shift in sound,
the speeds are measured relative to the medium (such as
air or water), which may be moving.

17.33 Calculate the shift in sound frequency for (a) a source

 

Key Ideas

@ The Doppler effect is a change in the observed frequency of
a wave when the source or the detector moves relative to the
transmitting medium (such as air). For sound the observed fre-
quency f’ is given in terms of the source frequency f by

f=f

vivp

 

eneral Doppler effect),
v= vs (g pp )

moving either directly toward or away from a stationary
detector, (b) a detector moving either directly toward or
away from a stationary source, and (c) both source and
detector moving either directly toward each other or
directly away from each other.

17.34 Identify that for relative motion between a sound source
and a sound detector, motion toward tends to shift the
frequency up and motion away tends to shift it down.

where Vp is the speed of the detector relative to the medium,
Vs is that of the source, and v is the speed of sound in the
medium.

@ The signs are chosen such that f’ tends to be greater for
relative motion toward (one of the objects moves toward the
other) and /ess for motion away.

 
