Human Chromosomes

Each human somatic cell normally has 46 chromosomes,
which in meiosis form 23 pairs. By convention, the chro-
mosomes are divided into seven groups (designated A
through G), each characterized by a different size, shape,
and appearance. The differences among the chromosomes
are most clearly visible when the chromosomes are
arranged in order in a karyotype (figure 13.35). Tech-
niques that stain individual segments of chromosomes with
different-colored dyes make the identification of chromo-
somes unambiguous. Like a fingerprint, each chromosome
always exhibits the same pattern of colored bands.

Human Sex Chromosomes

Of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes, 22 are perfectly

matched in both males and females and are called auto-
somes. The remaining pair, the sex chromosomes, con-
sist of two similar chromosomes in females and two dissim-
ilar chromosomes in males. In humans, females are
designated XX and males XY. One of the sex chromosomes
in the male (the Y chromosome) is highly condensed and
bears few functional genes. Because few genes on the Y
chromosome are expressed, recessive alleles on a male’s
single X chromosome have no active counterpart on the Y
chromosome. Some of the active genes the Y chromosome
does possess are responsible for the features associated with
“maleness” in humans. Consequently, any individual with
at least one Y chromosome is a male.

 

Sex Chromosomes in Other Organisms

The structure and number of sex chromosomes vary in dif-
ferent organisms (table 13.4). In the fruit fly Drosophila, fe-
males are XX and males XY, as in humans and most other

 

vertebrates. However, in birds, the male has two Z chro-
mosomes, and the female has a Z and a W chromosome. In
some insects, such as grasshoppers, there is no Y chromo-
some—females are XX and males are characterized as XO
(the O indicates the absence of a chromosome).

Sex Determination

In humans a specific gene located on the Y chromosome
known as SRY plays a key role in development of male sex-
ual characteristics. This gene is expressed early in develop-
ment, and acts to masculinize genitalia and secondary sex
ual organs that would otherwise be female. Lacking a Y
chromosome, females fail to undergo these changes.

Among fishes and in some species of reptiles, environ-
mental changes can cause changes in the expression of
this sex-determining gene, and thus of the sex of the
adult individual.

 

268 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

FIGURE 13.35
A human karyotype. This karyotype shows the colored banding
patterns, arranged by class A~

 

Table 13.4 Sex Determination in Some Organisms
Female Male

 

Humans, Drosophila XX XY
Birds Zw ZZ
Grasshoppers PxOXG xO
Honeybees Diploid Haploid
