Key Ideas

e@ Asimple pendulum consists of a rod of negligible mass that
pivots about its upper end, with a particle (the bob) attached
at its lower end. If the rod swings through only small angles,
its motion is approximately simple harmonic motion with a pe-
riod given by

T = 2m, t (simple pendulum),
mgL

where J is the particle's rotational inertia about the pivot, m is
the particle's mass, and L is the rod’s length.

15-4 PENDULUMS, CIRCULAR MOTION 425

@ A physical pendulum has a more complicated distribution
of mass. For small angles of swinging, its motion is simple
harmonic motion with a period given by

I
T=27, gh (physical pendulum),

where J is the pendulum’s rotational inertia about the pivot, m
is the pendulum's mass, and /1 is the distance between the
pivot and the pendulum’s center of mass.

@ Simple harmonic motion corresponds to the projection of
uniform circular motion onto a diameter of the circle.

Pendulums

We turn now to a class of simple harmonic oscillators in which the springiness is
associated with the gravitational force rather than with the elastic properties of
a twisted wire or a compressed or stretched spring.

The Simple Pendulum

If an apple swings on a long thread, does it have simple harmonic motion? If so,
what is the period T? To answer, we consider a simple pendulum, which consists
of a particle of mass m (called the bob of the pendulum) suspended from one end
of an unstretchable, massless string of length L that is fixed at the other end, as in
Fig. 15-11a.The bob is free to swing back and forth in the plane of the page, to the
left and right of a vertical line through the pendulum’s pivot point.

The Restoring Torque. The forces acting on the bob are the force T from the
string and the gravitational force F,, as shown in Fig. 15-11, where the string makes
an angle @ with the vertical. We resolve F, into a radial component F, cos and a
component F, sin @that is tangent to the path taken by the bob. This tangential com-
ponent produces a restoring torque about the pendulum’s pivot point because the
component always acts opposite the displacement of the bob so as to bring the bob
back toward its central location. That location is called the equilibrium position
(@ = 0) because the pendulum would be at rest there were it not swinging.

From Eq. 10-41 (7 = r, F), we can write this restoring torque as

7= —L(F, sin 6), (15-24)
where the minus sign indicates that the torque acts to reduce @and L is the moment

arm of the force component F, sin @ about the pivot point. Substituting Eq. 15-24 into
Eq. 10-44 (7 = Ja) and then substituting mg as the magnitude of F,,we obtain

—L(mg sin 0) = Ia, (15-25)

where J is the pendulum’s rotational inertia about the pivot point and a is its
angular acceleration about that point.

We can simplify Eq. 15-25 if we assume the angle @ is small, for then we can
approximate sin @ with 6 (expressed in radian measure). (As an example, if =
5.00° = 0.0873 rad, then sin @ = 0.0872, a difference of only about 0.1%.) With
that approximation and some rearranging, we then have

mgL
I

This equation is the angular equivalent of Eq. 15-8, the hallmark of SHM. It tells
us that the angular acceleration a of the pendulum is proportional to the angular
displacement 6 but opposite in sign. Thus, as the pendulum bob moves to the
right, as in Fig. 15-1 1a, its acceleration to the left increases until the bob stops and

a=

0. (15-26)

 

 

F,cos@

This

component
This - merely
component pulls on
brings the the string.
bob back
to center.

(0)
Figure 15-11 (a) A simple pendulum. (b) The
forces acting on the bob are the gravitational
force F, and the force T from the string.
‘The tangential component F, sin 6 of the
gravitational force is a restoring force that
tends to bring the pendulum back to its cen-
tral position.
