Genetic Recombination

Morgan’s experiments led to the gen-
eral acceptance of Sutton’s chromoso-
mal theory of inheritance. Scientists
then attempted to resolve the paradox
that there are many more indepen-
dently assorting Mendelian genes than
chromosomes. In 1903 the Dutch ge-
neticist Hugo de Vries suggested that
this paradox could be resolved only by
assuming that homologous chromo-
somes exchange elements during
meiosis. In 1909, French cytologist
F. A. Janssens provided evidence to
support this suggestion. Investigating
chiasmata produced during amphibian
meiosis, Janssens noticed that of the
four chromatids involved in each chi-
asma, two crossed each other and two
did not. He suggested that this cross-
ing of chromatids reflected a switch in
chromosomal arms between the pater-
nal and maternal homologues, involv-
ing one chromatid in each homologue.
His suggestion was not accepted

 

No
crossing
over

 

 

 

 

Fertilization
by sperm

from carnation
F, male

 

 

 

Abnormality at
one locus of
X chromosome

car tar
Ffemale B B

Abnormality at
another locus of
X chromosome

car A vr
B B
U

 

i car* [Crossing over
during meiosis
, in F; female

Ir,

il Az # | i Fl ( ‘ll ffs

 

 

 

28

 

Fertilization
by sperm

from carnation
F, male

 

 

 

 

widely, primarily because it was diffi-
cult to see how two chromatids could
break and rejoin at exactly the same
position.

Crossing Over

Later experiments clearly established
that Janssens was indeed correct. One
of these experiments, performed in
1931 by American geneticist Curt

carnation,
bar

—__——__ _—__—_

Parental combinations of Recombinant combinations
both genetic traits and of both genetic traits and
chromosome abnormalities chromosome abnormalities

normal carnation

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 13.31

Stern’s experiment demonstrating the physical exchange of chromosomal arms
during crossing over. Stern monitored crossing over between two genes, the recessive
carnation eye color (car) and the dominant bar-shaped eye (B), on chromosomes with
physical peculiarities visible under a microscope. Whenever these genes recombined

Stern, is described in figure 13.31.
Stern studied two sex-linked eye char-
acters in Drosophila strains whose X
chromosomes were visibly abnormal
at both ends. He first examined many
flies and identified those in which an
exchange had occurred with respect to
the two eye characters. He then stud-
ied the chromosomes of those flies to see if their X chro-
mosomes had exchanged arms. Stern found that all of the
individuals that had exchanged eye traits also possessed
chromosomes that had exchanged abnormal ends. The
conclusion was inescapable: genetic exchanges of charac-
ters such as eye color involve the physical exchange of
chromosome arms, a phenomenon called crossing over.
Crossing over creates new combinations of genes, and is
thus a form of genetic recombination.

The chromosomal exchanges Stern demonstrated pro-
vide the solution to the paradox, because crossing over

particular gene.

264 = PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

through crossing over, the chromosomes recombined as well. Therefore, the
recombination of genes reflects a physical exchange of chromosome arms. The “+
notation on the alleles refers to the wild-type allele, the most common allele at a

can occur between homologues anywhere along the
length of the chromosome, in locations that seem to be
randomly determined. Thus, if two different genes are
located relatively far apart on a chromosome, crossing
over is more likely to occur somewhere between them
than if they are located close together. Two genes can be
on the same chromosome and still show independent as-
sortment if they are located so far apart on the chromo-
some that crossing over occurs regularly between them

(figure 13.32).
