Nondisjunction Involving the Sex Chromosomes

Individuals that gain or lose a sex chromosome do not gen-
erally experience the severe developmental abnormalities
caused by similar changes in autosomes. Such individuals
may reach maturity, but they have somewhat abnormal
features.

The X Chromosome. When X chromosomes fail to
separate during meiosis, some of the gametes that are
produced possess both X chromosomes and so are XX ga-
metes; the other gametes that result from such an event
have no sex chromosome and are designated “O”
(figure 13.40).

If an XX gamete combines with an X gamete, the re-
sulting XXX zygote develops into a female with one func-
tional X chromosome and two Barr bodies. She is sterile
but usually normal in other respects. If an XX gamete in-
stead combines with a Y gamete, the effects are more seri-
ous. The resulting XXY zygote develops into a sterile
male who has many female body characteristics and, in
some cases, diminished mental capacity. This condition,
called Kiinefelter syndrome, occurs in about 1 out of every
500 male births.

If an O gamete fuses with a Y gamete, the resulting OY
zygote is nonviable and fails to develop further because hu-
mans cannot survive when they lack the genes on the X
chromosome. If, on the other hand, an O gamete fuses with
an X gamete, the XO zygote develops into a sterile female
of short stature, with a webbed neck and immature sex or-
gans that do not undergo changes during puberty. The
mental abilities of an XO individual are in the low-normal
range. This condition, called Turner syndrome, occurs
roughly once in every 5000 female births.

The Y Chromosome. The Y chromosome can also fail
to separate in meiosis, leading to the formation of YY ga-
metes. When these gametes combine with X gametes, the
XYY zygotes develop into fertile males of normal appear-
ance. The frequency of the XYY genotype (Jacob’s syn-
drome) is about I per 1000 newborn males, but it is ap-
proximately 20 times higher among males in penal and
mental institutions. This observation has led to the highly
controversial suggestion that XYY males are inherently an-
tisocial, a suggestion supported by some studies but not by
others. In any case, most XYY males do not develop pat-
terns of antisocial behavior.

 

Gene dosage plays a crucial role in development, so
humans do not tolerate the loss or addition of
chromosomes well. Autosome loss is always lethal, and
an extra autosome is with few exceptions lethal too.
Additional sex chromosomes have less serious
consequences, although they can lead to sterility.

 

 

100.0

ss
55

°
°

3.0
2.0

Incidence of Down syndrome
per 1000 live births

 

 

SP
15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Age of mother

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 13.39

Correlation between maternal age and the incidence of Down
syndrome. As women age, the chances they will bear a child with
Down syndrome increase. After a woman reaches 35, the
frequency of Down syndrome increases rapidly.

Female

 

 

Nondisjunction

@.O
@ |e

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Male Female Female
7 (Triple x (Turner
syndrome) syndrome)
xy KG Sperm
XXY oy
Male
(Klinefelter Nonviable
syndrome)
FIGURE 13.40

How nondisjunction can produce abnormalities in the
number of sex chromosomes. When nondisjunction occurs

in the production of female gametes, the gamete with two

X chromosomes (XX) produces Klinefelter males (XXY) and
XXX females. The gamete with no X chromosome (0) produces
Turner females (XO) and nonviable OY males lacking any

X chromosome.

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 271
