<Questions

1 The following four waves are sent along strings with the same
linear densities (x is in meters and f is in seconds). Rank the waves
according to (a) their wave speed and (b) the tension in the strings
along which they travel, greatest first:

(1) y: = (3mm) sin(x — 34), (3) ys = (1mm) sin(4x — 4),
(2) yo = (6mm) sin(2x ~ 1), (4) ys = (2 mm) sin(x — 24).
2 InFig, 16-24, wave 1 consists of a rectangular peak of height 4 units
and width d, and a rectangular valley of depth 2 units and width d. The
wave travels rightward along an x axis. Choices 2, 3, and 4 are similar
waves, with the same heights, depths, and widths, that will travel leftward
along that axis and through wave 1. Right-going wave 1 and one of the
left-going waves will interfere as they pass through each other. With
which left-going wave will the interference give, for an instant, (a) the
deepest valley, (b) a flat line, and (c) a flat peak 2d wide?

ab =e

(3) 4)
Figure 16-24 Question 2.

3 Figure 16-25a gives a snapshot of a wave traveling in the direc-
tion of positive x along a string under tension. Four string elements
are indicated by the lettered points. For each of those elements, de-
termine whether, at the instant of the snapshot, the element is
moving upward or downward or is momentarily at rest. (Hint:
Imagine the wave as it moves through the four string elements, as if
you were watching a video of the wave as it traveled rightward.)
Figure 16-256 gives the displacement of a string element located
at, say, x =0 as a function of time. At the lettered times, is the
element moving upward or downward or is it momentarily at rest?

 

, y
ad fe
x t
Dee e h
(a (b)

Figure 16-25 Question 3.

4 Figure 16-26 shows three waves that]

are separately sent along a string that is

stretched under a certain tension along 3
an x axis Rank the waves according to

their (a) wavelengths, (b) speeds, and

(c) angular frequencies, greatest first.

5 If you start with two sinusoidal
waves of the same amplitude travel-
ing in phase on a string and then
somehow phase-shift one of them by
5.4 wavelengths, what type of interference will occur on the string?

Figure 16-26 Question 4.

QUESTIONS 471

6 The amplitudes and phase differences for four pairs of
waves of equal wavelengths are (a) 2mm, 6mm, and rad;
(b) 3mm, 5 mm, and rad; (c) 7 mm,9 mm, and zrad; (d) 2 mm,
2mm, and 0 rad. Each pair travels in the same direction along the
same string. Without written calculation, rank the four pairs ac-
cording to the amplitude of their resultant wave, greatest first.
(Hint: Construct phasor diagrams.)

7 Asinusoidal wave is sent along a cord under tension, transport-
ing energy at the average rate of P,,, ;. Two waves, identical to that
first one, are then to be sent along the cord with a phase difference
¢of either 0,0.2 wavelength, or 0.5 wavelength. (a) With only men-
tal calculation, rank those choices of ¢ according to the average
rate at which the waves will transport energy, greatest first. (b) For
the first choice of ¢ what is the average rate in terms of P,y. 1?

8 (a) Ifastanding wave ona string is given by
y'() = (3 mm) sin(5x) cos(4f),
is there a node or an antinode of the oscillations of the string at
x = 0? (b) If the standing wave is given by
y'(t) = (3 mm) sin(Sx + 77/2) cos(4t),
is there a node or an antinode at x = 0?

9 Strings A and B have identical lengths and linear densities, but
string B is under greater tension than string A. Figure 16-27 shows
four situations, (a) through (d), in which standing wave patterns
exist on the two strings. In which situations is there the possibility
that strings A and B are oscillating at the same resonant frequency?

String A Swing B
(a -
ects. ors ss.
oe =
~ ()
KI eee
aaa io) Neer

~ :

oe (@
Figure 16-27 Question 9.

10 If you set up the seventh harmonic on a string, (a) how many
nodes are present, and (b) is there a node, antinode, or some inter-

mediate state at the midpoint? If you next set up the sixth harmonic,
(c) is its resonant wavelength longer or shorter than that for the sev-
enth harmonic, and (d) is
the resonant frequency
higher or lower? q
11 Figure 16-28 shows Z.
phasor diagrams for three (4) 6) ©
situations in which two

waves travel along the Figure 16-28 Question 11.
same string. All six waves
have the same amplitude. Rank the situations according to the am-
plitude of the net wave on the string, greatest first.
