Human Abnormalities
Due to Alterations in
Chromosome Number

Occasionally, homologues or sister
chromatids fail to separate properly in
meiosis, leading to the acquisition or
loss of a chromosome in a gamete. This
condition, called primary nondisjunc-
tion, can result in individuals with se-
vere abnormalities if the affected gamete
forms a zygote.

Nondisjunction Involving

FIGURE 13.38
Autosomes

Almost all humans of the same sex have
the same karyotype, for the same reason
that all automobiles have engines, trans-
missions, and wheels: other arrange-
ments don’t work well. Humans who have lost even one
copy of an autosome (called monosomics) do not survive
development. In all but a few cases, humans who have
gained an extra autosome (called trisomics) also do not
survive. However, five of the smallest autosomes—those
numbered 13, 15, 18, 21, and 22—can be present in hu-
mans as three copies and still allow the individual to survive
for a time. The presence of an extra chromosome 13, 15, or
18 causes severe developmental defects, and infants with
such a genetic makeup die within a few months. In con-
trast, individuals who have an extra copy of chromosome 21
or, more rarely, chromosome 22, usually survive to adult-
hood. In such individuals, the maturation of the skeletal
system is delayed, so they generally are short and have poor
muscle tone. Their mental development is also affected,
and children with trisomy 21 or trisomy 22 are always men-
tally retarded.

Down Syndrome. The developmental defect produced
by trisomy 21 (figure 13.38) was first described in 1866 by
J. Langdon Down; for this reason, it is called Down syn-
drome (formerly “Down’s syndrome”). About I in every
750 children exhibits Down syndrome, and the frequency is
similar in all racial groups. Similar conditions also occur in
chimpanzees and other related primates. In humans, the
defect is associated with a particular small portion of chro-
mosome 21. When this chromosomal segment is present in
three copies instead of two, Down syndrome results. In
97% of the human cases examined, all of chromosome 21 is
present in three copies. In the other 3%, a small portion of
chromosome 21 containing the critical segment has been
added to another chromosome by a process called trans/oca-
tion (see chapter 18); it exists along with the normal two
copies of chromosome 21. This condition is known as
translocation Down syndrome.

270 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

 

at 22

 

Down syndrome. As shown in this male karyotype, Down syndrome is associated with
trisomy of chromosome 21. A child with Down syndrome sitting on his father’s knee.

Not much is known about the developmental role of the
genes whose extra copies produces Down syndrome, al-
though clues are beginning to emerge from current re-
search. Some researchers suspect that the gene or genes
that produce Down syndrome are similar or identical to
some of the genes associated with cancer and with
Alzheimer’s disease. The reason for this suspicion is that
one of the human cancer-causing genes (to be described in
chapter 18) and the gene causing Alzheimer’s disease are
located on the segment of chromosome 21 associated with
Down syndrome. Moreover, cancer is more common in
children with Down syndrome. The incidence of leukemia,
for example, is 11 times higher in children with Down syn-
drome than in unaffected children of the same age.

How does Down syndrome arise? In humans, it comes
about almost exclusively as a result of primary nondisjunc-
tion of chromosome 21 during egg formation. The cause of
these primary nondisjunctions is not known, but their inci-
dence, like that of cancer, increases with age (figure 13.39).
In mothers younger than 20 years of age, the risk of giving
birth to a child with Down syndrome is about 1 in 1700; in
mothers 20 to 30 years old, the risk is only about 1 in 1400.
In mothers 30 to 35 years old, however, the risk rises to 1
in 750, and by age 45, the risk is as high as 1 in 16!

Primary nondisjunctions are far more common in
women than in men because all of the eggs a woman will
ever produce have developed to the point of prophase in
meiosis I by the time she is born. By the time she has chil-
dren, her eggs are as old as she is. In contrast, men produce
new sperm daily. Therefore, there is a much greater chance
for problems of various kinds, including those that cause
primary nondisjunction, to accumulate over time in the ga-
metes of women than in those of men. For this reason, the
age of the mother is more critical than that of the father in
couples contemplating childbearing.
