Waves-ll

17-1 speeD oF SOUND

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

17.01 Distinguish between a longitudinal wave and a through a material, the material's bulk modulus, and the
transverse wave. material's density.
17.02 Explain wavefronts and rays. 17.04 Apply the relationship between the speed of sound, the
17.03 Apply the relationship between the speed of sound distance traveled by a sound wave, and the time required
to travel that distance.
Key Idea
@ Sound waves are longitudinal mechanical waves that can 2
travel through solids, liquids, or gases. The speed v of a 7 \ (peed Gistoun ds

sound wave in a medium having bulk modulus B and den-
sity pis

What Is Physics?

The physics of sound waves is the basis of countless studies in the research
journals of many fields. Here are just a few examples. Some physiologists are
concerned with how speech is produced, how speech impairment might be
corrected, how hearing loss can be alleviated, and even how snoring is pro-
duced. Some acoustic engineers are concerned with improving the acoustics of
cathedrals and concert halls, with reducing noise near freeways and road
construction, and with reproducing music by speaker systems. Some aviation en-
gineers are concerned with the shock waves produced by supersonic aircraft and
the aircraft noise produced in communities near an airport. Some medical re-
searchers are concerned with how noises produced by the heart and lungs can
signal a medical problem in a patient. Some paleontologists are concerned with
how a dinosaur’s fossil might reveal the dinosaur’s vocalizations. Some military
engineers are concerned with how the sounds of sniper fire might allow a sol-
dier to pinpoint the sniper’s location, and, on the gentler side, some biolo-
gists are concerned with how a cat purrs. ae

To begin our discussion of the physics of sound, we must first answer the
question “What are sound waves?”

Sound Waves

As we saw in Chapter 16, mechanical waves are waves that require a material
medium to exist. There are two types of mechanical waves: Transverse waves
involve oscillations perpendicular to the direction in which the wave travels;
longitudinal waves involve oscillations parallel to the direction of wave travel.

In this book, a sound wave is defined roughly as any longitudinal wave.
Seismic prospecting teams use such waves to probe Earth’s crust for oil. Ships

In air at 20°C, the speed of sound is 343 m/s.

479
