470 CHAPTER 16 WAVES-!

2(2.00 x 10-3 m)(277)(806.2 Hz)

x sin 527 —
0.400 m

 

(0.180 m)) |

= 6.26 mis. (Answer)

Review & Summary

Transverse and Longitudinal Waves Mechanical waves
can exist only in material media and are governed by Newton's
laws. Transverse mechanical waves, like those on a stretched string,
are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate perpendi-
cular to the wave’s direction of travel. Waves in which the particles
of the medium oscillate parallel to the wave’s direction of travel
are longitudinal waves.

Sinusoidal Waves A sinusoidal wave moving in the positive
direction of an x axis has the mathematical form

V(X, t) = Ym sin(kx — of), (16-2)

where y,, is the amplitude of the wave, is the angular wave number,
wis the angular frequency, and kx — wf is the phase. The wavelength
Ais related to kby

2a
=—. 5)
k= (16-5)
The period Tand frequency fof the wave are related to wby
o 1
te SOT (16-9)

Finally, the wave speed v is related to these other parameters by
(16-13)

Equation of a Traveling Wave Any function of the form

y(x, t) = h(kx + wt) (16-17)

can represent a traveling wave with a wave speed given by Eq. 16-13
and a wave shape given by the mathematical form of h. The plus sign
denotes a wave traveling in the negative direction of the x axis, and
the minus sign a wave traveling in the positive direction.

Wave Speed on Stretched String The speed of a wave on
a stretched string is set by properties of the string. The speed on a
string with tension vand linear density 2 is

 

Ve (16-26)

Power The average power of, or average rate at which energy is

transmitted by, a sinusoidal wave on a stretched string is given by

Pag = SUV. (16-33

To determine when the string element has this maxi-
mum speed, we could investigate Eq. 16-69. However, alittle
thought can save a lot of work. The element is undergoing
SHM and must come to a momentary stop at its extreme
upward position and extreme downward position. It has the
greatest speed as it zips through the midpoint of its oscilla-
tion, just as a block does in a block-spring oscillator.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Superposition of Waves When two or more waves traverse
the same medium, the displacement of any particle of the medium is
the sum of the displacements that the individual waves would give it.

Interference of Waves Two sinusoidal waves on the same
string exhibit interference, adding or canceling according to the prin-
ciple of superposition. If the two are traveling in the same direction
and have the same amplitude y,, and frequency (hence the same
wavelength) but differ in phase by a phase constant ¢, the result is a
single wave with this same frequency:

y' (x, ) = [2¥m cos $4] sin(kx — wt + 3). (16-51)

If ¢ = 0, the waves are exactly in phase and their interference is
fully constructive; if ¢ = wrad, they are exactly out of phase and
their interference is fully destructive.

Phasors A wave y(x, f) can be represented with a phasor. This
is a vector that has a magnitude equal to the amplitude y,, of the
wave and that rotates about an origin with an angular speed equal
to the angular frequency w of the wave. The projection of the rotat-
ing phasor on a vertical axis gives the displacement y of a point
along the wave’s travel.

Standing Waves The interference of two identical sinusoidal
waves moving in opposite directions produces standing waves. For
astring with fixed ends, the standing wave is given by

y'(x, 8) = [ym sin kx] cos wt. (16-60)

Standing waves are characterized by fixed locations of zero dis-
placement called nodes and fixed locations of maximum displace-
ment called antinodes.

Resonance Standing waves on a string can be set up by
reflection of traveling waves from the ends of the string. If an end
is fixed, it must be the position of a node. This limits the frequen-
cies at which standing waves will occur on a given string. Each pos-
sible frequency is a resonant frequency, and the corresponding
standing wave pattern is an oscillation mode. For a stretched string
of length L with fixed ends, the resonant frequencies are
v

s> oforn =1,2,3,....

ar (16-66)

f=

 

2
a
The oscillation mode corresponding to n = 1 is called the funda-

mental mode or the first harmonic; the mode corresponding to
n = 2is the second harmonic; and so on.
