15-4 PENDULUMS, CIRCULAR MOTION 429

d P’ isa particle y
moving in a circle.

  
  
 

    

This relates the
velocities of
Pand P’.

Pis a projection
moving in SHM.

 

 

(a) (b)

Figure 15-15 (a) A reference particle P’ moving with uniform circular motion in a reference
circle of radius x,,. Its projection P on the x axis executes simple harmonic motion. (b) The
projection of the velocity V’ of the reference particle is the velocity of SHM. (c) The projec-
tion of the radial acceleration @ of the reference particle is the acceleration of SHM.

motion is uniform circular motion viewed edge-on. In more formal language:

) Simple harmonic motion is the projection of uniform circular motion on a diame-
ter of the circle in which the circular motion occurs.

Figure 15-15a gives an example. It shows a reference particle P’ moving in
uniform circular motion with (constant) angular speed w in a reference circle. The
radius x,, of the circle is the magnitude of the particle’s position vector. At any
time f, the angular position of the particle is wf + 4, where ¢ is its angular posi-
tion att = 0.

Position. The projection of particle P’ onto the x axis is a point P, which we
take to be a second particle. The projection of the position vector of particle P’
onto the x axis gives the location x(f) of P. (Can you see the x component in the
triangle in Fig. 15-5a?) Thus, we find

X(t) = Xm Cos(wt + ), (15-36)

which is precisely Eq. 15-3. Our conclusion is correct. If reference particle P’
moves in uniform circular motion, its projection particle P moves in simple
harmonic motion along a diameter of the circle.

Velocity. Figure 15-15b shows the velocity V of the reference particle. From
Eq. 10-18 (v = or), the magnitude of the velocity vector is wx,,; its projection on
the x axis is

V(t) = — ax, sin(wt + ), (15-37)

which is exactly Eq. 15-6.The minus sign appears because the velocity component
of P in Fig. 15-15b is directed to the left, in the negative direction of x. (The minus
sign is consistent with the derivative of Eq. 15-36 with respect to time.)

Acceleration. Figure 15-15c shows the radial acceleration @ of the reference
particle. From Eq. 10-23 (a, = w*r), the magnitude of the radial acceleration vec-
tor is w°x,,;its projection on the x axis is

a(t) = —@X»,cos(wt + d), (15-38)

which is exactly Eq. 15-7. Thus, whether we look at the displacement, the velocity,
or the acceleration, the projection of uniform circular motion is indeed simple
harmonic motion.

 

(c)

   

This relates the
accelerations of
PandP’.
