504 CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

or projectile produces a burst of sound, called a sonic boom, in which the air pres-
sure first suddenly increases and then suddenly decreases below normal before re-
turning to normal. Part of the sound that is heard when a rifle is fired is the sonic
boom produced by the bullet. When a long bull whip is snapped, its tip is moving
faster than sound and produces a small sonic bobom—the crack of the whip. ===

Review & Summary

Sound Waves Sound waves are longitudinal mechanical waves
that can travel through solids, liquids, or gases. The speed v of a
sound wave in a medium having bulk modulus B and density pis

B
v (speed of sound).
p

In air at 20°C, the speed of sound is 343 m/s.
A sound wave causes a longitudinal displacement s of a mass
element in a mediumas given by

(17-3)

5 = 5 cos(kx — af), (17-12)

where 5,, is the displacement amplitude (maximum displacement)
from equilibrium, k = 27/A, and w = 27f, A and f being the wave-
length and frequency of the sound wave. The wave also causes a
pressure change Ap from the equilibrium pressure:

Ap = Apm sin(kx — ot), (17-13)
where the pressure amplitude is
AP in = (VPO)S me (17-14)

Interference The interference of two sound waves with identi-
cal wavelengths passing through a common point depends on their
phase difference ¢ there. If the sound waves were emitted in phase
and are traveling in approximately the same direction, ¢ is given by

b= 2m (17-21)
where AL is their path length difference (the difference in the

distances traveled by the waves to reach the common point). Fully
constructive interference occurs when ¢is an integer multiple of 277,

g=m2n),  form=0,1,2,..., (17-22)
and, equivalently, when AL is related to wavelength A by
AL Lona... (17-23)

A

Fully destructive interference occurs when ¢is an odd multiple of 7,

 

b=(2m+1)x, — form=0,1,2, (17-24)
and, equivalently, when AL is related to A by
AE = 95,15.25..... (17-25)

Sound Intensity The intensity / of a sound wave at a surface is
the average rate per unit area at which energy is transferred by the
wave through or onto the surface:

(17-26)

where Pis the time rate of energy transfer (power) of the sound wave

and A is the area of the surface intercepting the sound. The intensity J
is related to the displacement amplitude s,, of the sound wave by

(17-27)

 

The intensity at a distance r from a point source that emits sound
waves of power P, is

 

I= (17-28)

Sound Level in Decibels
is defined as

The sound level Bin decibels (AB)

I
B = (10 dB) log Tv (17-29)
where Jy (= 10-!2 Wim?) is a reference intensity level to which all
intensities are compared. For every factor-of-10 increase in inten-
sity, 10 dB is added to the sound level.

Standing Wave Patterns in Pipes Standing sound wave
patterns can be set up in pipes. A pipe open at both ends will
resonate at frequencies

vw

Fapaap  MAh2B.s (17-39)
where v is the speed of sound in the air in the pipe. For a pipe
closed at one end and open at the other, the resonant fre-
quencies are

vow
A 4L°

= n=1,3,5,....

f= (17-41)

Beats Beats arise when two waves having slightly different fre-
quencies, f, and f,, are detected together. The beat frequency is

treat = fi ~ fa: (17-46)

The Doppler Effect The Doppler effect is a change in the
observed frequency of a wave when the source or the detec-
tor moves relative to the transmitting medium (such as air).
For sound the observed frequency f’ is given in terms of the source
frequency fby
f=f

vivp

 

(general Doppler effect), (17-47)

vivs
where vp is the speed of the detector relative to the medium, vs is
that of the source, and v is the speed of sound in the medium. The
signs are chosen such that f’ tends to be greater for motion toward
and /ess for motion away.

Shock Wave If the speed of a source relative to the medium
exceeds the speed of sound in the medium, the Doppler equation
no longer applies. In such a case, shock waves result. The half-angle
Gof the Mach cone is given by

(Mach cone angle). (17-57)

v
sin = —
Vs
