430 CHAPTER 15 OSCILLATIONS

15-5 DAMPED SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

15.38 Describe the motion of adamped simple harmonic oscil-
lator and sketch a graph of the oscillator's position as a func-
tion of time.

15.39 For any particular time, calculate the position of a
damped simple harmonic oscillator.

15.40 Determine the amplitude of a damped simple harmonic
oscillator at any given time.

Key Ideas

15.41 Calculate the angular frequency of a damped simple
harmonic oscillator in terms of the spring constant, the
damping constant, and the mass, and approximate the
angular frequency when the damping constant is small.

15.42 Apply the equation giving the (approximate) total
energy of a damped simple harmonic oscillator as a func-
tion of time.

 

@ The mechanical energy E in a real oscillating system de-
creases during the oscillations because external forces, such
as a drag force, inhibit the oscillations and transfer mechani-
cal energy to thermal energy. The real oscillator and its motion
are then said to be damped.

@ If the damping force is given by F., = —bv, where Vis the
velocity of the oscillator and b is a damping constant, then the
displacement of the oscillator is given by

X(t) = Xp, e7P" cos(w't + d),

where w’, the angular frequency of the damped oscillator, is
given by

 

@ If the damping constant is small (b < km), then w' ~ w,
where wis the angular frequency of the undamped oscillator.
For small b, the mechanical energy E of the oscillator is given by

E(0) ~ Skye

 

x Rigid support

   
  
  
 

Springiness, k

Mass m

‘Vane

Damping, >

Figure 15-16 An idealized damped simple
harmonic oscillator. A vane immersed in a
liquid exerts a damping force on the block
as the block oscillates parallel to the x axis.

15-16, we have

Damped Simple Harmonic Motion

A pendulum will swing only briefly underwater, because the water exerts on the
pendulum a drag force that quickly eliminates the motion. A pendulum swinging
in air does better, but still the motion dies out eventually, because the air exerts
a drag force on the pendulum (and friction acts at its support point), transferring
energy from the pendulum’s motion.

When the motion of an oscillator is reduced by an external force, the oscil-
lator and its motion are said to be damped. An idealized example of a damped
oscillator is shown in Fig. 15-16, where a block with mass m oscillates vertically on
a spring with spring constant k. From the block, a rod extends to a vane (both
assumed massless) that is submerged in a liquid. As the vane moves up and down,
the liquid exerts an inhibiting drag force on it and thus on the entire oscillating
system. With time, the mechanical energy of the block—spring system decreases,
as energy is transferred to thermal energy of the liquid and vane.

Let us assume the liquid exerts a damping force F, that is proportional to the
velocity ¥ of the vane and block (an assumption that is accurate if the vane
moves slowly). Then, for force and velocity components along the x axis in Fig.

F, = —by, (15-39)

where b is a damping constant that depends on the characteristics of both the
vane and the liquid and has the SI unit of kilogram per second. The minus sign
indicates that F, opposes the motion.

Damped Oscillations. The force on the block from the spring is F, = —kx.
Let us assume that the gravitational force on the block is negligible relative to Fy
and F;.Then we can write Newton’s second law for components along the x axis

(Frets = may) as

—bv — kx = ma. (15-40)
