418 CHAPTER 15

 

Displacement
°

v @ 1
HO, |
\

Velocity
°

I
2, @ |
407%, |

Vail
OX,
(o)
Figure 15-6 (a) The displacement x(t)

 

 

Acceleration
°

 

OSCILLATIONS

Extreme
values
here
mean ...

zero
values
here

and...

extreme
* values
here.

ofa

particle oscillating in SHM with phase
angle ¢ equal to zero. The period T marks
one complete oscillation. (b) The velocity
v(t) of the particle. (c) The acceleration

a(t) of the particle.

determine the extent of the variation in the velocity, between +x, and — aX).
We say that ax, is the velocity amplitude v,,, of the velocity variation. When the
particle is moving rightward through x = 0, its velocity is positive and the magni-
tude is at this greatest value. When it is moving leftward through x = 0, its veloc-
ity is negative and the magnitude is again at this greatest value. This variation
with time (a negative sine function) is displayed in the graph of Fig. 15-6b for a
phase constant of ¢ = 0, which corresponds to the cosine function for the dis-
placement versus time shown in Fig. 15-6a.

Recall that we use a cosine function for x() regardless of the particle’s posi-
tion at t= 0. We simply choose an appropriate value of ¢ so that Eq. 15-3 gives us
the correct position at t = 0. That decision about the cosine function leads us toa
negative sine function for the velocity in Eq. 15-6, and the value of ¢ now gives
the correct velocity at t = 0.

 

The Acceleration of SHM

Let’s go one more step by differentiating the velocity function of Eq. 15-6 with
respect to time to get the acceleration function of the particle in simple harmonic
motion:

a() = OF (aay sinfor + 8]

 

or a(t) = —w°x,,cos(wt + d) (acceleration). (15-7)

We are back to a cosine function but with a minus sign out front. We know the
drill by now. The acceleration varies because the cosine function varies with time,
between +1 and —1.The variation in the magnitude of the acceleration is set by
the acceleration amplitude a,,, which is the product wx, that multiplies the co-
sine function.

Figure 15-6c displays Eq. 15-7 for a phase constant ¢ = 0, consistent with
Figs. 15-6a and 15-6b. Note that the acceleration magnitude is zero when the
cosine is zero, which is when the particle is at x = 0. And the acceleration mag-
nitude is maximum when the cosine magnitude is maximum, which is when the
particle is at an extreme point, where it has been slowed to a stop so that its
motion can be reversed. Indeed, comparing Eqs. 15-3 and 15-7 we see an extremely
neat relationship:

a(t) = —a*x(t). (15-8)

This is the hallmark of SHM: (1) The particle’s acceleration is always oppo-
site its displacement (hence the minus sign) and (2) the two quantities are al-
ways related by a constant (w”). If you ever see such a relationship in an oscil-
lating situation (such as with, say, the current in an electrical circuit, or the
rise and fall of water in a tidal bay), you can immediately say that the motion
is SHM and immediately identify the angular frequency w of the motion. Ina
nutshell:

Oo In SHM, the acceleration a is proportional to the displacement x but opposite in
sign, and the two quantities are related by the square of the angular frequency w.

M Checkpoint 2

Which of the following relationships between a particle’s acceleration a and its
position x indicates simple harmonic oscillation: (a) a = 3x2, (b) a = 5x,(c) a= —4x,
(d) a = —2/x? For the SHM, what is the angular frequency (assume the unit of rad/s)?
