16-7 STANDING WAVES AND RESONANCE 467

through itself. The incident (original) wave and the reflected wave can then be
described by Eqs. 16-58 and 16-59, respectively, and they can combine to form a
pattern of standing waves.

In Fig. 16-19, we use a single pulse to show how such reflections take place. In
Fig, 16-19a, the string is fixed at its left end. When the pulse arrives at that end, it ex-
erts an upward force on the support (the wall). By Newton’s third law, the support
exerts an opposite force of equal magnitude on the string. This second force gener-
ates a pulse at the support, which travels back along the string in the direction op-
posite that of the incident pulse. In a “hard” reflection of this kind, there must be a
node at the support because the string is fixed there. The reflected and incident
pulses must have opposite signs, so as to cancel each other at that point.

In Fig. 16-195, the left end of the string is fastened to a light ring that is free to
slide without friction along a rod. When the incident pulse arrives, the ring moves
up the rod. As the ring moves, it pulls on the string, stretching the string and
producing a reflected pulse with the same sign and amplitude as the incident
pulse. Thus, in such a “soft” reflection, the incident and reflected pulses rein-
force each other, creating an antinode at the end of the string; the maximum
displacement of the ring is twice the amplitude of either of these two pulses.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

Two waves with the same amplitude and wavelength interfere in three different
situations to produce resultant waves with the following equations:

()y'@.0) =4 sin(Sx — 49)
(2) y'(x, 0) = 4 sin(5x) cos(42)
(3) y'(x, 0) = 4 sin(Sx + 4)

In which situation are the two combining waves traveling (a) toward positive x,
(b) toward negative x, and (c) in opposite directions?

Standing Waves and Resonance

Consider a string, such as a guitar string, that is stretched between two clamps.
Suppose we send a continuous sinusoidal wave of a certain frequency along the
string, say, toward the right. When the wave reaches the right end, it reflects and
begins to travel back to the left. That left-going wave then overlaps the wave that
is still traveling to the right. When the left-going wave reaches the left end, it
reflects again and the newly reflected wave begins to travel to the right, over-
lapping the left-going and right-going waves. In short, we very soon have many
overlapping traveling waves, which interfere with one another.

For certain frequencies, the interference produces a standing wave pattern
(or oscillation mode) with nodes and large antinodes like those in Fig. 16-20.
Such a standing wave is said to be produced at resonance, and the string is said
to resonate at these certain frequencies, called resonant frequencies. If the string

 

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 16-20 Stroboscopic photographs reveal (imperfect) standing wave patterns on a
string being made to oscillate by an oscillator at the left end. The patterns occur at certain
frequencies of oscillation.

There are two ways a
pulse can reflect from
the end of a string.

a a
YW R__

NRL,
Nh _
1 — |—

—
Y\—
KZ

(a) (Y)
Figuer 16-19 (a) A pulse incident from the
right is reflected at the left end of the
string, which is tied to a wall. Note that the
reflected pulse is inverted from the incident
pulse. (b) Here the left end of the string is
tied to a ring that can slide without friction
up and down the rod. Now the pulse is not
inverted by the reflection.

 

 
