426 CHAPTER 15 OSCILLATIONS

    
 

F,sin@

This component

brings the

pendulum

back to center. aa - \
©

Figure 15-12 A physical pendulum. The
restoring torque is AF, sin 6. When 6 = 0,
center of mass C hangs directly below
pivot point O.

begins moving to the left. Then, when it is to the left of the equilibrium position,
its acceleration to the right tends to return it to the right, and so on, as it swings
back and forth in SHM. More precisely, the motion of a simple pendulum swing-
ing through only small angles is approximately SHM. We can state this
restriction to small angles another way: The angular amplitude 6,, of the motion
(the maximum angle of swing) must be small.

Angular Frequency. Here is a neat trick. Because Eq. 15-26 has the same
form as Eg. 15-8 for SHM, we can immediately identify the pendulum’s angular
frequency as being the square root of the constants in front of the displacement:

_ [mgl
o= 7

In the homework problems you might see oscillating systems that do not seem to
resemble pendulums. However, if you can relate the acceleration (linear or angu-
lar) to the displacement (linear or angular), you can then immediately identify
the angular frequency as we have just done here.

Period. Next, if we substitute this expression for w into Eq. 15-5 (w = 27/T),
we see that the period of the pendulum may be written as

T
T= 20 (15-27)

All the mass of a simple pendulum is concentrated in the mass m of the particle-
like bob, which is at radius L from the pivot point. Thus, we can use Eq. 10-33
(I= mr’) to write I= mL? for the rotational inertia of the pendulum.
Substituting this into Eq. 15-27 and simplifying then yield

T=20 a (simple pendulum, small amplitude). (15-28)
&
We assume small-angle swinging in this chapter.

The Physical Pendulum
A real pendulum, usually called a physical pendulum, can have a complicated
distribution of mass. Does it also undergo SHM? If so, what is its period?

Figure 15-12 shows an arbitrary physical pendulum displaced to one side
by angle @.The gravitational force F, acts at its center of mass C, at a distance h
from the pivot point O. Comparison of Figs. 15-12 and 15-115 reveals only one
important difference between an arbitrary physical pendulum and a simple
pendulum. For a physical pendulum the restoring component F, sin @ of the grav-
itational force has a moment arm of distance h about the pivot point, rather than
of string length L. In all other respects, an analysis of the physical pendulum
would duplicate our analysis of the simple pendulum up through Eq. 15-27.
Again (for small 6,,), we would find that the motion is approximately SHM.

If we replace L with / in Eq. 15-27, we can write the period as

T=20 a (physical pendulum, small amplitude). (15-29)
mgh

As with the simple pendulum, / is the rotational inertia of the pendulum about O.
However, now / is not simply mL? (it depends on the shape of the physical pen-
dulum), but it is still proportional to m.

A physical pendulum will not swing if it pivots at its center of mass.
Formally, this corresponds to putting h = 0 in Eq. 15-29. That equation then pre-
dicts T > ~, which implies that such a pendulum will never complete one swing.
