Y chromosome

     

FIGURE 13.30

Morgan’s experiment demonstrating
the chromosomal basis of sex linkage
in Drosophila. The white-eyed mutant
male fly was crossed with a normal
female. The F, generation flies all
exhibited red eyes, as expected for flies
heterozygous for a recessive white-eye
allele. In the F; generation, all of the
white-eyed flies

were male.

Sex Linkage

The solution to this puzzle involved sex. In Drosophila, the
sex of an individual is determined by the number of copies
of a particular chromosome, the X chromosome, that an
individual possesses. A fly with two X chromosomes is a fe-
male, and a fly with only one X chromosome is a male. In
males, the single X chromosome pairs in meiosis with a dis-
similar partner called the Y chromosome. The female thus
produces only X gametes, while the male produces both X
and Y gametes. When fertilization involves an X sperm, the
result is an XX zygote, which develops into a female; when
fertilization involves a Y sperm, the result is an XY zygote,
which develops into a male.

The solution to Morgan’s puzzle is that the gene caus-
ing the white-eye trait in Drosophila resides only on the X
chromosome—it is absent from the Y chromosome. (We
now know that the Y chromosome in flies carries almost
no functional genes.) A trait determined by a gene on the
X chromosome is said to be sex-linked. Knowing the

X chromosome with
red-eye gene

X chromosome with
white-eye gene

Parents

x

F, generation

 

white-eye trait is recessive to the red-eye trait, we can
now see that Morgan’s result was a natural consequence
of the Mendelian assortment of chromosomes (fig-
ure 13.30).

Morgan’s experiment was one of the most important in
the history of genetics because it presented the first clear
evidence that the genes determining Mendelian traits do
indeed reside on the chromosomes, as Sutton had pro-
posed. The segregation of the white-eye trait has a one-to-
one correspondence with the segregation of the X chromo-
some. In other words, Mendelian traits such as eye color in
Drosophila assort independently because chromosomes do.
When Mendel observed the segregation of alternative traits
in pea plants, he was observing a reflection of the meiotic
segregation of chromosomes.

 

Mendelian traits assort independently because they are
determined by genes located on chromosomes that
assort independently in meiosis.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 263
