17-8 SUPERSONIC SPEEDS, SHOCK WAVES 503

17-8 supersonic SPEEDS, SHOCK WAVES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

17.35 Sketch the bunching of wavefronts for a sound source 17.37 For a sound source exceeding the speed of
traveling at the speed of sound or faster. sound, apply the relationship between the Mach

17.36 Calculate the Mach number for a sound source cone angle, the speed of sound, and the speed of the
exceeding the speed of sound. source.

Key Idea

 

@ If the speed of a source relative to the medium exceeds the speed of sound in the medium, the Doppler equation no longer
applies. In such a case, shock waves result. The half-angle 6 of the Mach cone is given by

. v
sin 9 = — _ (Mach cone angle).
Vs

 

Supersonic Speeds, Shock Waves

If a source is moving toward a stationary detector at a speed vs equal to
the speed of sound v, Eqs. 17-47 and 17-55 predict that the detected fre- Vs
quency f’ will be infinitely great. This means that the source is moving so

fast that it keeps pace with its own spherical wavefronts (Fig. 17-23a).

‘What happens when vs > v? For such supersonic speeds, Eqs. 17-47 and

17-55 no longer apply. Figure 17-23b depicts the spherical wavefronts that

originated at various positions of the source. The radius of any wavefront

is vt, where ¢ is the time that has elapsed since the source emitted that (a)

wavefront. Note that all the wavefronts bunch along a V-shaped envelope a
in this two-dimensional drawing. The wavefronts actually extend in
three dimensions, and the bunching actually forms a cone called the Mach
cone. A shock wave exists along the surface of this cone, because the
bunching of wavefronts causes an abrupt rise and fall of air pressure as
the surface passes through any point. From Fig. 17-23b, we see that the
half-angle 0 of the cone (the Mach cone angle) is given by

  
   

Surface of
Mach cone

sing =~ = (Mach cone angle). (17-57)

vst Vs
The ratio vs/v is the Mach number. If a plane flies at Mach 2.3, its
speed is 2.3 times the speed of sound in the air through which the plane
is flying. The shock wave generated by a supersonic aircraft (Fig. 17-24)

Figure 17-23 (a) A source of sound S$ moves at speed
vs equal to the speed of sound and thus as fast as the
wavefronts it generates. (b) A source $ moves at
speed vs faster than the speed of sound and thus
faster than the wavefronts. When the source was at
position S; it generated wavefront W;, and at posi-
tion S, it generated W,. Alll the spherical wavefronts
expand at the speed of sound v and bunch along the
surface of a cone called the Mach cone, forming a
shock wave. The surface of the cone has half-angle 0

U.S. Navy photo by Ensign John Gay and is tangent to all the wavefronts.

 

Figure 17-24 Shock waves produced by the wings of a Navy FA
18 jet. The shock waves are visible because the sudden decrease
in air pressure in them caused water molecules in the air to con-
dense, forming a fog.
