446 CHAPTER 16 WAVES-!

 

SEG TON RE ee
Figure 16-2 A sound wave is set up in an air
filled pipe by moving a piston back and
forth. Because the oscillations of an ele-
ment of the air (represented by the dot) are
parallel to the direction in which the wave
travels, the wave is a longitudinal wave.

If you move your hand up and down in continuous simple harmonic motion, a
continuous wave travels along the string at velocity V. Because the motion of your
hand is a sinusoidal function of time, the wave has a sinusoidal shape at any given in-
stant, as in Fig. 16-1; that is, the wave has the shape of a sine curve or a cosine curve.

We consider here only an “ideal” string, in which no friction-like forces
within the string cause the wave to die out as it travels along the string. In
addition, we assume that the string is so long that we need not consider a wave
rebounding from the far end.

One way to study the waves of Fig. 16-1 is to monitor the wave forms (shapes of
the waves) as they move to the right. Alternatively, we could monitor the motion of
an element of the string as the element oscillates up and down while a wave passes
through it. We would find that the displacement of every such oscillating string ele-
ment is perpendicular to the direction of travel of the wave, as indicated in Fig. 16-1b.
This motion is said to be transverse, and the wave is said to be a transverse wave.

Longitudinal Waves. Figure 16-2 shows how a sound wave can be produced
by a piston in a long, air-filled pipe. If you suddenly move the piston rightward
and then leftward, you can send a pulse of sound along the pipe. The rightward
motion of the piston moves the elements of air next to it rightward, changing the
air pressure there. The increased air pressure then pushes rightward on the
elements of air somewhat farther along the pipe. Moving the piston leftward
reduces the air pressure next to it. As a result, first the elements nearest the
piston and then farther elements move leftward. Thus, the motion of the air and
the change in air pressure travel rightward along the pipe as a pulse.

If you push and pull on the piston in simple harmonic motion, as is being
done in Fig. 16-2, a sinusoidal wave travels along the pipe. Because the motion of
the elements of air is parallel to the direction of the wave’s travel, the motion
is said to be longitudinal, and the wave is said to be a longitudinal wave. In this
chapter we focus on transverse waves, and string waves in particular; in
Chapter 17 we focus on longitudinal waves, and sound waves in particular.

Both a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave are said to be traveling
waves because they both travel from one point to another, as from one end of the
string to the other end in Fig. 16-1 and from one end of the pipe to the other end
in Fig. 16-2. Note that it is the wave that moves from end to end, not the material
(string or air) through which the wave moves.

Wavelength and Frequency

To completely describe a wave on a string (and the motion of any element along
its length), we need a function that gives the shape of the wave. This means that
we need a relation in the form

y=h(x,t), (16-1)

in which y is the transverse displacement of any string element as a function h of
the time ¢ and the position x of the element along the string. In general, a sinu-
soidal shape like the wave in Fig. 16-1 can be described with h being either a sine
or cosine function; both give the same general shape for the wave. In this chapter
we use the sine function.

Sinusoidal Function. Imagine a sinusoidal wave like that of Fig. 16-1b traveling
in the positive direction of an x axis. As the wave sweeps through succeeding ele-
ments (that is, very short sections) of the string, the elements oscillate parallel to the y
axis. At time ¢, the displacement y of the element located at position x is given by

(x,t) = Ym sin(kx — wt). (16-2)

Because this equation is written in terms of position x, it can be used to find the
displacements of all the elements of the string as a function of time. Thus, it can
tell us the shape of the wave at any given time.
