500 CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

Ns

|-—vt—+| 5

a

Figure 17-20 The wavefronts of Fig. 17-19,
assumed planar, (a) reach and (b) pass
a stationary detector D; they move a
distance vt to the right in time t.

Mill

a re
a

(b)

Ake

()

s

)

Figure 17-21 Wavefronts traveling to the
right (a) reach and (b) pass detector D,
which moves in the opposite direction. In
time ¢, the wavefronts move a distance vt
to the right and D moves a distance vpt to
the left.

Shift up: The detector
moves toward the source.

Figure 17-19 A stationary source of
sound S emits spherical wavefronts,
shown one wavelength apart, that
expand outward at speed v. A sound
detector D, represented by an ear,
moves with velocity 7) toward the
source. The detector senses a higher
frequency because of its motion.

 

Detector Moving, Source Stationary

In Fig. 17-19, a detector D (represented by an ear) is moving at speed vp toward
a stationary source S that emits spherical wavefronts, of wavelength A and
frequency f, moving at the speed v of sound in air. The wavefronts are drawn one
wavelength apart. The frequency detected by detector D is the rate at which D
intercepts wavefronts (or individual wavelengths). If D were stationary, that rate
would be f, but since D is moving into the wavefronts, the rate of interception is
greater, and thus the detected frequency f’ is greater than f.

Let us for the moment consider the situation in which D is stationary
(Fig. 17-20). In time ¢, the wavefronts move to the right a distance vt. The num-
ber of wavelengths in that distance vt is the number of wavelengths intercepted
by D in time ¢, and that number is vt/A. The rate at which D intercepts wave-
lengths, which is the frequency f detected by D, is

vtlA v

=> (17-48)

 

f=

In this situation, with D stationary, there is no Doppler effect—the frequency
detected by D is the frequency emitted by S.

Now let us again consider the situation in which D moves in the direction
opposite the wavefront velocity (Fig. 17-21). In time ¢, the wavefronts move to
the right a distance vt as previously, but now D moves to the left a distance vp.
Thus, in this time f, the distance moved by the wavefronts relative to D is vt +
vpt. The number of wavelengths in this relative distance vf + vpf is the number
of wavelengths intercepted by D in time ¢ and is (vf + vpt)/A. The rate at which
D intercepts wavelengths in this situation is the frequency f’, given by

(vt + vpt)/IA _ vtVp

"= 17-49
f ; Y (17-49)
From Eq. 17-48, we have A = v/f. Then Eq. 17-49 becomes
»_ VtVp _.vtVD .
pap at. (17-50)

Note that in Eq. 17-50, f’ > funless vp = 0 (the detector is stationary).

Similarly, we can find the frequency detected by D if D moves away from
the source. In this situation, the wavefronts move a distance vt — vpf relative to
Din time t,and f’ is given by

fap. (17-51)
v
In Eq. 17-51, f’ < funless vp = 0.We can summarize Eqs. 17-50 and 17-51 with
vevp ; ,
f' =f—_ Cdetector moving, source stationary). (17-52)
v
