15-4 PENDULUMS, CIRCULAR MOTION

Corresponding to any physical pendulum that oscillates about a given pivot
point O with period Tis a simple pendulum of length Lo with the same period T.
We can find Lp with Eq. 15-28. The point along the physical pendulum at distance
Lo from point O is called the center of oscillation of the physical pendulum for the
given suspension point.

Measuring g

We can use a physical pendulum to measure the free-fall acceleration g at a par-
ticular location on Earth’s surface. (Countless thousands of such measurements
have been made during geophysical prospecting.)

To analyze a simple case, take the pendulum to be a uniform rod of length L,
suspended from one end. For such a pendulum, h in Eq. 15-29, the distance
between the pivot point and the center of mass, is }L. Table 10-2e tells us that the
rotational inertia of this pendulum about a perpendicular axis through its center
of mass is ;;mL?. From the parallel-axis theorem of Eq. 10-36 (J = Icom + Mh?),
we then find that the rotational inertia about a perpendicular axis through one
end of the rod is

T= [gym + mi? = pL? + mGL)? = nL. (15-30)
If we puth = 3L and] = unl? in Eq. 15-29 and solve for g, we find

_ 8b
§ Sr

 

(15-31)

Thus, by measuring L and the period T, we can find the value of g at the pendu-
lum’s location. (If precise measurements are to be made, a number of refine-
ments are needed, such as swinging the pendulum in an evacuated chamber.)

Iv] Checkpoint 5

Three physical pendulums, of masses 17, 2m, and 37, have the same shape and size
and are suspended at the same point. Rank the masses according to the periods of the
pendulums, greatest first.

Sample Problem 15.05 Physical pendulum, period and length

In Fig. 15-13a, a meter stick swings about a pivot point at
one end, at distance h from the stick’s center of mass.

(a) What is the period of oscillation T?
KEY IDEA

The stick is not a simple pendulum because its mass is not
concentrated in a bob at the end opposite the pivot point—
so the stick is a physical pendulum.

Calculations: The period for a physical pendulum is
given by Eq. 15-29, for which we need the rotational

inertia J of the stick about the pivot point. We can treat Figure 15-13 (a) A meter stick suspended from one endasa

 

427

the stick as a uniform rod of length L and mass m. Then physical pendulum. (b) A simple pendulum whose length Lo is

Eg. 15-30 tells us that J = ynL?, and the distance h in chosenso that the periods of the two pendulums are equal.

Eq. 15-29 is}L. Substituting these quantities into Eq. 15-29, Point Pon the pendulum of (a) marks the center of oscillation.
