456 CHAPTER 16 WAVES-!

16-4 tHe wave Equation

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

16.17 For the equation giving a string-element displacement between the second derivative with respect to x and the
as a function of position x and time ¢, apply the relationship second derivative with respect to f.
Key Idea

@ The general differential equation that governs the travel of waves _ Here the waves travel along an x axis and oscillate parallel to
of all types is ay 1 ay the y axis, and they move with speed v, in either the positive x

ae ae direction or the negative x direction.
Ix:

The Wave Equation

As a wave passes through any element on a stretched string, the element moves
perpendicularly to the wave’s direction of travel (we are dealing with a trans-
verse wave). By applying Newton’s second law to the element’s motion, we can
derive a general differential equation, called the wave equation, that governs the
travel of waves of any type.

Figure 16-11a shows a snapshot of a string element of mass dm and length €
as a wave travels along a string of linear density that is stretched along a hori-
zontal x axis. Let us assume that the wave amplitude is small so that the element
can be tilted only slightly from the x axis as the wave passes. The force F’, on the
right end of the element has a magnitude equal to tension 7 in the string and is
directed slightly upward. The force F', on the left end of the element also has
a magnitude equal to the tension 7 but is directed slightly downward. Because of
the slight curvature of the element, these two forces are not simply in opposite di-
rection so that they cancel. Instead, they combine to produce a net force that
causes the element to have an upward acceleration a,. Newton’s second law writ-
ten for y components (Fhe. = may) gives us

Fry — Fy = day. (16-34)

Let’s analyze this equation in parts, first the mass dm, then the acceleration com-
ponent a,, then the individual force components F, and F,,, and then finally the
net force that is on the left side of Eq. 16-34.

Mass. The element’s mass dm can be written in terms of the string’s linear
density 4 and the element’s length ¢ as dm = yf. Because the element can have
only a slight tilt, € ~ dx (Fig. 16-11a) and we have the approximation

dm = pdx. (16-35)

  

(a) -#— dx —} (b)

Figure 16-11 (a) A string element as a sinusoidal transverse wave travels on a stretched string.
Forces F, and F, act at the left and right ends, producing acceleration @ having a vertical
component a,. (b) The force at the element’s right end is directed along a tangent to the ele-
ment’s right side.
