 

Water Atoms Act Like Tiny
Magnets

Both the oxygen and the hydrogen atoms attract
the electrons they share in the covalent bonds of
a water molecule; this attraction is called elec-
tronegativity. However, the oxygen atom is
more electronegative than the hydrogen atoms,
so it attracts the electrons more strongly than do
the hydrogen atoms. As a result, the shared
electrons in a water molecule are far more
likely to be found near the oxygen nucleus than
near the hydrogen nuclei. This stronger attrac-

 

 

An organic molecule

Hydrogen atom
Hydrogen bond

Oxygen atom

 

 

tion for electrons gives the oxygen atom two
partial negative charges (&>), as though the elec-
tron cloud were denser near the oxygen atom
than around the hydrogen atoms. Because the
water molecule as a whole is electrically neu-
tral, each hydrogen atom carries a partial positive charge (5*).
The Greek letter delta (8) signifies a partial charge, much
weaker than the full unit charge of an ion.

What would you expect the shape of a water molecule to
be? Each of water’s two covalent bonds has a partial charge
at each end, 5 at the oxygen end and 8* at the hydrogen end.
The most stable arrangement of these charges is a tetrabe-
dron, in which the two negative and two positive charges are
approximately equidistant from one another (figure 2.120).
The oxygen atom lies at the center of the tetrahedron, the
hydrogen atoms occupy two of the apexes, and the partial
negative charges occupy the other two apexes. This results
in a bond angle of 104.5° between the two covalent oxygen-
hydrogen bonds. (In a regular tetrahedron, the bond angles
would be 109.5°; in water, the partial negative charges occu-
py more space than the hydrogen atoms, and, therefore, they
compress the oxygen-hydrogen bond angle slightly.)

‘The water molecule, thus, has distinct “ends,” each with a
partial charge, like the two poles of a magnet. (These partial

FIGURE 2.13
Structure of a hydrogen bond.

charges are much less than the unit charges of ions, how-
ever.) Molecules that exhibit charge separation are called
polar molecules because of their magnet-like poles, and
water is one of the most polar molecules known. The polarity
of water underlies its chemistry and the chemistry of life.

Polar molecules interact with one another, as the & of
one molecule is attracted to the * of another. Because many
of these interactions involve hydrogen atoms, they are
called hydrogen bonds (figure 2.13). Each hydrogen bond
is individually very weak and transient, lasting on average
only ipqqon0oy0m second (10-1! sec). However, the cumula-
tive effects of large numbers of these bonds can be enor-
mous. Water forms an abundance of hydrogen bonds,
which are responsible for many of its important physical
properties (table 2.2).

 

The water molecule is very polar, with ends that exhibit
partial positive and negative charges. Opposite charges
attract, forming weak linkages called hydrogen bonds.

 

Table 2.2. The Properties of Water

Example of Benefit to Life

Property Explanation

Cohesion Hydrogen bonds hold water molecules together

High specific heat Hydrogen bonds absorb heat when they break, and release
heat when they form, minimizing temperature changes

High heat of Many hydrogen bonds must be broken for water to evapo-

vaporization rate

Lower density Water molecules in an ice crystal are spaced relatively far

of ice apart because of hydrogen bonding

High polarity Polar water molecules are attracted to ions and polar com-

pounds, making them soluble

Leaves pull water upward from the
roots; seeds swell and germinate
Water stabilizes the temperature of
organisms and the environment
Evaporation of water cools body
surfaces

Because ice is less dense than water,
lakes do not freeze solid

Many kinds of molecules can move
freely in cells, permitting a diverse
array of chemical reactions

Chapter 2 The Nature of Molecules

29
