4ss8 CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

KK The difference
1.04

in these path
Thus, the waves arrive exactly in phase

lengths
equals 1.0.
and undergo fully constructive interference.

(9

Yn

 

We find six points
of fully constructive
interference.

Maximum phase
difference

   
   
   

Zero
phase 1.02"
difference

Zero phase
1.0 difference

(g) Maximum phase difference

Figure 17-8 (continued) (e) Another point of fully constructive interference. ( f ) Using symmetry to determine other points. (g) The six points

of fully constructive interference.

one point between a and d at which AL = A (Fig. 17-8e).
From Eq. 17-23, fully constructive interference occurs at
that point. Also, there can be no other point along the way
from point a to point d at which fully constructive inter-
ference occurs, because there is no other integer than 1
between 0 at point a and 1.5 at point d.

17-4 INTENSITY AND SOUND LEVEL

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

17.17 Calculate the sound intensity / at a surface as the ratio of
the power P to the surface area A.

17.18 Apply the relationship between the sound intensity J and
the displacement amplitude s,,, of the sound wave.

17.19 Identify an isotropic point source of sound.

17.20 For an isotropic point source, apply the relationship in-
volving the emitting power P,, the distance r to a detector,
and the sound intensity J at the detector.

Key Ideas

‘We can now use symmetry to locate other points of fully
constructive or destructive interference (Fig. 17-8f).
Symmetry about line cd gives us point b, at which AL = 0A.
Also, there are three more points at which AL = A. In all
(Fig. 17-8g) we have

N=6. (Answer)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

17.21 Apply the relationship between the sound level B,
the sound intensity J, and the standard reference
intensity Jp.

17.22 Evaluate a logarithm function (log) and an antilogarithm
function (log~').

17.23 Relate the change in a sound level to the change in sound
intensity.

 

@ The intensity J of a sound wave at a surface is the average
rate per unit area at which energy is transferred by the wave
through or onto the surface:

l=—,

A

where P is the time rate of energy transfer (power) of the
sound wave and A is the area of the surface intercepting
the sound. The intensity / is related to the displacement
amplitude s,,, of the sound wave by

-1 2o2
T= 3pv 0S.

@ The intensity at a distance r from a point source that
emits sound waves of power P, equally in all directions
(isotropically) is
P
I=— +>.
An?
@ The sound level £ in decibels (dB) is defined as

 

B = (10 dB) log i
0

where Jy (= 10°” W/m?) is a reference intensity level to
which all intensities are compared. For every factor-of-10
increase in intensity, 10 dB is added to the sound level.

 
