506

=

CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

<Problems

SS
@

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM _ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
«Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

 

WWW Worked-out solution is at
Interactive solution is at

CS Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Where needed in the problems, use
speed of sound in air = 343 m/s

and density of air = 1.21 kg/m}
unless otherwise specified.

Module 17-1 Speed of Sound

*1 Two spectators at a soccer game see, and a moment later hear,
the ball being kicked on the playing field. The time delay for spec-
tator A is 0.23 s, and for spectator B it is 0.12 s. Sight lines from the
two spectators to the player kicking the ball meet at an angle of
90°. How far are (a) spectator A and (b) spectator B from the
player? (c) How far are the spectators from each other?

+2 Whats the bulk modulus of oxygen if 32.0 g of oxygen occupies
22.4 Land the speed of sound in the oxygen is 317 m/s?

°3 <= When the door of the Chapel of the Mausoleum in
Hamilton, Scotland, is slammed shut, the last echo heard by some-
one standing just inside the door reportedly comes 15 s later. (a) If
that echo were due to a single reflection off a wall opposite the
door, how far from the door is the wall? (b) If, instead, the wall is
25.7 maway, how many reflections (back and forth) occur?

*4 A column of soldiers, marching at 120 paces per minute, keep
in step with the beat of a drummer at the head of the column. The
soldiers in the rear end of the column are striding forward with the
left foot when the drummer is advancing with the right foot. What is
the approximate length of the column?

**5 SSM ILw Earthquakes generate sound waves inside Earth.
Unlike a gas, Earth can experience both transverse (S) and longitu-
dinal (P) sound waves. Typically, the speed of S waves is about
45 kms, and that of P waves 8.0 km/s. A seismograph records
P and S waves from an earthquake. The first P waves arrive 3.0 min
before the first S waves. If the waves travel in a straight line, how
far away did the earthquake occur?

**6 A man strikes one end of a thin rod with a hammer.
The speed of sound in the rod is 15 times the speed of sound in air.
A woman, at the other end with her ear close to the rod, hears the
sound of the blow twice with a 0.12 s interval between; one sound
comes through the rod and the other comes through the air along-
side the rod. If the speed of sound in air is 343 m/s, what is the
length of the rod?

*°7 SSM WWW A stone is dropped into a well. The splash is
heard 3.00 s later. What is the depth of the well?

8 © <= Hot chocolate effect. Tap a metal spoon inside a
mug of water and note the frequency f, you hear. Then add a
spoonful of powder (say, chocolate mix or instant coffee) and tap
again as you stir the powder. The frequency you hear has a lower
value f, because the tiny air bubbles released by the powder
change the water’s bulk modulus. As the bubbles reach the water
surface and disappear, the frequency gradually shifts back to its
initial value. During the effect, the bubbles don’t appreciably
change the water’s density or volume or the sound’s wavelength.

Rather, they change the value of dV/dp—that is, the differential
change in volume due to the differential change in the pressure
caused by the sound wave in the water. If f,/f, = 0.333, what is the
ratio (dV/dp),(dV/dp),?

Module 17-2 Traveling Sound Waves
°9 If the form of a sound wave traveling through air is

s(x, f) = (6.0 nm) cos(kx + (3000 rad/s) + #),

how much time does any given air molecule along the path take to
move between displacements s = +2.0 nm ands = —2.0nm?

°10 <= Underwater illusion. One

clue used by your brain to determine — Wavefronts,
the direction of a source of sound is
the time delay At between the arrival
of the sound at the ear closer to the
source and the arrival at the farther
ear. Assume that the source is distant
so that a wavefront from itis approx-
imately planar when it reaches you, Figure 17-31 Problem 10.
and let D represent the separation

between your ears. (a) If the source is located at angle @ in front of
you (Fig. 17-31), what is Arin terms of D and the speed of sound v
in air? (b) If you are submerged in water and the sound source is di-
rectly to your right, what is Ar in terms of D and the speed of sound
v, in water? (c) Based on the time-delay clue, your brain interprets
the submerged sound to arrive at an angle 6 from the forward direc-
tion. Evaluate 6 for fresh water at 20°C.

  

L D R

*11 ssm Diagnostic ultrasound of frequency 4.50 MHz is used to
examine tumors in soft tissue. (a) What is the wavelength in air of
such a sound wave? (b) If the speed of sound in tissue is 1500 m/s,
what is the wavelength of this wave in tissue?

°12 The pressure in a traveling sound wave is given by the
equation

Ap = (1.50 Pa) sin 7{(0.900 m-!) x — (315 s~)4].

Find the (a) pressure amplitude, (b) frequency, (c) wavelength, and
(d) speed of the wave.

13  A-sound wave of the form s = s,, cos(kx — wt + ) travels at
343 m/s through air in a long horizontal tube. At one instant, air
molecule A at x = 2.000 m is at

its maximum positive displace- Ap (mPa)

ment of 6.00 nm and air mole-
cule B at x = 2.070 mis at a pos-
itive displacement of 2.00 nm.
All the molecules between A
and B are at intermediate dis-
placements. What is the fre-
quency of the wave?

14 Figure 17-32 shows the
output from a pressure monitor #(ms)
mounted at a point along the Figure 17-32 Problem 14.

 
