17-5 SOURCES OF MUSICAL SOUND

   

"Tenor sixophone

SE ea Alto saxophone

  
 
      

Figure 17-15 The saxophone and
violin families, showing the re-
lations between instrument
length and frequency range.
The frequency range of each
instrument is indicated by a
horizontal bar along a fre-
quency scale suggested by the
keyboard at the bottom; the

Ch CUCUUTOUUTORTAPETEETPPETPETPEUTEETHUETAETHeeTee Tee

number 2 and any integer value of n, but Eqs. 17-40 and 17-41 for one open end
contain the number 4 and only odd values of n.

Length. The length of a musical instrument reflects the range of frequencies
over which the instrument is designed to function, and smaller length implies
higher frequencies, as we can tell from Eq. 16-66 for string instruments and Eggs. 17-
39 and 17-41 for instruments with air columns. Figure 17-15, for example, shows the
saxophone and violin families, with their frequency ranges suggested by the piano
keyboard. Note that, for every instrument, there is overlap with its higher- and
lower-frequency neighbors.

Net Wave. In any oscillating system that gives rise to a musical sound,
whether it is a violin string or the air in an organ pipe, the fundamental and one
or more of the higher harmonics are usually generated simultaneously. Thus, you
hear them together —that is, superimposed as a net wave. When different instru-
ments are played at the same note, they produce the same fundamental fre-
quency but different intensities for the higher harmonics. For example, the fourth
harmonic of middle C might be relatively loud on one instrument and relatively
quiet or even missing on another. Thus, because different instruments produce
different net waves, they sound different to you even when they are played at the
same note. That would be the case for the two net waves shown in Fig. 17-16,
which were produced at the same note by different instruments. If you heard only
the fundamentals, the music would not be musical.

lv] Checkpoint 3

Pipe A, with length L, and pipe B, with length 2L, both have two open ends. Which
harmonic of pipe B has the same frequency as the fundamental of pipe A?

Bass

495

(@

—
Time

Figure 17-16 The wave forms produced by (a)

aflute and (b) an oboe when played at the

same note, with the same first harmonic

frequency.

Sample Problem 17.05 Resonance between pipes of different lengths

Pipe A is open at both ends and has length L4 = 0.343 m. KEY IDEAS
‘We want to place it near three other pipes in which standing

waves have been set up, so that the sound can set up a stand-
ing wave in pipe A. Those other three pipes are each closed
at one end and have lengths Lg = 0.500L4, Le = 0.250L,,
and Lp = 2.00L,. For each of these three pipes, which of
their harmonics can excite a harmonic in pipe A?

(1) The sound from one pipe can set up a standing wave in
another pipe only if the harmonic frequencies match. (2)
Equation 17-39 gives the harmonic frequencies in a pipe
with two open ends (a symmetric pipe) as f = nv/2L, for
n = 1,2,3,..., that is, for any positive integer. (3) Equation
