17-5 SOURCES OF MUSICAL SOUND

Sources of Musical Sound

Musical sounds can be set up by oscillating strings (guitar, piano, violin), mem-
branes (kettledrum, snare drum), air columns (flute, oboe, pipe organ, and the
didgeridoo of Fig. 17-12), wooden blocks or steel bars (marimba, xylophone), and
many other oscillating bodies. Most common instruments involve more than a
single oscillating part. ee

Recall from Chapter 16 that standing waves can be set up on a stretched
string that is fixed at both ends. They arise because waves traveling along the
string are reflected back onto the string at each end. If the wavelength of the
waves is suitably matched to the length of the string, the superposition of waves
traveling in opposite directions produces a standing wave pattern (or oscillation
mode). The wavelength required of the waves for such a match is one that cor-
responds to a resonant frequency of the string. The advantage of setting up
standing waves is that the string then oscillates with a large, sustained amplitude,
pushing back and forth against the surrounding air and thus generating a notice-
able sound wave with the same frequency as the oscillations of the string. This
production of sound is of obvious importance to, say, a guitarist.

Sound Waves. We can set up standing waves of sound in an air-filled pipe in
a similar way. As sound waves travel through the air in the pipe, they are reflected
at each end and travel back through the pipe. (The reflection occurs even if an
end is open, but the reflection is not as complete as when the end is closed.) If the
wavelength of the sound waves is suitably matched to the length of the pipe, the
superposition of waves traveling in opposite directions through the pipe sets up
a standing wave pattern. The wavelength required of the sound waves for such a
match is one that corresponds to a resonant frequency of the pipe. The advan-
tage of such a standing wave is that the air in the pipe oscillates with a large,
sustained amplitude, emitting at any open end a sound wave that has the same
frequency as the oscillations in the pipe. This emission of sound is of obvious
importance to, say, an organist.

Many other aspects of standing sound wave patterns are similar to those
of string waves: The closed end of a pipe is like the fixed end of a string in that
there must be a node (zero displacement) there, and the open end of a pipe is
like the end of a string attached to a freely moving ring, as in Fig. 16-19, in
that there must be an antinode there. (Actually, the antinode for the open
end of a pipe is located slightly beyond the end, but we shall not dwell on
that detail.)

Two Open Ends. The simplest standing wave pattern that can be set up ina
pipe with two open ends is shown in Fig. 17-13a. There is an antinode across each

Antinodes (maximum oscillation)
occur at the open ends.

| |
—_

   

(0) - First harmonic

Figure 17-13 (a) The simplest standing wave pattern of displacement for (longitudinal)
sound waves in a pipe with both ends open has an antinode (A) across each end and a
node (N) across the middle. (The longitudinal displacements represented by the double
arrows are greatly exaggerated.) (b) The corresponding standing wave pattern for
(transverse) string waves.

493

   

Alamy

Figure 17-12 The air column within a didgeri-
doo (“a pipe”) oscillates when the instru-
ment is played.
