The names of the quantities in Eq. 16-2 are displayed in Fig. 16-3 and defined
next. Before we discuss them, however, let us examine Fig. 16-4, which shows five
“snapshots” of a sinusoidal wave traveling in the positive direction of an x axis.
The movement of the wave is indicated by the rightward progress of the short
arrow pointing to a high point of the wave. From snapshot to snapshot, the short
arrow moves to the right with the wave shape, but the string moves only parallel
to the y axis. To see that, let us follow the motion of the red-dyed string element at
x = 0. In the first snapshot (Fig. 16-4a), this element is at displacement y = 0.
In the next snapshot, it is at its extreme downward displacement because a valley
(or extreme low point) of the wave is passing through it. It then moves back up
through y = 0. In the fourth snapshot, it is at its extreme upward displacement
because a peak (or extreme high point) of the wave is passing through it. In the
fifth snapshot, it is again at y = 0, having completed one full oscillation.

Amplitude and Phase

The amplitude y,, of a wave, such as that in Fig. 16-4 , is the magnitude of the
maximum displacement of the elements from their equilibrium positions as the
wave passes through them. (The subscript m stands for maximum.) Because y,, is
a magnitude, it is always a positive quantity, even if it is measured downward
instead of upward as drawn in Fig. 16-4a.

The phase of the wave is the argument kx — wt of the sine in Eq. 16-2. As the
wave sweeps through a string element at a particular position x, the phase
changes linearly with time ¢. This means that the sine also changes, oscillating
between +1 and —1. Its extreme positive value (+1) corresponds to a peak of the
wave moving through the element; at that instant the value of y at position x is y,,.
Its extreme negative value (—1) corresponds to a valley of the wave moving
through the element; at that instant the value of y at position x is —y,,. Thus, the
sine function and the time-dependent phase of a wave correspond to the oscilla-
tion of a string element, and the amplitude of the wave determines the extremes
of the element’s displacement.

Caution: When evaluating the phase, rounding off the numbers before you
evaluate the sine function can throw of the calculation considerably.

Wavelength and Angular Wave Number

The wavelength A of a wave is the distance (parallel to the direction of the wave’s
travel) between repetitions of the shape of the wave (or wave shape). A typical
wavelength is marked in Fig. 16-4a, which is a snapshot of the wave at time t = 0.
At that time, Eq. 16-2 gives, for the description of the wave shape,

y(x,0) = y», sin kx. (16-3)

By definition, the displacement y is the same at both ends of this wave-
length —that is, at x = x, and x = x, + A. Thus, by Eq. 16-3,

Yin Sin Kacy = Yn Sin k(Qey + A)

= Ym sin(kx; + kA). (16-4)

A sine function begins to repeat itself when its angle (or argument) is increased
by 27rrad,so in Eq. 16-4 we must have kA = 27, or

k (16-5)

(angular wave number).

We call k the angular wave number of the wave; its SI unit is the radian per meter,
or the inverse meter. (Note that the symbol k here does not represent a spring
constant as previously.)

Notice that the wave in Fig. 16-4 moves to the right by iA from one snapshot
to the next. Thus, by the fifth snapshot, it has moved to the right by 1A.

16-1 TRANSVERSE WAVES 447

Amplitude 6. tating
Displacement term
Phase
——
y(X,f) = yy, Sin (kx — Ot)

Angular

wave number ‘Time

Position Angular

frequency

Figure 16-3 The names of the quantities in
Eq. 16-2, for a transverse sinusoidal wave.

Watch this spot in this
series of snapshots.

A.

y

-#—ia—
(a

 

 

 

(@)
Figure 16-4 Five “snapshots” of a string wave
traveling in the positive direction of an
x axis. The amplitude y,, is indicated. A
typical wavelength A, measured from an
arbitrary position x;,is also indicated.
