462 CHAPTER 16 WAVES-!

16-6 PHasors

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

16.22 Using sketches, explain how a phasor can represent
the oscillations of a string element as a wave travels
through its location.

16.23 Sketch a phasor diagram for two overlapping waves
traveling together on a string, indicating their amplitudes
and phase difference on the sketch.

16.24 By using phasors, find the resultant wave of two trans-
verse waves traveling together along a string, calculating
the amplitude and phase and writing out the displacement
equation, and then displaying all three phasors in a phasor
diagram that shows the amplitudes, the leading or lagging,
and the relative phases.

 

Key Idea

@ A wave y(x, ) can be represented with a phasor. This is a
vector that has a magnitude equal to the amplitude y,,, of the
wave and that rotates about an origin with an angular speed

Phasors

equal to the angular frequency w of the wave. The projection
of the rotating phasor on a vertical axis gives the displace-
ment y of a point along the wave's travel.

Adding two waves as discussed in the preceding module is strictly limited to
waves with identical amplitudes. If we have such waves, that technique is easy
enough to use, but we need a more general technique that can be applied to any
waves, whether or not they have the same amplitudes. One neat way is to use
phasors to represent the waves. Although this may seem bizarre at first, it is es-
sentially a graphical technique that uses the vector addition rules of Chapter 3 in-
stead of messy trig additions.

A phasor is a vector that rotates around its tail, which is pivoted at the origin
of a coordinate system. The magnitude of the vector is equal to the amplitude y,,
of the wave that it represents. The angular speed of the rotation is equal to the an-
gular frequency w of the wave. For example, the wave

yilt.t) = ym sin(kx ~ wf) (16-55)

is represented by the phasor shown in Figs. 16-15a to d. The magnitude of the
phasor is the amplitude y,,,, of the wave. As the phasor rotates around the origin
at angular speed w, its projection y, on the vertical axis varies sinusoidally, from a
maximum of y,,; through zero to a minimum of —y,,, and then back to y,,;. This
variation corresponds to the sinusoidal variation in the displacement y, of any
point along the string as the wave passes through that point. (All this is shown as
an animation with voiceover in Wiley PLUS.)

When two waves travel along the same string in the same direction, we can
represent them and their resultant wave in a phasor diagram. The phasors in
Fig. 16-15e represent the wave of Eq. 16-55 and a second wave given by

yal0.t) = Yngsin(kx ~ of + 4). (16-56)

This second wave is phase-shifted from the first wave by phase constant ¢.
Because the phasors rotate at the same angular speed , the angle between the
two phasors is always ¢. If ¢ is a positive quantity, then the phasor for wave 2 lags
the phasor for wave 1 as they rotate, as drawn in Fig. 16-15e. If ¢ is a negative
quantity, then the phasor for wave 2 /eads the phasor for wave 1.

Because waves y, and y> have the same angular wave number k and angu-
lar frequency w, we know from Egs. 16-51 and 16-52 that their resultant is of

the form

YD) = Yin sin(kx — wt + B), (16-57)
