Using Recombination to Make Genetic Maps

Because crossing over is more frequent between two genes
that are relatively far apart than between two that are close
together, the frequency of crossing over can be used to map
the relative positions of genes on chromosomes. In a cross,
the proportion of progeny exhibiting an exchange between
two genes is a measure of the frequency of crossover events
between them, and thus indicates the relative distance sepa-
rating them. The results of such crosses can be used to con-
struct a genetic map that measures distance between genes
in terms of the frequency of recombination. One “map
unit” is defined as the distance within which a crossover
event is expected to occur in an average of 1% of gametes.
A map unit is now called a centimorgan, after Thomas
Hunt Morgan.

In recent times new technologies have allowed geneti-
cists to create gene maps based on the relative positions of
specific gene sequences called restriction sites because they
are recognized by DNA-cleaving enzymes called restriction
endonucleases. Restriction maps, discussed in chapter 19,
have largely supplanted genetic recombination maps for
detailed gene analysis because they are far easier to pro-
duce. Recombination maps remain the method of choice
for genes widely separated on a chromosome.

The Three-Point Cross. In constructing a genetic map,
one simultaneously monitors recombination among three
or more genes located on the same chromosome, referred
to as syntenic genes. When genes are close enough to-
gether on a chromosome that they do not assort indepen-
dently, they are said to be linked to one another. A cross
involving three linked genes is called a three-point cross.
Data obtained by Morgan on traits encoded by genes on
the X chromosome of Drosophila were used by his student
A. H. Sturtevant, to draw the first genetic map (figure
13.33). By convention, the most common allele of a gene is
often denoted with the symbol “+” and is designated as
wild type. All other alleles are denoted with just the spe-

cific letters.

FIGURE 13.33

Chromosome
number

o g ;

Flower color

Location of genes

Seed color

! mn

Flower position Pod shape Plant
height
Pod color

© 1

Seed shape

FIGURE 13.32

The chromosomal locations of the seven genes studied by
Mendel in the garden pea. The genes for plant height and pod
shape are very close to each other and rarely recombine. Plant
height and pod shape were not among the characters Mendel
examined in dihybrid crosses. One wonders what he would have
made of the linkage he surely would have detected had he tested
these characters.

 

The first genetic map. This map of
the X chromosome of Drosophila was
prepared in 1913 by A. H. Sturtevant, a
student of Morgan. On it he located

the relative positions of five recessive
traits that exhibited sex linkage by

Five
traits

estimating their relative recombination
frequencies in genetic crosses.
Sturtevant arbitrarily chose the

position of the yellow gene

as zero on his map to provide a frame
of reference. The higher the
recombination frequency, the farther
apart the two genes.

 

y Yellow body color
w White eye color

v_ Vermilion eye color
m Miniature wing

r Rudimentary wing

 

Genetic
Recombination mee
frequencies
5B Ar
y and w 0.010
v and m 0.030
v andr 0.269 maa
v and w 0.300 3t °
v and y 0.322
wand m 0.327
y and m 0.355 01 w
wand r 0.450 oHy

 

 

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance

265
