Waves-l

16-1 TRANSVERSE WAVES

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

16.01 Identify the three main types of waves.

16.02 Distinguish between transverse waves and longitudi-
nal waves.

16.03 Given a displacement function for a traverse wave,
determine amplitude y,,,, angular wave number k, angular
frequency w, phase constant ¢, and direction of travel,
and calculate the phase kx + wt + ¢ and the displace-
ment at any given time and position.

16.04 Given a displacement function for a traverse
wave, calculate the time between two given displace-
ments.

16.05 Sketch a graph of a transverse wave as a function
of position, identifying amplitude y,,,, wavelength A, where
the slope is greatest, where it is zero, and where the
string elements have positive velocity, negative velocity,
and zero velocity.

16.06 Given a graph of displacement versus time for
a transverse wave, determine amplitude y,, and
period T.

Key Ideas

@ Mechanical waves can exist only in material media and are
governed by Newton's laws. Transverse mechanical waves,
like those on a stretched string, are waves in which the
particles of the medium oscillate perpendicular to the wave's
direction of travel. Waves in which the particles of the

medium oscillate parallel to the wave's direction of travel are
longitudinal waves.

@ Asinusoidal wave moving in the positive direction of an
x axis has the mathematical form

yO, 1) = yp, sin(kx ~ wt),

where y,,, is the amplitude (magnitude of the maximum dis-

placement) of the wave, k is the angular wave number, w is
the angular frequency, and kx — wt is the phase. The wave-
length A is related to k by

444

16.07 Describe the effect on a transverse wave of changing
phase constant ¢.

16.08 Apply the relation between the wave speed v, the
distance traveled by the wave, and the time required for
that travel.

16.09 Apply the relationships between wave speed v,
angular frequency w, angular wave number k, wavelength
A, period T, and frequency f.

16.10 Describe the motion of a string element as a trans-
verse wave moves through its location, and identify
when its transverse speed is zero and when it is maxi-
mum.

16.11 Calculate the transverse velocity u(t) of a string
element as a transverse wave moves through its location.

16.12 Calculate the transverse acceleration a(t) ofa
string element as a transverse wave moves through its
location.

16.13 Given a graph of displacement, transverse velocity,
or transverse acceleration, determine the phase con-
stant ¢.

@ The period T and frequency f of the wave are related to w by

o 1

an SOE

@ The wave speed v (the speed of the wave along the string) is
related to these other parameters by

vase af

@ Any function of the form
y(x, t) = h(kx + wt)

can representa traveling wave with a wave speed as given
above and a wave shape given by the mathematical form of h.
The plus sign denotes a wave traveling in the negative
direction of the x axis, and the minus sign a wave traveling in
the positive direction.
