17-7 THE DOPPLER EFFECT

The Doppler Effect

A police car is parked by the side of the highway, sounding its 1000 Hz siren. If
you are also parked by the highway, you will hear that same frequency.
However, if there is relative motion between you and the police car, either
toward or away from each other, you will hear a different frequency. For exam-
ple, if you are driving toward the police car at 120 km/h (about 75 mi/h), you will
hear a higher frequency (1096 Hz, an increase of 96 Hz). If you are driving away
from the police car at that same speed, you will hear a /ower frequency (904 Hz,
a decrease of 96 Hz).

These motion-related frequency changes are examples of the Doppler
effect. The effect was proposed (although not fully worked out) in 1842 by
Austrian physicist Johann Christian Doppler. It was tested experimentally in
1845 by Buys Ballot in Holland, “using a locomotive drawing an open car with
several trumpeters.”

The Doppler effect holds not only for sound waves but also for electromag-
netic waves, including microwaves, radio waves, and visible light. Here, however,
we shall consider only sound waves, and we shall take as a reference frame the
body of air through which these waves travel. This means that we shall measure
the speeds of a source S of sound waves and a detector D of those waves relative
to that body of air. (Unless otherwise stated, the body of air is stationary relative
to the ground, so the speeds can also be measured relative to the ground.)
We shall assume that S and D move either directly toward or directly away from
each other, at speeds less than the speed of sound.

General Equation. If either the detector or the source is moving, or both are
moving, the emitted frequency fand the detected frequency f’ are related by

+

Ds VIVp
dae vg eneral Doppler effect), (17-47)

where v is the speed of sound through the air, vp is the detector’s speed relative
to the air, and vs is the source’s speed relative to the air. The choice of plus or
minus signs is set by this rule:

oO When the motion of detector or source is toward the other, the sign on its speed
must give an upward shift in frequency. When the motion of detector or source is
away from the other, the sign on its speed must give a downward shift in frequency.

In short, toward means shift up, and away means shift down.

Here are some examples of the rule. If the detector moves toward the
source, use the plus sign in the numerator of Eq. 17-47 to get a shift up in the
frequency. If it moves away, use the minus sign in the numerator to get a shift
down. If it is stationary, substitute 0 for vp. If the source moves toward the
detector, use the minus sign in the denominator of Eq. 17-47 to get a shift up in
the frequency. If it moves away, use the plus sign in the denominator to get
a shift down. If the source is stationary, substitute 0 for vs.

Next, we derive equations for the Doppler effect for the following two
specific situations and then derive Eq. 17-47 for the general situation.

1. When the detector moves relative to the air and the source is stationary
relative to the air, the motion changes the frequency at which the detector
intercepts wavefronts and thus changes the detected frequency of the sound
wave.

2. When the source moves relative to the air and the detector is stationary
relative to the air, the motion changes the wavelength of the sound wave and
thus changes the detected frequency (recall that frequency is related to
wavelength).

499
