From Eq. 17-21, this occurs when the ratio AL/A is

- OS), 15,25), ooo
a

(fully destructive interference).

17-3 INTERFERENCE 487

(17-25)

For example, if the path length difference AL = |L, — L,I in Fig. 17-7a is equal to
2.5A, then AL/A = 2.5 and the waves undergo fully destructive interference at
point P (Fig. 17-7c). The interference is fully destructive because the wave from
Sis phase-shifted relative to the wave from S, by 2.5 wavelengths, which puts the

two waves exactly out of phase at P.

Of course, two waves could produce intermediate interference as, say, when
AL/A = 1.2. This would be closer to fully constructive interference (AL/A = 1.0)

than to fully destructive interference (AL/A = 1.5).

Sample Problem 17.02

In Fig. 17-8a, two point sources S; and S,, which are in phase
and separated by distance D = 1.5A, emit identical sound
waves of wavelength A.

(a) What is the path length difference of the waves from S,
and S, at point P,, which lies on the perpendicular bisector
of distance D, at a distance greater than D from the sources
(Fig. 17-8b)? (That is, what is the difference in the distance
from source S; to point P; and the distance from source Sy
to P;?) What type of interference occurs at P;?

Reasoning: Because the waves travel identical distances to
reach P,, their path length difference is

AL=0. (Answer)

From Eq. 17-23, this means that the waves undergo fully
constructive interference at P, because they start in phase at
the sources and reach P, in phase.

(b) What are the path length difference and type of inter-
ference at point P) in Fig. 17-8c?

The difference in these
path lengths equals 0.
ce

 
    
 
    

Sy

I,

Thus, the waves arrive exactly
in phase and undergo fully
constructive interference.

(a) (d) 1)

Interference points along a big circle

Reasoning: The wave from S, travels the extra distance D
(= 1.5A) to reach P>. Thus, the path length difference is

AL = 1.5A. (Answer)

From Eq. 17-25, this means that the waves are exactly out
of phase at P, and undergo fully destructive interference
there.

(c) Figure 17-8d shows a circle with a radius much greater
than D, centered on the midpoint between sources S; and S>.
‘What is the number of points N around this circle at which
the interference is fully constructive? (That is, at how many
points do the waves arrive exactly in phase?)

Reasoning: Starting at point a, let’s move clockwise
along the circle to point d. As we move, path length differ-
ence AL increases and so the type of interference changes.
From (a), we know that is AL = 0A at point a. From (b),
we know that AL = 1.5A at point d. Thus, there must be

 

6

The difference in these
path lengths is D,
which equals 1.52.

Thus, the waves arrive
exactly out of phase
and undergo fully
2 destructive interference. (a)

Figure 17-8 (a) Two point sources S; and $5, separated by distance D, emit spherical sound waves in phase. (b) The waves travel equal
distances to reach point P,. (c) Point P) is on the line extending through S, and S,. (d) We move around a large circle. (Figure continues)
