508 CHAPTER 17 WAVES-II

the sources is d = 16.0 m. At any point P on the x axis, the wave
from S, and the wave from S, interfere. When P is very far away
(x ~ ~), what are (a) the phase difference between the arriving
waves from S; and S, and (b) the type of interference they pro-
duce? Now move point P along the x axis toward S;.(c) Does the
phase difference between the waves increase or decrease? At
what distance x do the waves have a phase difference of (d)
0.50A, (e) 1.00A, and (f) 1.504?

Module 17-4 Intensity and Sound Level

°24 Suppose that the sound level of a conversation is initially at
an angry 70 dB and then drops to a soothing 50 dB. Assuming that
the frequency of the sound is 500 Hz, determine the (a) initial and
(b) final sound intensities and the (c) initial and (d) final sound
wave amplitudes.

*25 A sound wave of frequency 300 Hz has an intensity of
1.00 «W/m?. What is the amplitude of the air oscillations caused by
this wave?

°26 A 1.0W point source emits sound waves isotropically.
Assuming that the energy of the waves is conserved, find the inten-
sity (a) 1.0 m from the source and (b) 2.5 m from the source.

*27 SSM WWW A certain sound source is increased in sound
level by 30.0 dB. By what multiple is (a) its intensity increased and
(b) its pressure amplitude increased?

°28 Two sounds differ in sound level by 1.00 dB. What is the ratio
of the greater intensity to the smaller intensity?

*29 SSM A point source emits sound waves isotropically. The
intensity of the waves 2.50 m from the source is 1.91 x 10-4 W/m?.
Assuming that the energy of the waves is conserved, find the
power of the source.

°30 The source of a sound wave has a power of 1.00 «W. If it is a
point source, (a) what is the intensity 3.00 m away and (b) what is
the sound level in decibels at that distance?

31 <== © When you “crack” a knuckle, you suddenly widen
the knuckle cavity, allowing more volume for the synovial fluid in-
side it and causing a gas bubble suddenly to appear in the fluid. The
sudden production of the bubble, called “cavitation,” produces a
sound pulse —the cracking sound. Assume that the sound is trans-
mitted uniformly in all directions and that it fully passes from the
knuckle interior to the outside. If the pulse has a sound level of
62 dB at your ear, estimate the rate at which energy is produced by
the cavitation.

°32 <= Approximately a third of people with normal hearing
have ears that continuously emit a low-intensity sound outward
through the ear canal. A person with such spontaneous otoacoustic
emission is rarely aware of the sound, except perhaps in a noise-
free environment, but occasionally the emission is loud enough to
be heard by someone else nearby. In one observation, the sound
wave had a frequency of 1665 Hz and a pressure amplitude of
1.13 X 10-3 Pa. What were (a) the displacement amplitude and
(b) the intensity of the wave emitted by the ear?

°33 <x Male Rana catesbeiana bullfrogs are known for their
loud mating call. The call is emitted not by the frog’s mouth but by
its eardrums, which lie on the surface of the head. And, surpris-
ingly, the sound has nothing to do with the frog’s inflated throat. If
the emitted sound has a frequency of 260 Hz and a sound level of
85 dB (near the eardrum), what is the amplitude of the eardrum’s
oscillation? The air density is 1.21 kg/m’.

34 © Two atmospheric sound sources A and B emit isotropi-
cally at constant power. The sound levels @ of their emissions are
plotted in Fig. 17-40 versus the radial distance r from the sources.
The vertical axis scale is set by #; = 85.0 dB and , = 65.0 dB.
What are (a) the ratio of the larger power to the smaller power and
(b) the sound level difference at r= 10 m?

 

Bb

B (dB)

= 100 500 1000
Figure 17-40 Problem 34. r(m)
35 A point source emits 30.0 W of sound isotropically. A small
microphone intercepts the sound in an area of 0.750 cm?, 200 m
from the source. Calculate (a) the sound intensity there and (b) the
power intercepted by the microphone.

°°36 <$= Party hearing. As the number of people at a party in-
creases, you must raise your voice for a listener to hear you against
the background noise of the other partygoers. However, once you
reach the level of yelling, the only way you can be heard is if you
move closer to your listener, into the listener’s “personal space.”
Model the situation by replacing you with an isotropic point source
of fixed power P and replacing your listener with a point that ab-
sorbs part of your sound waves. These points are initially separated
by r, = 1.20 m. If the background noise increases by AB=5 dB, the
sound level at your listener must also increase. What separation r,
is then required?

37 @ A sound source sends a sinusoidal sound wave of angular
frequency 3000 rad/s and amplitude 12.0 nm through a tube of air.
The internal radius of the tube is 2.00 cm. (a) What is the average
rate at which energy (the sum of the kinetic and potential energies)
is transported to the opposite end of the tube? (b) If, simultane-
ously, an identical wave travels along an adjacent, identical tube,
what is the total average rate at which energy is transported to the
opposite ends of the two tubes by the waves? If, instead, those two
waves are sent along the same tube simultaneously, what is the to-
tal average rate at which they transport energy when their phase
difference is (c) 0, (d) 0.40 7rad, and (e) rad?

Module 17-5 Sources of Musical Sound

38 The water level in a vertical glass tube 1.00 m long can be ad-
justed to any position in the tube. A tuning fork vibrating at 686 Hz
is held just over the open top end of the tube, to set up a standing
wave of sound in the air-filled top portion of the tube. (That air-
filled top portion acts as a tube with one end closed and the other
end open.) (a) For how many different positions of the water level
will sound from the fork set up resonance in the tube’s air-filled
portion? What are the (b) least and (c) second least water heights
in the tube for resonance to occur?

*39 SSM _ ILW (a) Find the speed of waves on a violin string of
mass 800 mg and length 22.0 cm if the fundamental frequency is
920 Hz. (b) What is the tension in the string? For the fundamental,
what is the wavelength of (c) the waves on the string and (d) the
sound waves emitted by the string?
