Barr Bodies

Although males have only one copy
of the X chromosome and females
have two, female cells do not produce
twice as much of the proteins en-
coded by genes on the X chromo-
some. Instead, one of the X chromo-
somes in females is inactivated early
in embryonic development, shortly

after the embryo’s sex is determined. 2s
Which X chromosome is inactivated

varies randomly from cell to cell. If a

woman is heterozygous for a sex- Zygote

linked trait, some of her cells will ex-
press one allele and some the other.
The inactivated and highly con-
densed X chromosome is visible as a
darkly staining Barr body attached to
the nuclear membrane (figure 13.36).

X-inactivation is not restricted to humans. The
patches of color on tortoiseshell and calico cats are a fa-
miliar result of this process. The gene for orange coat
color is located on the X chromosome. The O allele spec-
ifies orange fur, and the 0 allele specifies black fur. Early
in development, one X chromosome is inactivated in the
cells that will become skin cells. If the remaining active X
carries the O allele, then the patch of skin that results
from that cell will have orange fur. If it carries the 0 al-
lele, then the fur will be black. Because X-inactivation is
a random process, the orange and black patches appear
randomly in the cat’s coat. Because only females have two
copies of the X chromosome, only they can be heterozy-
gous at the O gene, so almost all calico cats are females
(figure 13.37). The exception is male cats that have the
genotype XXY; the XXY genotype is discussed in the
next section. The white on a calico cat is due to the ac-
tion of an allele at another gene, the white spotting gene.

 

One of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes carries
the genes that determine sex. The gene determining
maleness is located on a version of the sex
chromosome called Y, which has few other
transcribed genes.

 

FIGURE 13.37

A calico cat. The coat coloration of this cat is due to the random
inactivation of her X chromosome during early development. The
female is heterozygous for orange coat color, but because only

one coat color allele is expressed, she exhibits patches of orange
and black fur.

 

Some cells

 

Random Mitosis
inactivation
(1) Embryo
Barr body
Other cells
FIGURE 13.36

Barr bodies. In the developing female embryo, one of the

X chromosomes (determined randomly) condenses and becomes
inactivated. These condensed X chromosomes, called Barr bodies,
then attach to the nuclear membrane.

 

Chapter 13 269

Patterns of Inheritance
