Analyzing a Three-Point Cross. The first genetic map
was constructed by A. H. Sturtevant, a student of Morgan’s
in 1913. He studied several traits of Drosophila, all of which
exhibited sex linkage and thus were encoded by genes re-
siding on the same chromosome (the X chromosome).
Here we will describe his study of three traits: y, yellow
body color (the normal body color is gray), w, white eye
color (the normal eye color is red), and m, miniature wing
(the normal wing is 50% longer).

Sturtevant carried out the mapping cross by crossing a
female fly homozygous for the three recessive alleles with a
normal male fly that carried none of them. All of the prog-
eny were heterozygotes. Such a cross is conventionally rep-
resented by a diagram like the one that follows, in which
the lines represent gene locations and + indicates the nor-
mal, or “wild-type” allele. Each female fly participating in a
cross possesses two homologous copies of the chromosome
being mapped, and both chromosomes are represented in
the diagram. Crossing over occurs between these two
copies in meiosis.

yom ye wt me
P generation x
—,
yom (Y chromosome)
4
yum
F, generation ——
females yw me

These heterozygous females, the F; generation, are the
key to the mapping procedure. Because they are heterozy-
gous, any crossing over that occurs during meiosis will, if it
occurs between where these genes are located, produce ga-
metes with different combinations of alleles for these
genes—in other words, recombinant chromosomes. Thus,
a crossover between the homologous X chromosomes of
such a female in the interval between the y and w genes will
yield recombinant [ y w*] and [ y* w] chromosomes, which
are different combinations than we started with. In the dia-
gram below, the crossed lines between the chromosomes
indicate where the crossover occurs. (In the parental chro-
mosomes of this cross, w is always linked with y and y*

linked with w*,)

yum y wt mt
x SO
yt wt mt yowm

In order to see all the recombinant types that might be
present among the gametes of these heterozygous flies,
Sturtevant conducted a testcross. He crossed female het-
erozygous flies to males recessive for all three traits and
examined the progeny. Because males contribute either a
Y chromosome with no genes on it or an X chromosome
with recessive alleles at all three loci, the male contribu-
tion does not disguise the potentially recombinant female
chromosomes.

266 Part IV Reproduction and Heredity

Table 13.3 summarizes the results Sturtevant obtained.
The parentals are represented by the highest number of
progeny and the double crossovers (progeny in which two
crossovers occurred) by the lowest number. To analyze his
data, Sturtevant considered the traits in pairs and deter-
mined which involved a crossover event.

1. For the body trait (y) and the eye trait (w), the first
two classes, [y* w*] and [y w], involve no crossovers
(they are parental combinations). In table 13.3, no
progeny numbers are tabulated for these two classes
on the “body-eye” column (a dash appears instead).

2. The next two classes have the same body-eye combi-
nation as the parents, [y* w*] and [y w], so again no
numbers are entered as recombinants under body-eye
crossover type.

3. The next two classes, [y* w] and [y w*], do not have
the same body-eye combinations as the parent chro-
mosomes, so the observed numbers of progeny are
recorded, 16 and 12, respectively.

4. The last two classes also differ from parental chromo-
somes in body-eye combination, so again the ob-
served numbers of each class are recorded, 1 and 0.

5. The sum of the numbers of observed progeny that
are recombinant for body (y) and eye (w) is 16 + 12 +
1, or 29. Because the total number of progeny is
2205, this represents 29/2205, or 0.01315. The per-
centage of recombination between y and w is thus
1.315%, or 1.3 centimorgans.

To estimate the percentage of recombination between
eye (w) and wing (m), one proceeds in the same manner,
obtaining a value of 32.608%, or 32.6 centimorgans. Simi-
larly, body (y) and wing (7) are separated by a recombina-
tion distance of 33.832%, or 33.8 centimorgans.

From this, then, we can construct our genetic map. The
biggest distance, 33.8 centimorgans, separates the two out-
side genes, which are evidently y and m. The gene w is be-
tween them, near y.

yw m

ee

[ )
1.3 32.6

33.8

The two distances 1.3 and 32.6 do not add up to 33.8
but rather to 33.9. The difference, 0.1, represents chromo-
somes in which two crossovers occurred, one between y and
w and another between w and m. These chromosomes do
not exhibit recombination between y and m.

Genetic maps such as this are key tools in genetic analy-
sis, permitting an investigator reliably to predict how a
newly discovered trait, once it has been located on the
chromosome map, will recombine with many others.
