<Questions

1 Ina first experiment, a sinusoidal sound wave is sent through
a long tube of air, transporting energy at the average rate of P,y.1-
In a second experiment, two other sound waves, identical to the
first one, are to be sent simultaneously through the tube with a
phase difference ¢ of either 0, 0.2 wavelength, or 0.5 wavelength
between the waves. (a) With only mental calculation, rank those
choices of # according to the average rate at which the waves will
transport energy, greatest first. (b) For the first choice of ¢, what is
the average rate in terms of Pay?

2 In Fig. 17-25, two point sources
5, and 55, which are in phase, emit
identical sound waves of wave-
length 2.0m. In terms of wave-
lengths, what is the phase differ-
ence between the waves arriving at
point P if (a) L; = 38m and L, = 34 m, and (b) L; = 39m and
L, = 36m? (c) Assuming that the source separation is much
smaller than L; and L,, what type of interference occurs at P in
situations (a) and (b)? : :
[LL |
3 In Fig. 17-26, three long tubes I 1
(A, B, and C) are filled with differ-
ent gases under different pressures.
The ratio of the bulk modulus to the 1°4/Po
density is indicated for each gas in
terms of a basic value By/pp. Each A
tube has a piston at its left end
that can send a sound pulse

it
through the tube (as in Fig. 16-2). |
The three pulses are sent simulta 4%/Po |

Figure 17-25 Question 2.

T
L
-{.
!
L
aL.

 

neously. Rank the tubes according

to the time of arrival of the pulses i
at the open right ends of the tubes, _%/Po C

earliest first. Figure 17-26 Question 3.

f
L
\-L.

4 The sixth harmonic is set up in a

pipe. (a) How many open ends does the pipe have (it has at least
one)? (b) Is there a node, antinode, or some intermediate state at the
midpoint?

5 In Fig. 17-27, pipe A is made to oscillate in its third harmonic
by a small internal sound source. Sound emitted at the right end
happens to resonate four nearby pipes, each with only one open
end (they are not drawn to scale). Pipe B oscillates in its lowest
harmonic, pipe C in its second lowest harmonic, pipe D in its
third lowest harmonic, and pipe £ in its fourth lowest harmonic.
Without computation, rank all five pipes according to their
length, greatest first. (Hint: Draw the standing waves to scale and
then draw the pipes to scale.)

=) =

E

 

Figure 17-27 Question 5.

 

QUESTIONS 505

6 Pipe A has length L and one open end. Pipe B has length 2L
and two open ends. Which harmonics of pipe B have a frequency
that matches a resonant frequency of pipe A?

7 Figure 17-28 shows a moving sound source S that emits at a certain
frequency, and four stationary sound detectors. Rank the detectors
according to the frequency of the sound they detect from the
source, greatest first.

 

Figure 17-28 Question 7.

8 A friend rides, in turn, the rims of three fast merry-go-rounds
while holding a sound source that emits isotropically at a certain
frequency. You stand far from each merry-go-round. The frequency
you hear for each of your friend’s three rides varies as the merry-go-
round rotates. The variations in frequency for the three rides are
given by the three curves in Fig. 17-29. Rank the curves according to
(a) the linear speed v of the sound source, (b) the angular speeds w of
the merry-go-rounds, and (c) the radii r of the merry-go-rounds,
greatest first.

 

Figure 17-29 Question 8.

9 For a particular tube, here are four of the six harmonic
frequencies below 1000 Hz: 300, 600, 750, and 900 Hz. What two
frequencies are missing from the list?

10 Figure 17-30 shows a stretched string of length L and pipes a,
b,c, and d of lengths L, 2L, L/2, and L/2, respectively. The string’s
tension is adjusted until the speed of waves on the string equals the
speed of sound waves in the air. The fundamental mode of oscilla-
tion is then set up on the string. In which pipe will the sound pro-
duced by the string cause resonance, and what oscillation mode will
that sound set up?

Cc —

a © d
Figure 17-30 Question 10.

 

 

11 You are given four tuning forks. The fork with the lowest fre-
quency oscillates at 500 Hz. By striking two tuning forks at a time,
you can produce the following beat frequencies, 1, 2,3, 5, 7, and 8
Hz. What are the possible frequencies of the other three forks?
(There are two sets of answers.)
