16-7 STANDING WAVES AND RESONANCE

465

16-7 sTANDING WAVES AND RESONANCE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

16.25 For two overlapping waves (same amplitude and
wavelength) that are traveling in opposite directions,
sketch snapshots of the resultant wave, indicating nodes
and antinodes.

16.26 For two overlapping waves (same amplitude and
wavelength) that are traveling in opposite directions, find
the displacement equation for the resultant wave and
calculate the amplitude in terms of the individual wave
amplitude.

16.27 Describe the SHM of a string element at an antinode
ofa standing wave.

Key Ideas

16.28 For a string element at an antinode of a standing wave,
write equations for the displacement, transverse velocity,
and transverse acceleration as functions of time.

16.29 Distinguish between “hard” and “soft” reflections of
string waves at a boundary.

16.30 Describe resonance on a string tied taut between two
supports, and sketch the first several standing wave
patterns, indicating nodes and antinodes.

16.31 In terms of string length, determine the wavelengths re-
quired for the first several harmonics on a string under tension.

16.32 For any given harmonic, apply the relationship between
frequency, wave speed, and string length.

 

@ The interference of two identical sinusoidal waves moving
in opposite directions produces standing waves. For a string
with fixed ends, the standing wave is given by

y'(x, 1) = [2ym sin kx] cos of.

Standing waves are characterized by fixed locations of zero
displacement called nodes and fixed locations of maximum
displacement called antinodes.

@ Standing waves on a string can be set up by reflection of
traveling waves from the ends of the string. If an end is fixed, it
must be the position of a node. This limits the frequencies at

Standing Waves

which standing waves will occur ona given string. Each
possible frequency is a resonant frequency, and the
corresponding standing wave pattern is an oscillation mode.
For a stretched string of length L with fixed ends, the
resonant frequencies are

fepansn for n = 1,2,3,....
The oscillation mode corresponding to n = 1 is called the
fundamental mode or the first harmonic; the mode
corresponding to n = 2 is the second harmonic; and so on.

In Module 16-5, we discussed two sinusoidal waves of the same wavelength and
amplitude traveling in the same direction along a stretched string. What if they
travel in opposite directions? We can again find the resultant wave by applying

the superposition principle.

Figure 16-17 suggests the situation graphically. It shows the two combin-
ing waves, one traveling to the left in Fig. 16-17a, the other to the right in
Fig. 16-17b. Figure 16-17c shows their sum, obtained by applying the superposition

Figure 16-17 (a) Five snapshots of a wave
traveling to the left, at the times ¢

indicated below part (c) (Tis the period

of oscillation). (b) Five snapshots of a

wave identical to that in (a) but traveling

to the right, at the same times ¢. (c) (a)

the most.

As the waves move through each other,
some points never move and some move

 

Corresponding snapshots for the
superposition of the two waves on the
same string, At ¢= 0,57, and T,fully (b)

 

NO

PAAR

 

constructive interference occurs because
of the alignment of peaks with peaks and
valleys with valleys Att = }7 and37,
fully destructive interference occurs
because of the alignment of peaks with (o) x
valleys. Some points (the nodes, marked
with dots) never oscillate; some points.
(the antinodes) oscillate the most.

$4

 

 

LS

=f
t=47

AE

Ae
AR

 

Po
FS
ifr

 
