Oscillations

15-1 siMPLe HARMONIC MOTION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

15.01 Distinguish simple harmonic motion from other types of
periodic motion.

15.02 For a simple harmonic oscillator, apply the relationship
between position x and time ¢ to calculate either if given a
value for the other.

15.03 Relate period T, frequency f, and angular frequency w.

15.04 Identify (displacement) amplitude x,,, phase constant
(or phase angle) , and phase wt + .

15.05 Sketch a graph of the oscillator's position x versus time
t, identifying amplitude x,,, and period T.

15.06 Froma graph of position versus time, velocity versus
time, or acceleration versus time, determine the amplitude
of the plot and the value of the phase constant ¢.

15.07 Ona graph of position x versus time t describe the ef-
fects of changing period T, frequency f, amplitude x,,,, or
phase constant ¢.

15.08 Identify the phase constant ¢ that corresponds to the
starting time (t = 0) being set when a particle in SHM is
at an extreme point or passing through the center point.

15.09 Given an oscillator's position x(¢) as a function of time,
find its velocity v(t) as a function of time, identify the veloc-
ity amplitude v,,, in the result, and calculate the velocity at
any given time.

Key Ideas

15.10 Sketch a graph of an oscillator's velocity v versus time ¢,
identifying the velocity amplitude v,,,.

15.11 Apply the relationship between velocity amplitude v,,,,
angular frequency «, and (displacement) amplitude x,,,.

15.12 Given an oscillator's velocity v(t) as a function of time,
calculate its acceleration a(t) as a function of time, identify
the acceleration amplitude q,, in the result, and calculate
the acceleration at any given time.

15.13 Sketch a graph of an oscillator's acceleration a versus
time 1, identifying the acceleration amplitude a,,,.

15.14 Identify that for a simple harmonic oscillator the acceler-
ation a at any instant is always given by the product of a
negative constant and the displacement x just then.

15.15 For any given instant in an oscillation, apply the relation-
ship between acceleration a, angular frequency «, and dis-
placement x.

15.16 Given data about the position x and velocity v at one
instant, determine the phase wt + and phase constant ¢.

15.17 For a spring—block oscillator, apply the relationships be-
tween spring constant k and mass m and either period T or
angular frequency «.

15.18 Apply Hooke's law to relate the force F on a simple har-
monic oscillator at any instant to the displacement x of the
oscillator at that instant.

 

@ The frequency f of periodic, or oscillatory, motion is the
number of oscillations per second. In the SI system, it is
measured in hertz: 1 Hz = 1s~!.

@ The period Tis the time required for one complete oscilla-
tion, or cycle. It is related to the frequency by T = I/f.

@ In simple harmonic motion (SHM), the displacement x(f) of a
particle from its equilibrium position is described by the equation

xX =X,, cos(wt + )

in which x, is the amplitude of the displacement, af + dis
the phase of the motion, and ¢ is the phase constant. The
angular frequency w is related to the period and frequency of
the motion by w = 2a/T = 2 nf.

@ Differentiating x(t) leads to equations for the particle's

SHM velocity and acceleration as functions of time:

(displacement),

v= —ax,, Sin(wt + 6)
@ = —@X,, cos(at + d)

(velocity)

and (acceleration).

In the velocity function, the positive quantity wx, is the veloc-
ity amplitude v,,,. In the acceleration function, the positive
quantity «7x, is the acceleration amplitude a,

@ A particle with mass m that moves under the influence of a
Hooke's law restoring force given by F = —kx is a linear sim-
ple harmonic oscillator with

(angular frequency)

T =20 ip (period).

 

and
