string? (g) What is the transverse displacement y when this mini-
mum transfer occurs?

72 Two sinusoidal 120 Hz
waves, of the same frequency
and amplitude, are to be sent in
the positive direction of an x axis
that is directed along a cord un-
der tension. The waves can be -y’
sent in phase, or they can be
phase-shifted. Figure 16-47
shows the amplitude y’ of the re-
sulting wave versus the distance of the shift (how far one wave is
shifted from the other wave). The scale of the vertical axis is set
by y, = 6.0 mm. If the equations for the two waves are of the
form y(x, t) = Ym sin(kx + wt), what are (a) ym, (b) k, (c) @, and
(d) the correct choice of sign in front of w?

y' (mm)
°

Shift distance (cm)
Figure 16-47 Problem 72.

73 At time ¢ = 0 and at position x = 0 m along a string, a travel-
ing sinusoidal wave with an angular frequency of 440 rad/s has dis-
placement y = +4.5 mm and transverse velocity w = —0.75 m/s. If
the wave has the general form y(x, t) = y,, sin(kx — wt + ), what
is phase constant 4?

74 Energy is transmitted at rate P; by a wave of frequency f; ona
string under tension 7;. What is the new energy transmission rate P,
in terms of P; (a) if the tension is increased to 7 = 47, and (b) if,in-
stead, the frequency is decreased to f, = f,/2?

75 (a) What is the fastest transverse wave that can be sent along
a steel wire? For safety reasons, the maximum tensile stress to
which steel wires should be subjected is 7.00 X 10° N/m?. The den-
sity of steel is 7800 kg/m’. (b) Does your answer depend on the di-
ameter of the wire?

76 A standing wave results from the sum of two transverse trav-
eling waves given by

1 = 0.050 cos(ax — 47)
and > = 0.050 cos(x + 471),

where x, y;, and y, are in meters and fis in seconds. (a) What is the
smallest positive value of x that corresponds to a node? Beginning
at t = 0, what is the value of the (b) first, (c) second, and (d) third
time the particle at x = 0 has zero velocity?

77 SSM The type of rubber band used inside some baseballs
and golf balls obeys Hooke’s law over a wide range of elonga-
tion of the band. A segment of this material has an unstretched
length € and a mass m. When a force F is applied, the band
stretches an additional length A¢. (a) What is the speed (in
terms of m, A€, and the spring constant k) of transverse waves
on this stretched rubber band? (b) Using your answer to (a),
show that the time required for a transverse pulse to travel the
length of the rubber band is proportional to 1/VAC if A€ <€
and is constant if A€ > ¢.

78 The speed of electromagnetic waves (which include visible
light, radio, and x rays) in vacuum is 3.0 X 108 m/s. (a) Wavelengths
of visible light waves range from about 400 nm in the violet to
about 700 nm in the red. What is the range of frequencies of these
waves? (b) The range of frequencies for shortwave radio (for ex-
ample, FM radio and VHF television) is 1.5 to 300 MHz. What is
the corresponding wavelength range? (c) X-ray wavelengths range
from about 5.0 nm to about 1.0 X 10-* nm. What is the frequency
range for x rays?

PROBLEMS 477

79 SSM A 1.50m wire has a mass of 8.70 g and is under a ten-
sion of 120N. The wire is held rigidly at both ends and set into
oscillation. (a) What is the speed of waves on the wire? What is the
wavelength of the waves that produce (b) one-loop and (c) two-
loop standing waves? What is the frequency of the waves that pro-
duce (d) one-loop and (e) two-loop standing waves?

80 When played in a certain manner, the lowest resonant fre-
quency of a certain violin string is concert A (440 Hz). What is the
frequency of the (a) second and (b) third harmonic of the string?

81 A sinusoidal transverse wave traveling in the negative
direction of an x axis has an amplitude of 1.00 cm, a frequency of
550 Hz, and a speed of 330 m/s. If the wave equation is of the form
(x, t) = Ym sin(kx + wt), what are (a) ym, (b) @, (c) k, and (d) the
correct choice of sign in front of w?

 

82 Two sinusoidal waves of the same wavelength travel in the same
direction along a stretched string. For wave 1, y,, = 3.0mm and ¢ =
0; for wave 2, y;, = 5.0 mm and ¢ = 70°. What are the (a) amplitude
and (b) phase constant of the resultant wave?

83 SSM A sinusoidal transverse wave of amplitude y,, and
wavelength A travels on a stretched cord. (a) Find the ratio of
the maximum particle speed (the speed with which a single particle
in the cord moves transverse to the wave) to the wave speed. (b)
Does this ratio depend on the material of which the cord is made?

84 Oscillation of a 600 Hz tuning fork sets up standing waves ina
string clamped at both ends. The wave speed for the string is
400 m/s. The standing wave has four loops and an amplitude of
2.0 mm. (a) What is the length of the string? (b) Write an equation
for the displacement of the string as a function of position and time.

85 A 120cm length of string is stretched between fixed supports.
What are the (a) longest, (b) second longest, and (c) third longest
wavelength for waves traveling on the string if standing waves are to
be set up? (d) Sketch those standing waves.

86 (a) Write an equation describing a sinusoidal transverse wave
traveling on a cord in the positive direction of a y axis with an an-
gular wave number of 60 cm~!, a period of 0.20 s, and an amplitude
of 3.0mm. Take the transverse direction to be the z direction.
(b) What is the maximum transverse speed of a point on the cord?

87 Awave on astring is described by
y(x, f) = 15.0 sin(mx/8 — 471),

where x and y are in centimeters and f is in seconds. (a) What is
the transverse speed for a point on the string at x = 6.00cm
when ft = 0.250 s? (b) What is the maximum transverse speed of
any point on the string? (c) What is the magnitude of the
transverse acceleration for a point on the string at x = 6.00cm
when t= 0.250 s? (d) What is the magnitude of the maximum
transverse acceleration for any point on the string?

88 <%= Body armor. When a high-speed projectile such as a
bullet or bomb fragment strikes modern body armor, the fabric of
the armor stops the projectile and prevents penetration by quickly
spreading the projectile’s energy over a large area. This spreading
is done by longitudinal and transverse pulses that move radially
from the impact point, where the projectile pushes a cone-shaped
dent into the fabric. The longitudinal pulse, racing along the fibers
of the fabric at speed v, ahead of the denting, causes the fibers to
thin and stretch, with material flowing radially inward into the
dent. One such radial fiber is shown in Fig, 16-48a. Part of the pro-
jectile’s energy goes into this motion and stretching. The transverse
