414 CHAPTER 15 OSCILLATIONS

+--+:

Xn 0 +
Figure 15-1 A particle repeatedly oscillates
left and right along an x axis, between
extreme points x,, and —x,,.

What Is Physics?

Our world is filled with oscillations in which objects move back and forth repeat-
edly. Many oscillations are merely amusing or annoying, but many others are
dangerous or financially important. Here are a few examples: When a bat hits a
baseball, the bat may oscillate enough to sting the batter’s hands or even to break
apart. When wind blows past a power line, the line may oscillate (“gallop” in elec-
trical engineering terms) so severely that it rips apart, shutting off the power
supply to a community. When an airplane is in flight, the turbulence of the air
flowing past the wings makes them oscillate, eventually leading to metal fatigue
and even failure. When a train travels around a curve, its wheels oscillate horizon-
tally (“hunt” in mechanical engineering terms) as they are forced to turn in new
directions (you can hear the oscillations).

When an earthquake occurs near a city, buildings may be set oscillating so
severely that they are shaken apart. When an arrow is shot from a bow, the feathers
at the end of the arrow manage to snake around the bow staff without hitting it be-
cause the arrow oscillates. When a coin drops into a metal collection plate, the coin
oscillates with such a familiar ring that the coin’s denomination can be determined
from the sound. When a rodeo cowboy rides a bull, the cowboy oscillates wildly as
the bull jumps and turns (at least the cowboy hopes to be oscillating). Se

The study and control of oscillations are two of the primary goals of both
physics and engineering. In this chapter we discuss a basic type of oscillation
called simple harmonic motion.

Heads Up. This material is quite challenging to most students. One reason is
that there is a truckload of definitions and symbols to sort out, but the main reason
is that we need to relate an object’s oscillations (something that we can see or even
experience) to the equations and graphs for the oscillations. Relating the real, visi-
ble motion to the abstraction of an equation or graph requires a lot of hard work.

Simple Harmonic Motion

Figure 15-1 shows a particle that is oscillating about the origin of an x axis, repeat-
edly going left and right by identical amounts. The frequency f of the oscillation is
the number of times per second that it completes a full oscillation (a cycle) and
has the unit of hertz (abbreviated Hz), where

Lhertz = 1 Hz = 1 oscillation per second = 1 s~!. (15-1)

The time for one full cycle is the period T of the oscillation, which is
os (15-2)

Any motion that repeats at regular intervals is called periodic motion or har-
monic motion. However, here we are interested in a particular type of periodic
motion called simple harmonic motion (SHM). Such motion is a sinusoidal func-
tion of time f¢. That is, it can be written as a sine or a cosine of time ¢. Here we
arbitrarily choose the cosine function and write the displacement (or position) of
the particle in Fig. 15-1 as

X(t) = Xm Cos(wt + ) (displacement), (15-3)

in which x,,, @,and ¢are quantities that we shall define.

Freeze-Frames. Let’s take some freeze-frames of the motion and then arrange
them one after another down the page (Fig. 15-2a). Our first freeze-frame is at t = 0
when the particle is at its rightmost position on the x axis. We label that coordi-
nate as X,, (the subscript means maximum), it is the symbol in front of the cosine
