Genetic Counseling

Although most genetic disorders cannot yet be cured, we
are learning a great deal about them, and progress toward
successful therapy is being made in many cases. In the ab-
sence of a cure, however, the only recourse is to try to
avoid producing children with these conditions. The
process of identifying parents at risk of producing children
with genetic defects and of assessing the genetic state of
early embryos is called genetic counseling.

Tf a genetic defect is caused by a recessive allele, how
can potential parents determine the likelihood that they
carry the allele? One way is through pedigree analysis,
often employed as an aid in genetic counseling. By ana-
lyzing a person’s pedigree, it is sometimes possible to es-
timate the likelihood that the person is a carrier for cer-
tain disorders. For example, if one of your relatives has
been afflicted with a recessive genetic disorder such as
cystic fibrosis, it is possible that you are a heterozygous
carrier of the recessive allele for that disorder. When a
couple is expecting a child, and pedigree analysis indi-
cates that both of them have a significant probability of
being heterozygous carriers of a recessive allele responsi-
ble for a serious genetic disorder, the pregnancy is said to
be a high-risk pregnancy. In such cases, there is a sig-
nificant probability that the child will exhibit the clinical
disorder.

Another class of high-risk pregnancies is that in which
the mothers are more than 35 years old. As we have seen,
the frequency of birth of infants with Down syndrome in-
creases dramatically in the pregnancies of older women (see

figure 13.39).

Amniotic fluid

      
    

ee
S Hypodermic

syringe

  
 

Le

Fam

 

 

———— a

272 PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

When a pregnancy is diagnosed as being high-risk, many
women elect to undergo amniocentesis, a procedure that per-
mits the prenatal diagnosis of many genetic disorders. In the
fourth month of pregnancy, a sterile hypodermic needle is
inserted into the expanded uterus of the mother, removing a
small sample of the amniotic fluid bathing the fetus (figure
13.41). Within the fluid are free-floating cells derived from
the fetus; once removed, these cells can be grown in cul-
tures in the laboratory. During amniocentesis, the position
of the needle and that of the fetus are usually observed by
means of ultrasound. The sound waves used in ultrasound
are not harmful to mother or fetus, and they permit the per-
son withdrawing the amniotic fluid to do so without damag-
ing the fetus. In addition, ultrasound can be used to examine
the fetus for signs of major abnormalities.

In recent years, physicians have increasingly turned to a
new, less invasive procedure for genetic screening called
chorionic villi sampling. In this procedure, the physician
removes cells from the chorion, a membranous part of the
placenta that nourishes the fetus. This procedure can be
used earlier in pregnancy (by the eighth week) and yields
results much more rapidly than does amniocentesis.

To test for certain genetic disorders, genetic counselors
can look for three things in the cultures of cells obtained
from amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling. First,
analysis of the karyotype can reveal aneuploidy (extra or
missing chromosomes) and gross chromosomal alterations.
Second, in many cases it is possible to test directly for the
proper functioning of enzymes involved in genetic disorders.
The lack of normal enzymatic activity signals the presence
of the disorder. Thus, the lack of the enzyme responsible
for breaking down phenylalanine signals PKU (phenylke-

 

FIGURE 13.41

Amniocentesis. A needle is inserted into
the amniotic cavity, and a sample of
amniotic fluid, containing some free cells
derived from the fetus, is withdrawn into a
syringe. The fetal cells are then grown in
culture and their karyotype and many of
their metabolic functions are examined.

Fetal cells
