Thermal Expansion All objects change size with changes in tem-
perature. For a temperature change AT, a change AL in any linear
dimension L is given by

AL = Le AT, (18-9)
in which ais the coefficient of linear expansion. The change AV in
the volume V ofa solid or liquid is

AV = VB AT. (18-10)

Here 8 = 3ais the material's coefficient of volume expansion.

Heat Heat Q is energy that is transferred between a system and

its environment because of a temperature difference between

them. It can be measured in joules (J), calories (cal), kilocalories

(Cal or kcal), or British thermal units (Btu), with

1 cal = 3.968 X 10-3 Btu = 4.1868 J. (18-12)

Heat Capacity and Specific Heat If heat Q is absorbed by

an object, the object’s temperature change T,— T;is related to Q by

Q=C(T;~ T), (18-13)

in which C is the heat capacity of the object. If the object has mass
m, then

Q=cn(T;- T), (18-14)

where c is the specific heat of the material making up the object.

The molar specific heat of a material is the heat capacity

per mole, which means per 6.02 X 1073 elementary units of the
material.

Heat of Transformation Matter can exist in three common
states: solid, liquid, and vapor. Heat absorbed by a material may
change the material’s physical state—for example, from solid to liq-
uid or from liquid to gas. The amount of energy required per unit mass
to change the state (but not the temperature) of a particular material
is its heat of transformation L. Thus,

Q=Lm. (18-16)
The heat of vaporization Ly is the amount of energy per unit mass
that must be added to vaporize a liquid or that must be removed to
condense a gas. The heat of fusion L; is the amount of energy per
unit mass that must be added to melt a solid or that must be re-
moved to freeze a liquid.

Work Associated with Volume Change A gas may
exchange energy with its surroundings through work. The amount
of work W done by a gas as it expands or contracts from an initial
volume V; toa final volume V; is given by

Y
we [av- | nav.
A

(18-25)

REVIEW & SUMMARY 539

The integration is necessary because the pressure p may vary dur-
ing the volume change.

First Law of Thermodynamics The principle of conser-
vation of energy for a thermodynamic process is expressed in the
first law of thermodynamics, which may assume either of the
forms

(first law)

AE in = Eine ~ Eins = Q — W (18-26)

or dE, =dQ—dW (first law). (18-27)
E,, represents the internal energy of the material, which depends
only on the material's state (temperature, pressure, and volume).
Q represents the energy exchanged as heat between the system
and its surroundings; Q is positive if the system absorbs heat and
negative if the system loses heat. W is the work done by the sys-
tem; W is positive if the system expands against an external force
from the surroundings and negative if the system contracts be-
cause of an external force. Q and W are path dependent; AEjn is
path independent.

Applications of the First Law The first law of thermody-
namics finds application in several special cases:

adiabatic processes: Q=0, AE = —W

constant-volume processes) W=0, AEin = Q

cyclical processes: AE, =0, Q=W

free expansions: Q = W = AEin =0

Conduction, Convection, and Radiation § The rate P,,,, at
which energy is conducted through a slab for which one face is
maintained at the higher temperature Ty and the other face is
maintained at the lower temperature T¢ is

Jn Te (18-32)
t L
Here each face of the slab has area A, the length of the slab (the
distance between the faces) is L, and k is the thermal conductivity
of the material.

Convection occurs when temperature differences cause an en-
ergy transfer by motion within a fluid.

Radiation is an energy transfer via the emission of electromag-
netic energy. The rate P,, at which an object emits energy via ther-
mal radiation is

Prag = 08 AT#, (18-38)
where o (= 5.6704 x 10-§ Wim?-K*) is the Stefan—Boltzmann
constant, ¢ is the emissivity of the object's surface, A is its surface
area, and T is its surface temperature (in kelvins). The rate P,,, at
which an object absorbs energy via thermal radiation from its envi-
ronment, which is at the uniform temperature T,,, (in kelvins), is

Paps = FEAT ny. (18-39)
