14.1 What is the genetic material?

The Hammerling Experiment: Cells
Store Hereditary Information in the
Nucleus

Perhaps the most basic question one can ask about heredi-
tary information is where it is stored in the cell. To answer
this question, Danish biologist Joachim Hammerling,
working at the Max Plank Institute for Marine Biology in
Berlin in the 1930s, cut cells into pieces and observed the
pieces to see which were able to express hereditary infor-
mation. For this experiment, Hammerling needed cells
large enough to operate on conveniently and differentiated
enough to distinguish the pieces. He chose the unicellular
green alga Acetabularia, which grows up to 5 cm, as a
model organism for his investigations. Just as Mendel
used pea plants and Sturtevant used fruit flies as model or-
ganisms, Hammerling picked an organism that was suited
to the specific experimental question he wanted to answer,
assuming that what he learned could then be applied to
other organisms.

Individuals of the genus Acetabularia have distinct foot,
stalk, and cap regions; all are differentiated parts of a sin-
gle cell. The nucleus is located in the foot. As a prelimi-
nary experiment, Hammerling amputated the caps of
some cells and the feet of others. He found that when he
amputated the cap, a new cap regenerated from the re-
maining portions of the cell (foot and stalk). When he
amputated the foot, however, no new foot regenerated
from the cap and stalk. Hammerling, therefore, hypothe-
sized that the hereditary information resided within the
foot of Acetabularia.

Surgery on Single Cells

To test his hypothesis, Hammering selected individuals
from two species of the genus Acetabularia in which the
caps look very different from one another: A. mediterranea
has a disk-shaped cap, and A. crenulata has a branched,
flower-like cap. Hammerling grafted a stalk from A. crenu-
Jata to a foot from A. mediterranea (figure 14.2). The cap
that regenerated looked somewhat like the cap of A. crenu-
Jata, though not exactly the same.

Hammerling then cut off this regenerated cap and
found that a disk-shaped cap exactly like that of A.
mediterranea formed in the second regeneration and in
every regeneration thereafter. This experiment supported
Hammerling’s hypothesis that the instructions specifying
the kind of cap are stored in the foot of the cell, and that
these instructions must pass from the foot through the
stalk to the cap.

280 = =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

A. crenulata

Nucleus in base determines
type of cap regenerated

FIGURE 14.2

Hammerling’s Acetabularia reciprocal graft experiment.
Hammerling grafted a stalk of each species of Acetabularia onto

the foot of the other species. In each case, the cap that eventually
developed was dictated by the nucleus-containing foot rather than
by the stalk.

A. mediterranea

In this experiment, the initial flower-shaped cap was
somewhat intermediate in shape, unlike the disk-shaped
caps of subsequent generations. Hammerling speculated
that this initial cap, which resembled that of A. crenulata,
was formed from instructions already present in the trans-
planted stalk when it was excised from the original A.
crenulata cell. In contrast, all of the caps that regenerated
subsequently used new information derived from the foot
of the A. mediterranea cell the stalk had been grafted onto.
In some unknown way, the original instructions that had
been present in the stalk were eventually “used up.” We
now understand that genetic instructions (in the form of
messenger RNA, discussed in chapter 15) pass from the nu-
cleus in the foot upward through the stalk to the developing

cap.

 

Hereditary information in Acetabularia is stored in the
foot of the cell, where the nucleus resides.

 
