18-6 HEAT TRANSFER MECHANISMS 535

 

amount of energy transferred per unit time) is Table 18-6 Some Thermal Conductivities
Ty — Te :
Pons = 2 BAe (18-32) Substance k (Wim-K)
Metals
in which k, called the thermal conductivity, is a constant that depends on the Stainless steel 14
material of which the slab is made. A material that readily transfers energy by — Lead 35
conduction is a good thermal conductor and has a high value of k.Table 18-6 gives fron 67
the thermal conductivities of some common metals, gases, and building materials. Brass 109
Thermal Resistance to Conduction (A-Value) Aluminum 235
If you are interested in insulating your house or in keeping cola cans cold on a ital oe
ilver

picnic, you are more concerned with poor heat conductors than with good ones.
For this reason, the concept of thermal resistance R has been introduced into Gases

engineering practice. The R-value of a slab of thickness L is defined as Air (dry) 0.026

L Helium 0.15

R=— (18-33) Hydrogen 0.18

The lower the thermal conductivity of the material of which a slab is made, the Building Materials

higher the R-value of the slab; so something that has a high R-value is a poor ther- _ Polyurethane foam 0.024
mal conductor and thus a good thermal insulator. Rock wool 0.043
Note that R is a property attributed to a slab of a specified thickness, not toa _ Fiberglass 0.048

material. The commonly used unit for R (which, in the United States at least, is white pine O11

almost never stated) is the square foot—Fahrenheit degree—hour per British

" leg Window glass 1.0
thermal unit (ft?- F°- h/Btu). (Now you know why the unit is rarely stated.)

Conduction Through a Composite Slab

Figure 18-19 shows a composite slab, consisting of two materials having different
thicknesses L, and L, and different thermal conductivities k, and k,.The tempera-
tures of the outer surfaces of the slab are T}; and T¢. Each face of the slab has area
A. Let us derive an expression for the conduction rate through the slab under the
assumption that the transfer is a steady-state process; that is, the temperatures
everywhere in the slab and the rate of energy transfer do not change with time.

In the steady state, the conduction rates through the two materials must be
equal. This is the same as saying that the energy transferred through one material
in a certain time must be equal to that transferred through the other material in
the same time. If this were not true, temperatures in the slab would be changing
and we would not have a steady-state situation. Letting Ty be the temperature of
the interface between the two materials, we can now use Eq. 18-32 to write

— eA = Tx) _ kA(Tx = To)

 

Poona = Ly Li, (18-34)
Solving Eq. 18-34 for Ty yields, after a little algebra,
kK, LoTe + kyLyTy
X=. 18-35
* AL + kL, (18-35)
Substituting this expression for Tyinto either equality of Eq. 18-34 yields
Prong = ACh = To) 7 (18-36) The energy .. equals the
Lik, + Lika transfer per energy transfer
We can extend Eq. 18-36 to apply to any number n of materials making up second|herers petisecondlhere:
a slab: Figure 18-19 Heat is transferred at a steady
A(T — Te rate through a composite slab made up of
Fond = Ao (18-37) two different materials with different thick-

nesses and different thermal conductivities.
The summation sign in the denominator tells us to add the values of L/k for all The steady-state temperature at the interface
the materials. of the two materials is Ty.
