19-8 DEGREES OF FREEDOM AND MOLAR SPECIFIC HEATS

Table 19-3 Degrees of Freedom for Various Molecules

569

 

Degrees of Freedom

Molecule Example Translational Rotational Total (f)
Monatomic He 3 0 3
Diatomic oO, 3 2 5
Polyatomic CH, 3 3 6

methane (a polyatomic molecule). From such models, we would assume that all
three types of molecules can have translational motions (say, moving left-right
and up-down) and rotational motions (spinning about an axis like a top). In
addition, we would assume that the diatomic and polyatomic molecules can have
oscillatory motions, with the atoms oscillating slightly toward and away from one
another, as if attached to opposite ends of a spring.

To keep account of the various ways in which energy can be stored ina gas,
James Clerk Maxwell introduced the theorem of the equipartition of energy:

Ok] Every kind of molecule has a certain number f of degrees of freedom, which are inde-
pendent ways in which the molecule can store energy. Each such degree of freedom has
associated with it—on average—an energy of 3kT per molecule (or $RT per mole).

Let us apply the theorem to the translational and rotational motions of the
molecules in Fig. 19-13. (We discuss oscillatory motion below.) For the transla-
tional motion, superimpose an xyz coordinate system on any gas. The molecules
will, in general, have velocity components along all three axes. Thus, gas molecules
of all types have three degrees of translational freedom (three ways to move in
translation) and, on average, an associated energy of 3GkT) per molecule.

For the rotational motion, imagine the origin of our xyz coordinate system at
the center of each molecule in Fig. 19-13. In a gas, each molecule should be able to
rotate with an angular velocity component along each of the three axes, so each gas
should have three degrees of rotational freedom and, on average, an additional en-
ergy of 3GkT) per molecule. However, experiment shows this is true only for the
polyatomic molecules. According to quantum theory, the physics dealing with the al-
lowed motions and energies of molecules and atoms, a monatomic gas molecule
does not rotate and so has no rotational energy (a single atom cannot rotate like a
top).A diatomic molecule can rotate like a top only about axes perpendicular to the
line connecting the atoms (the axes are shown in Fig, 19-13b) and not about that line
itself. Therefore, a diatomic molecule can have only two degrees of rotational free-
dom and a rotational energy of only 2(3kT ) per molecule.

To extend our analysis of molar specific heats (C, and C in Module 19-7) to ideal
diatomic and polyatomic gases, it is necessary to retrace the derivations of that analysis
in detail. First, we replace Eq. 19-38 (Eig, = 37 RT) with Ejq, = (fi2)nRT, where fis the
number of degrees of freedom listed in Table 19-3. Doing so leads to the prediction

G= (Le = 4.16f J/mol-K, (19-51)
which agrees—as it must—with Eq. 19-43 for monatomic gases (f = 3). As Table
19-2 shows, this prediction also agrees with experiment for diatomic gases (f= 5),
but it is too low for polyatomic gases ( f = 6 for molecules comparable to CHy).

Predicted Molar Specific Heats

 

Cy (Eq. 19-51) C= Cy+R
aR BR
5
aR 5R
3R 4R

e
He
(a) He
‘
at
=
oO a)
rey
(0) O,
H

(9 CH,
Figure 19-13 Models of molecules as used
in kinetic theory: (a) helium, a typical
monatomic molecule; (b) oxygen, a typical
diatomic molecule; and (c) methane, a
typical polyatomic molecule. The spheres
represent atoms, and the lines between
them represent bonds. Two rotation axes
are shown for the oxygen molecule.

Sample Problem 19.08 Diatomic gas, heat, temperature, internal energy

‘We transfer 1000 J as heat Q to a diatomic gas, allowing the gas
to expand with the pressure held constant. The gas molecules

each rotate around an internal axis but do not oscillate. How
much of the 1000 J goes into the increase of the gas’s internal
