Mendelian Genetics Problems

1. The illustration below describes Mendel’s cross of
wrinkled and round seed characters. (Hint: Do you ex-
pect all the seeds in a pod to be the same?) What is
wrong with this diagram?

P vas
Round Wrinkled
seeds seeds

F, generation
(all round seeds)
5.

. Many animals and plants bear recessive alleles for a/-

 

W/

Round seeds (3) Wrinkled seeds (1

 

 

 

2. The annual plant Haplopappus gracilis has two pairs of
chromosomes (1 and 2). In this species, the probabil-
ity that two characters @ and selected at random will
be on the same chromosome is equal to the probabil-
ity that they will both be on chromosome | (4 x 4 =
%, or 0.25), plus the probability that they will both be
on chromosome 2 (also 4 x / = Ys, or 0.25), for an
overall probability of %4, or 0.5. In general, the proba-
bility that two randomly selected characters will be
on the same chromosome is equal to % where 7 is the
number of chromosome pairs. Humans have 23 pairs
of chromosomes. What is the probability that any
two human characters selected at random will be on
the same chromosome?

3. Among Hereford cattle there is a dominant allele
called polled; the individuals that have this allele lack
horns. Suppose you acquire a herd consisting entirely
of polled cattle, and you carefully determine that no

cow in the herd has horns. Some of the calves born
that year, however, grow horns. You remove them
from the herd and make certain that no horned adult
has gotten into your pasture. Despite your efforts,
more horned calves are born the next year. What is
the reason for the appearance of the horned calves? If
your goal is to maintain a herd consisting entirely of
polled cattle, what should you do?

. An inherited trait among humans in Norway causes

affected individuals to have very wavy hair, not unlike
that of a sheep. The trait, called woolly, is very evident
when it occurs in families; no child possesses woolly
hair unless at least one parent does. Imagine you are a
Norwegian judge, and you have before you a woolly-
haired man suing his normal-haired wife for divorce
because their first child has woolly hair but their sec-
ond child has normal hair. The husband claims this
constitutes evidence of his wife’s infidelity. Do you
accept his claim? Justify your decision.

In human beings, Down syndrome, a serious develop-
mental abnormality, results from the presence of
three copies of chromosome 21 rather than the usual
two copies. If a female exhibiting Down syndrome
mates with a normal male, what proportion of her
offspring would you expect to be affected?

binism, a condition in which homozygous individuals
lack certain pigments. An albino plant, for example,
lacks chlorophyll and is white, and an albino human
lacks melanin. If two normally pigmented persons het-
erozygous for the same albinism allele marry, what pro-
portion of their children would you expect to be albino?

. You inherit a racehorse and decide to put him out to

stud. In looking over the stud book, however, you
discover that the horse’s grandfather exhibited a rare
disorder that causes brittle bones. The disorder is
hereditary and results from homozygosity for a reces-
sive allele. If your horse is heterozygous for the allele,
it will not be possible to use him for stud because the
genetic defect may be passed on. How would you de-
termine whether your horse carries this allele?

. In the fly Drosophila, the allele for dumpy wings (d) is

recessive to the normal long-wing allele (d*), and the
allele for white eye (w) is recessive to the normal red-
eye allele (w*). In a cross of d*d*w*w x d*dww, what
proportion of the offspring are expected to be “nor-
mal” (long wings, red eyes)? What proportion are ex-
pected to have dumpy wings and white eyes?

. Your instructor presents you with a Drosophila with

red eyes, as well as a stock of white-eyed flies and an-
other stock of flies homozygous for the red-eye allele.
You know that the presence of white eyes in Drosophila
is caused by homozygosity for a recessive allele. How
would you determine whether the single red-eyed fly
was heterozygous for the white-eye allele?

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 275
