18-3 THERMAL EXPANSION

in which qis a constant called the coefficient of linear expansion. The coefficient a
has the unit “per degree” or “per kelvin” and depends on the material. Although a
varies somewhat with temperature, for most practical purposes it can be taken as
constant for a particular material. Table 18-2 shows some coefficients of linear ex-
pansion. Note that the unit C° there could be replaced with the unit K.

The thermal expansion of a solid is like photographic enlargement except it is in
three dimensions. Figure 18-11b shows the (exaggerated) thermal expansion of a
steel ruler. Equation 18-9 applies to every linear dimension of the ruler, including its
edge, thickness, diagonals, and the diameters of the circle etched on it and the circular
hole cut in it. If the disk cut from that hole originally fits snugly in the hole, it will con-
tinue to fit snugly if it undergoes the same temperature increase as the ruler.

Volume Expansion

Tf all dimensions of a solid expand with temperature, the volume of that solid
must also expand. For liquids, volume expansion is the only meaningful expan-
sion parameter. If the temperature of a solid or liquid whose volume is V is
increased by an amount AT, the increase in volume is found to be

AV = VBAT, (18-10)

where £ is the coefficient of volume expansion of the solid or liquid. The coef-
ficients of volume expansion and linear expansion for a solid are related by

B= 3a. (18-11)

The most common liquid, water, does not behave like other liquids. Above
about 4°C, water expands as the temperature rises, as we would expect. Between
0 and about 4°C, however, water contracts with increasing temperature. Thus, at
about 4°C, the density of water passes through a maximum. At all other tempera-
tures, the density of water is less than this maximum value.

This behavior of water is the reason lakes freeze from the top down rather than
from the bottom up. As water on the surface is cooled from, say, 10°C toward
the freezing point, it becomes denser (“heavier”) than lower water and sinks to the
bottom. Below 4°C, however, further cooling makes the water then on the surface
less dense (“lighter”) than the lower water, so it stays on the surface until it freezes.
Thus the surface freezes while the lower water is still liquid. If lakes froze from the
bottom up, the ice so formed would tend not to melt completely during the sum-
mer, because it would be insulated by the water above. After a few years, many
bodies of open water in the temperate zones of Earth would be frozen solid all year
round—and aquatic life could not exist. eS

Figure 18-11 The same steel ruler at two

different temperatures. When it ex-

pands, the scale,the numbers, the / (a) Cirle Circalar
thickness, and the diameters of the cir- hole

cle and circular hole are all increased /
by the same factor. (The expansion has
been exaggerated for clarity.)

()

lv] Checkpoint 2

The figure here shows four rectangular metal plates, with sides of L, 2, or
3L. They are all made of the same material, and their temperature is to be
increased by the same amount. Rank the plates according to the expected
increase in (a) their vertical heights and (b) their areas greatest first.

 

 

 

dy

\

\
\
\

(2)

Table 18-2 Some Coefficients of

Linear Expansion’
Substance

Ice (at 0°C)
Lead
Aluminum
Brass

Copper
Concrete
Steel

Glass (ordinary)
Glass (Pyrex)
Diamond
Invar’

Fused quartz

521

@ (10-9C°)

“Room temperature values except for the listing

for ice.

'This alloy was designed to have a low coeffi-
cient of expansion. The word is a shortened form

of “invariable.”

 

 

 

 

(3)

 

 

(4)

 

 

 

 
