564

CHAPTER 19 THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES

19-7 THE MOLAR SPECIFIC HEATS OF AN IDEAL GAS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

19.28 Identify that the internal energy of an ideal monatomic gas is
the sum of the translational kinetic energies of its atoms.

19.29 Apply the relationship between the internal energy Ein
of a monatomic ideal gas, the number of moles n, and the
gas temperature T.

19.30 Distinguish between monatomic, diatomic, and
polyatomic ideal gases.

19.31 For monatomic, diatomic, and polyatomic ideal gases,
evaluate the molar specific heats for a constant-volume
process and a constant-pressure process.

19.32 Calculate a molar specific heat at constant pressure C, by
adding R to the molar specific heat at constant volume Cy,
and explain why (physically) C, is greater.

19.33 Identify that the energy transferred to an ideal gas as
heat in a constant-volume process goes entirely into the
internal energy (the random translational motion) but that

Key Ideas
@ The molar specific heat Cy of a gas at constant volume is
defined as
QO _ Ew
nAT  nAT’

 

G=

in which Q is the energy transferred as heat to or froma
sample of n moles of the gas, AT is the resulting temperature
change of the gas, and AE; is the resulting change in the
internal energy of the gas.

@ For an ideal monatomic gas,
Cy = 3R = 12.5 Jmol -K.

@ The molar specific heat C, of a gas at constant pressure is

in a constant-pressure process energy also goes into the
work done to expand the gas.

19.34 Identify that for a given change in temperature, the
change in the internal energy of an ideal gas is the same
for any process and is most easily calculated by assuming
aconstant-volume process.

19.35 For an ideal gas, apply the relationship between heat
Q, number of moles n, and temperature change AT, using
the appropriate molar specific heat.

19.36 Between two isotherms on a p-V diagram, sketch a
constant-volume process and a constant-pressure
process, and for each identify the work done in terms of
area on the graph.

19.37 Calculate the work done by an ideal gas for a constant-
pressure process.

19.38 Identify that work is zero for constant volume.

defined to be
Gar
in which Q, n, and AT are defined as above. C, is also given by
G,=Cy +R.
@ For n moles of an ideal gas,
Ejg.=nCyT (ideal gas).

@ Ifn moles of a confined ideal gas undergo a temperature
change AT due to any process, the change in the internal
energy of the gas is

AE =nCy AT

(ideal gas, any process).

The Molar Specific Heats of an Ideal Gas

In this module, we want to derive from molecular considerations an expression for
the internal energy EF; of an ideal gas. In other words, we want an expression for the
energy associated with the random motions of the atoms or molecules in the gas. We
shall then use that expression to derive the molar specific heats of an ideal gas.

Internal Energy Ein
Let us first assume that our ideal gas is a monatomic gas (individual atoms rather
than molecules), such as helium, neon, or argon. Let us also assume that the inter-
nal energy Ej, is the sum of the translational kinetic energies of the atoms.
(Quantum theory disallows rotational kinetic energy for individual atoms.)

The average translational kinetic energy of a single atom depends only on the
gas temperature and is given by Eq. 19-24 as Kiyg = 3kT.A sample of n moles of
such a gas contains nN, atoms. The internal energy Ejq; of the sample is then

Eogs = (Na) Kang = (Na) GKT)- (19-37)
