H A P T E R

The Kinetic Theory of Gases

19-1 avocapRro’s NUMBER

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

19.01 Identify Avogadro's number Na.

19.02 Apply the relationship between the number of moles n,
the number of molecules N, and Avogadro's number N,..

19.03 Apply the relationships between the mass m of a sample,
the molar mass M of the molecules in the sample, the num-
ber of moles n in the sample, and Avogadro's number Na.

 

Key Ideas

@ The kinetic theory of gases relates the macroscopic

@ A moleis related to the mass m of the individual molecules

properties of gases (for example, pressure and temperature)
to the microscopic properties of gas molecules (for example,
speed and kinetic energy).

of the substance by

@ One mole of a substance contains N, (Avogadro's
number) elementary units (usually atoms or molecules),
where N, is found experimentally to be

Na = 6.02 X 10? mol“!

One molar mass M of any substance is the mass of one mole
of the substance.

as given by
(Avogadro's number).

 

What Is Physics?

One of the main subjects in thermodynamics is the physics of gases. A gas consists
of atoms (either individually or bound together as molecules) that fill their con-
tainer’s volume and exert pressure on the container’s walls. We can usually assign
a temperature to such a contained gas. These three variables associated with a
gas—volume, pressure, and temperature—are all a consequence of the motion of
the atoms. The volume is a result of the freedom the atoms have to spread
throughout the container, the pressure is a result of the collisions of the atoms
with the container’s walls, and the temperature has to do with the kinetic energy
of the atoms. The kinetic theory of gases, the focus of this chapter, relates the
motion of the atoms to the volume, pressure, and temperature of the gas.

Applications of the kinetic theory of gases are countless. Automobile engi-
neers are concerned with the combustion of vaporized fuel (a gas) in the automo-
bile engines. Food engineers are concerned with the production rate of the
fermentation gas that causes bread to rise as it bakes. Beverage engineers are
concerned with how gas can produce the head in a glass of beer or shoot a cork
from a champagne bottle. Medical engineers and physiologists are concerned
with calculating how long a scuba diver must pause during ascent to eliminate
nitrogen gas from the bloodstream (to avoid the bends). Environmental scientists
are concerned with how heat exchanges between the oceans and the atmosphere
can affect weather conditions.

The first step in our discussion of the kinetic theory of gases deals with measur-
ing the amount of a gas present in a sample, for which we use Avogadro’s number.

M=mNsz.

@ The number of moles n contained in a sample of mass
Mam, consisting of N molecules, is related to the molar
mass M of the molecules and to Avogadro's number Na

— Mam

549
