Agricultural engineers are concerned with the weather conditions that determine
whether the agriculture of a country thrives or vanishes. Medical engineers are
concerned with how a patient’s temperature might distinguish between a benign
viral infection and a cancerous growth. =

The starting point in our discussion of thermodynamics is the concept of
temperature and how it is measured.

Temperature

Temperature is one of the seven SI base quantities. Physicists measure tempera-
ture on the Kelvin scale, which is marked in units called kelvins. Although the
temperature of a body apparently has no upper limit, it does have a lower limit;
this limiting low temperature is taken as the zero of the Kelvin temperature scale.
Room temperature is about 290 kelvins, or 290 K as we write it, above this
absolute zero. Figure 18-1 shows a wide range of temperatures.

When the universe began 13.7 billion years ago, its temperature was about 10* K.
As the universe expanded it cooled, and it has now reached an average temperature of
about 3 K. We on Earth are a little warmer than that because we happen to live near a
star. Without our Sun, we too would be at 3 K (or, rather, we could not exist).

The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics

The properties of many bodies change as we alter their temperature, perhaps by
moving them from a refrigerator to a warm oven. To give a few examples: As
their temperature increases, the volume of a liquid increases, a metal rod grows a
little longer, and the electrical resistance of a wire increases, as does the pressure
exerted by a confined gas. We can use any one of these properties as the basis of
an instrument that will help us pin down the concept of temperature.

Figure 18-2 shows such an instrument. Any resourceful engineer could design
and construct it, using any one of the properties listed above. The instrument is
fitted with a digital readout display and has the following properties: If you heat
it (say, with a Bunsen burner), the displayed number starts to increase; if you then
put it into a refrigerator, the displayed number starts to decrease. The instrument
is not calibrated in any way, and the numbers have (as yet) no physical meaning.
The device is a thermoscope but not (as yet) a thermometer.

Suppose that, as in Fig. 18-34, we put the thermoscope (which we shall call
body T) into intimate contact with another body (body A). The entire system is
confined within a thick-walled insulating box. The numbers displayed by the
thermoscope roll by until, eventually, they come to rest (let us say the reading is
“137.04”) and no further change takes place. In fact, we suppose that every
measurable property of body T and of body A has assumed a stable, unchanging
value. Then we say that the two bodies are in thermal equilibrium with each other.
Even though the displayed readings for body T have not been calibrated, we
conclude that bodies Tand A must be at the same (unknown) temperature.

Suppose that we next put body T into intimate contact with body B (Fig. 18-3b)
and find that the two bodies come to thermal equilibrium at the same reading of the
thermoscope. Then bodies T and B must be at the same (still unknown) temperature.
If we now put bodies A and B into intimate contact (Fig. 18-3c), are they immediately
in thermal equilibrium with each other? Experimentally, we find that they are.

The experimental fact shown in Fig. 18-3 is summed up in the zeroth law of
thermodynamics:

a
ok] Tf bodies A and B are each in thermal equilibrium with a third body T, then A
and B are in thermal equilibrium with each other.

In less formal language, the message of the zeroth law is: “Every body has a
property called temperature. When two bodies are in thermal equilibrium, their
temperatures are equal. And vice versa.” We can now make our thermoscope

1841

10°9

10%

10°

Temperature (K)
2 2 &

5

10"

TEMPERATURE 515

 

Universe just after
beginning

Highest laboratory
temperature

Center of the Sun

 

7 Surface of the Sun
\— Tungsten melts

—— Water freezes

 

Universe today
Boiling helium-3

 

 

Record low temperature

Figure 18-1 Some temperatures on the Kelvin
scale. Temperature T = 0 corresponds

to 10-* and cannot be plotted on this
logarithmic scale.

 

Thermally sensitive
element

Figure 18-2 A thermoscope. The numbers
increase when the device is heated and
decrease when it is cooled. The thermally
sensitive element could be —among many
possibilities —a coil of wire whose
electrical resistance is measured and

displayed.
