Now let us integrate each term of this equation between an arbitrary initial state
i and an arbitrary final state f to get

'dO [ av [; aT
= | mR + | ny.
I TOV LY

The quantity on the left is the entropy change AS (= S; — S;) defined by Eq. 20-1.
Substituting this and integrating the quantities on the right yield

Ye T;
AS = S;— 8; =nRIn—, + nCyIn—=. (20-4)

v T
Note that we did not have to specify a particular reversible process when we
integrated. Therefore, the integration must hold for all reversible processes that
take the gas from state / to state f. Thus, the change in entropy AS between the
initial and final states of an ideal gas depends only on properties of the initial
state (V;and T;) and properties of the final state (V;and T;); AS does not depend

20-1

ENTROPY 587

on how the gas changes between the two states.

Vv] Checkpoint 2

An ideal gas has temperature T; at the initial state i shown in the p-V diagram here. The
gas has a higher temperature 7; at final states a and b, which it can reach along the paths
shown. Is the entropy change along the path to state a larger than, smaller than, or the

same as that along the path to state b?

Sample Problem 20.01

Figure 20-5a shows two identical copper blocks of mass
m= 15 kg: block L at temperature Tj, = 60°C and block
R at temperature Tig = 20°C. The blocks are in a thermally
insulated box and are separated by an insulating shutter.
When we lift the shutter, the blocks eventually come to the
equilibrium temperature T;= 40°C (Fig. 20-5b). What is
the net entropy change of the two-block system during
this irreversible process? The specific heat of copper is
386 J/kg -K.

KEY IDEA

To calculate the entropy change, we must find a reversible
process that takes the system from the initial state of Fig. 20-Sa
to the final state of Fig. 20-5b. We can calculate the net en-
tropy change AS,., of the reversible process using Eq. 20-1,
and then the entropy change for the irreversible process is
equal to AS,,,.

Calculations: For the reversible process, we need a thermal
reservoir whose temperature can be changed slowly (say, by
turning a knob). We then take the blocks through the fol-
lowing two steps, illustrated in Fig. 20-6.

Step 1: With the reservoir’s temperature set at 60°C, put
block L on the reservoir. (Since block and reservoir are at
the same temperature, they are already in thermal equilib-

Pressure

 

Volume

Entropy change of two blocks coming to thermal equilibrium

Movable~ ff
shuter Vf

Insulation

=>

Irreversible
process,

(a) (d)
Figure 20-5 (a) In the initial state, two copper blocks L and R, iden-
tical except for their temperatures, are in an insulating box and
are separated by an insulating shutter. (b) When the shutter is
removed, the blocks exchange energy as heat and come to a final
state, both with the same temperature 7).

   

Insulation

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Reservoir
(a) Step 1 (B) Step 2

Figure 20-6 The blocks of Fig. 20-5 can proceed from their initial

state to their final state in a reversible way if we use a reservoir

with a controllable temperature (a) to extract heat reversibly

from block L and (b) to add heat reversibly to block R.
