610 CHAPTER 21 COULOMB'S LAW

@ Shell theorem 1: A charged particle outside a shell with charge charge uniformly distributed on its surface has no net force

uniformly distributed on its surface is attracted or repelled as if acting on it due to the shell.
the shell's charge were concentrated as a particle at its center. @ Charge on a conducting spherical shell spreads uniformly
@ Shell theorem 2: A charged particle inside a shell with over the (external) surface.

 

9

= Plastic

(4)
Figure 21-1 (a) The two glass rods were each
rubbed with a silk cloth and one was sus-
pended by thread. When they are close to
each other, they repel each other. (b) The
plastic rod was rubbed with fur. When
brought close to the glass rod, the rods
attract each other.

What Is Physics?

You are surrounded by devices that depend on the physics of electromagnetism,
which is the combination of electric and magnetic phenomena. This physics is at
the root of computers, television, radio, telecommunications, household lighting,
and even the ability of food wrap to cling to a container. This physics is also the
basis of the natural world. Not only does it hold together all the atoms and
molecules in the world, it also produces lightning, auroras, and rainbows.

The physics of electromagnetism was first studied by the early Greek
philosophers, who discovered that if a piece of amber is rubbed and then brought
near bits of straw, the straw will jump to the amber. We now know that the attrac-
tion between amber and straw is due to an electric force. The Greek philosophers
also discovered that if a certain type of stone (a naturally occurring magnet) is
brought near bits of iron, the iron will jump to the stone. We now know that the
attraction between magnet and iron is due to a magnetic force.

From these modest origins with the Greek philosophers, the sciences of
electricity and magnetism developed separately for centuries—antil 1820, in fact,
when Hans Christian Oersted found a connection between them: an electric cur-
rent in a wire can deflect a magnetic compass needle. Interestingly enough,
Oersted made this discovery, a big surprise, while preparing a lecture demonstra-
tion for his physics students.

The new science of electromagnetism was developed further by workers in
many countries. One of the best was Michael Faraday, a truly gifted experimenter
with a talent for physical intuition and visualization. That talent is attested to by
the fact that his collected laboratory notebooks do not contain a single equation.
In the mid-nineteenth century, James Clerk Maxwell put Faraday’s ideas into
mathematical form, introduced many new ideas of his own, and put electromag-
netism on a sound theoretical basis.

Our discussion of electromagnetism is spread through the next 16 chapters.
We begin with electrical phenomena, and our first step is to discuss the nature of
electric charge and electric force.

Electric Charge

Here are two demonstrations that seem to be magic, but our job here is to make
sense of them. After rubbing a glass rod with a silk cloth (on a day when the
humidity is low), we hang the rod by means of a thread tied around its center
(Fig. 21-la). Then we rub a second glass rod with the silk cloth and bring it near
the hanging rod. The hanging rod magically moves away. We can see that a force
repels it from the second rod, but how? There is no contact with that rod, no
breeze to push on it, and no sound wave to disturb it.

In the second demonstration we replace the second rod with a plastic rod
that has been rubbed with fur. This time, the hanging rod moves toward the
nearby rod (Fig. 21-1b). Like the repulsion, this attraction occurs without any
contact or obvious communication between the rods.

In the next chapter we shall discuss how the hanging rod knows of the pres-
ence of the other rods, but in this chapter let’s focus on just the forces that are in-
volved. In the first demonstration, the force on the hanging rod was repulsive,and
