534 CHAPTER 18 TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

18-6 HEAT TRANSFER MECHANISMS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

18.31 For thermal conduction through a layer, apply the rela-
tionship between the energy-transfer rate Pong and the
layer's area A, thermal conductivity k, thickness L, and
temperature difference AT (between its two sides).

18.32 For a composite slab (two or more layers) that has
reached the steady state in which temperatures are no
longer changing, identify that (by the conservation of
energy) the rates of thermal conduction Peon through the
layers must be equal.

18.33 For thermal conduction through a layer, apply the
relationship between thermal resistance R, thickness L,
and thermal conductivity k.

18.34 Identify that thermal energy can be transferred by

Key Ideas

convection, in which a warmer fluid (gas or liquid) tends to
rise in a cooler fluid.

18.35 In the emission of thermal radiation by an object, apply
the relationship between the energy-transfer rate P,.g and
the object's surface area A, emissivity «, and surface tem-
perature T (in kelvins).

18.36 In the absorption of thermal radiation by an object,
apply the relationship between the energy-transfer rate
P.ys and the object's surface area A and emissivity 2, and
the environmental temperature T (in kelvins).

18.37 Calculate the net energy-transfer rate P,., of an object
emitting radiation to its environment and absorbing radia-
tion from that environment.

 

@ The rate Pooag at which energy is conducted through a slab
for which one face is maintained at the higher temperature
T} and the other face is maintained at the lower temperature
Tcis
Q

Pag => = kA HE
Here each face of the slab has area A, the length of the slab
(the distance between the faces) is L, and k is the thermal
conductivity of the material.

Ty — Te

@ Convection occurs when temperature differences cause an
energy transfer by motion within a fluid.

@ Radiation is an energy transfer via the emission of electro-
magnetic energy. The rate P,,4 at which an object emits
energy via thermal radiation is

Prag = oeAT4,

where o (= 5.6704 x 10~* W/m?: K*) is the Stefan -
Boltzmann constant, ¢ is the emissivity of the object's sur-
face, A is its surface area, and Tis its surface temperature
(in kelvins). The rate P,,, at which an object absorbs energy
via thermal radiation from its environment, which is at the
uniform temperature Teay (in kelvins), is

Paps = F&AT ony

We assume a steady
transfer of energy as heat.

 

Ty > Te

Figure 18-18 Thermal conduction. Energy is
transferred as heat froma reservoir at
temperature T;, to a cooler reservoir at
temperature 7; through a conducting slab
of thickness L and thermal conductivity k.

Heat Transfer Mechanisms

We have discussed the transfer of energy as heat between a system and its en-
vironment, but we have not yet described how that transfer takes place. There are
three transfer mechanisms: conduction, convection, and radiation. Let’s next ex-
amine these mechanisms in turn.

Conduction
If you leave the end of a metal poker in a fire for enough time, its handle will get
hot. Energy is transferred from the fire to the handle by (thermal) conduction
along the length of the poker. The vibration amplitudes of the atoms and elec-
trons of the metal at the fire end of the poker become relatively large because
of the high temperature of their environment. These increased vibrational ampli-
tudes, and thus the associated energy, are passed along the poker, from atom to
atom, during collisions between adjacent atoms. In this way, a region of rising
temperature extends itself along the poker to the handle.

Consider a slab of face area A and thickness L, whose faces are maintained
at temperatures 7}, and T¢ by a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir, as in Fig. 18-18.
Let Q be the energy that is transferred as heat through the slab, from its hot face
to its cold face, in time ¢. Experiment shows that the conduction rate Peogg (the
