20-3 REFRIGERATORS AND REAL ENGINES

Because Ty; > T,, the right side of this equation is negative and thus the net
change in entropy per cycle for the closed system refrigerator + reservoirs is also
negative. Because such a decrease in entropy violates the second law of ther-
modynamics (Eq. 20-5), a perfect refrigerator does not exist. (If you want your
refrigerator to operate, you must plug it in.)

Here, then, is another way to state the second law of thermodynamics:

Ok) No series of processes is possible whose sole result is the transfer of energy as heat
from a reservoir at a given temperature to a reservoir at a higher temperature.

In short, there are no perfect refrigerators.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

‘You wish to increase the coefficient of performance of an ideal refrigerator. You can
doso by (a) running the cold chamber at a slightly higher temperature, (b) running
the cold chamber at a slightly lower temperature, (c) moving the unit to a slightly
warmer room, or (d) moving it to a slightly cooler room. The magnitudes of the tem-
perature changes are to be the same in all four cases. List the changes according to the
resulting coefficients of performance, greatest first.

The Efficiencies of Real Engines

Let e¢ be the efficiency of a Carnot engine operating between two given tem-
peratures. Here we prove that no real engine operating between those tempera-
tures can have an efficiency greater than ec. If it could, the engine would violate
the second law of thermodynamics.

Let us assume that an inventor, working in her garage, has constructed an
engine X, which she claims has an efficiency ey that is greater than e¢:

ey > ec (aclaim). (20-17)
Let us couple engine X to a Carnot refrigerator, as in Fig. 20-16a. We adjust the
strokes of the Carnot refrigerator so that the work it requires per cycle is just equal
to that provided by engine X. Thus, no (external) work is performed on or by the
combination engine + refrigerator of Fig.20-16a, which we take as our system.
If Eq. 20-17 is true, from the definition of efficiency (Eq. 20-11), we must have
iwi. Iwi
IQ] |Qul ”

where the prime refers to engine X and the right side of the inequality is the
efficiency of the Carnot refrigerator when it operates as an engine. This inequal-

 

 

 

ity requires that
IQul > Qu. (20-18)
Q Ta ) { J
, Carnot

Figure 20-16 (a) Engine Xdrivesa = 2 L On Tt refrigerator t

Carnot refrigerator. (b) If, as Engine

_=

 

claimed, engine X is more effi-
cient than a Carnot engine, then >
the combination shown in (a) is

equivalent to the perfect refriger- L. =
ator shown here. This violates the : Lo

second law of thermodynamics,

so we conclude that engine X can-
not be more efficient than a
Carnot engine. (@ 0)

 

 

 

 

 

 

au

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Perfect
refrigerator

597
