586 CHAPTER 20 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

 

(a) Initial state i

Reversible
process

 

(0) Final state f

Figure 20-3 The isothermal expansion of an
ideal gas, done in a reversible way. The gas
has the same initial state i and same final
state fas in the irreversible process of
Figs. 20-1 and 20-2.

Isotherm

f

Pressure

 

Volume

Figure 20-4 A p-V diagram for the reversible
isothermal expansion of Fig. 20-3. The
intermediate states, which are now equilib-
rium states, are shown.

entropy. Because we removed the lead shot slowly, the intermediate states of the
gas are equilibrium states, so we can plot them on a p-V diagram (Fig. 20-4).

To apply Eq. 20-1 to the isothermal expansion, we take the constant tempera-
ture T outside the integral, obtaining

1 ff
AS = S;— S;=—] dQ.
¢ — Si [ao

Because f dQ = Q, where Q is the total energy transferred as heat during the
process, we have

AS = S;— S; = 2 (change in entropy, isothermal process). (20-2)

To keep the temperature T of the gas constant during the isothermal expansion
of Fig. 20-3, heat Q must have been energy transferred from the reservoir to the
gas. Thus, Q is positive and the entropy of the gas increases during the isothermal
process and during the free expansion of Fig. 20-1.

To summarize:

] To find the entropy change for an irreversible process, replace that process with
any reversible process that connects the same initial and final states. Calculate the
entropy change for this reversible process with Eq. 20-1.

‘When the temperature change AT of a system is small relative to the tem-
perature (in kelvins) before and after the process, the entropy change can be
approximated as

as=s,-5~2. (20-3)

ang
where Ty, is the average temperature of the system in kelvins during the process.

lv] Checkpoint 1

Water is heated on a stove. Rank the entropy changes of the water as its temperature rises
(a) from 20°C to 30°C, (b) from 30°C to 35°C, and (c) from 80°C to 85°C, greatest first.

Entropy as a State Function

‘We have assumed that entropy, like pressure, energy, and temperature, is a prop-
erty of the state of a system and is independent of how that state is reached. That
entropy is indeed a state function (as state properties are usually called) can be de-
duced only by experiment. However, we can prove it is a state function for the spe-
cial and important case in which an ideal gas is taken through a reversible process.

To make the process reversible, it is done slowly in a series of small steps,
with the gas in an equilibrium state at the end of each step. For each small step,
the energy transferred as heat to or from the gas is dQ, the work done by the gas
is dW, and the change in internal energy is dEj,;. These are related by the first law
of thermodynamics in differential form (Eq. 18-27):

dE, = dQ — dW.
Because the steps are reversible, with the gas in equilibrium states, we can use
Eg. 18-24 to replace dW with p dV and Eq. 19-45 to replace dE; with nCy dT.
Solving for dQ then leads to
dQ = pdV + nCydT.
Using the ideal gas law, we replace p in this equation with nRT/V.Then we divide
each term in the resulting equation by T, obtaining

dQ | dV dT
T =nR V +nCy Tt
