Water Clings to Polar Molecules

The polarity of water causes it to be attracted to other polar
molecules. When the other molecules are also water, the at-
traction is referred to as cohesion. When the other mole-
cules are of a different substance, the attraction is called ad-
hesion. It is because water is cohesive that it is a liquid, and
not a gas, at moderate temperatures.

The cohesion of liquid water is also responsible for its
surface tension. Small insects can walk on water (figure
2.14) because at the air-water interface all of the hydrogen
bonds in water face downward, causing the molecules of the
water surface to cling together. Water is adhesive to any
substance with which it can form hydrogen bonds. That is
why substances containing polar molecules get “wet” when
they are immersed in water, while those that are composed
of nonpolar molecules (such as oils) do not.

The attraction of water to substances like glass with sur-
face electrical charges is responsible for capillary action: if a
glass tube with a narrow diameter is lowered into a beaker
of water, water will rise in the tube above the level of the
water in the beaker, because the adhesion of water to the
glass surface, drawing it upward, is stronger than the force
of gravity, drawing it down. The narrower the tube, the
greater the electrostatic forces between the water and the
glass, and the higher the water rises (figure 2.15).

Water Stores Heat

Water moderates temperature through two properties: its
high specific heat and its high heat of vaporization. The
temperature of any substance is a measure of how rapidly
its individual molecules are moving. Because of the many
hydrogen bonds that water molecules form with one anoth-
er, a large input of thermal energy is required to break
these bonds before the individual water molecules can be-
gin moving about more freely and so have a higher temper-
ature. Therefore, water is said to have a high specific heat,
which is defined as the amount of heat that must be ab-
sorbed or lost by 1 gram of a substance to change its tem-
perature by I degree Celsius (°C). Specific heat measures
the extent to which a substance resists changing its temper-
ature when it absorbs or loses heat. Because polar substanc-
es tend to form hydrogen bonds, and energy is needed to
break these bonds, the more polar a substance is, the higher
is its specific heat. The specific heat of water (1 calo-
rie/gram/°C) is twice that of most carbon compounds and
nine times that of iron. Only ammonia, which is more
polar than water and forms very strong hydrogen bonds,
has a higher specific heat than water (1.23
calories/gram/°C). Still, only 20% of the hydrogen bonds
are broken as water heats from 0° to 100°C.

Because of its high specific heat, water heats up more
slowly than almost any other compound and holds its tem-
perature longer when heat is no longer applied. This char-
acteristic enables organisms, which have a high water con-

 

 

FIGURE 2.14

Cohesion. Some insects, such as this water strider, literally walk
on water. In this photograph you can see the dimpling the insect’s
feet make on the water as its weight bears down on the surface.
Because the surface tension of the water is greater than the force
that one foot brings to bear, the strider glides atop the surface of
the water rather than sinking.

FIGURE 2.15

Capillary action. Capillary action

causes the water within a narrow tube

to rise above the surrounding water;

the adhesion of the water to the glass |
surface, which draws water upward, is |
stronger than the force of gravity, i
which tends to draw it down. The

narrower the tube, the greater the
surface area available for adhesion for a

given volume of water, and the higher |
the water rises in the tube.

tent, to maintain a relatively constant internal temperature.
The heat generated by the chemical reactions inside cells
would destroy the cells, if it were not for the high specific
heat of the water within them.

A considerable amount of heat energy (586 calories) is re-
quired to change 1 gram of liquid water into a gas. Hence,
water also has a high heat of vaporization. Because the
transition of water from a liquid to a gas requires the input
of energy to break its many hydrogen bonds, the evapora-
tion of water from a surface causes cooling of that surface.
Many organisms dispose of excess body heat by evaporative
cooling; for example, humans and many other vertebrates
sweat.

At low temperatures, water molecules are locked into a
crystal-like lattice of hydrogen bonds, forming the solid we
call ice (figure 2.16). Interestingly, ice is less dense than liquid
water because the hydrogen bonds in ice space the water
molecules relatively far apart. This unusual feature enables
icebergs to float. Were it otherwise, ice would cover nearly all
bodies of water, with only shallow surface melting annually.
