10.

11.

12.

13.

276

Some children are born with recessive traits (and,

therefore, must be homozygous for the recessive al-

lele specifying the trait), even though neither of the
parents exhibits the trait. What can account for
this?

You collect two individuals of Drosophila, one a

young male and the other a young, unmated female.

Both are normal in appearance, with the red eyes

typical of Drosophila. You keep the two flies in the

same bottle, where they mate. Two weeks later, the
offspring they have produced all have red eyes.

From among the offspring, you select 100 individu-

als, some male and some female. You cross each in-

dividually with a fly you know to be homozygous
for the recessive allele sepia, which produces black
eyes when homozygous. Examining the results of
your 100 crosses, you observe that in about half of
the crosses, only red-eyed flies were produced. In
the other half, however, the progeny of each cross

consists of about 50% red-eyed flies and 50%

black-eyed flies. What were the genotypes of your

original two flies?

Hemophilia is a recessive sex-linked human blood

disease that leads to failure of blood to clot nor-

mally. One form of hemophilia has been traced to
the royal family of England, from which it spread
throughout the royal families of Europe. For the
purposes of this problem, assume that it originated
as a mutation either in Prince Albert or in his wife,

Queen Victoria.

a. Prince Albert did not have hemophilia. If the dis-
ease is a sex-linked recessive abnormality, how
could it have originated in Prince Albert, a male,
who would have been expected to exhibit sex-
linked recessive traits?

b. Alexis, the son of Czar Nicholas II of Russia and

Empress Alexandra (a granddaughter of Victoria),
had hemophilia, but their daughter Anastasia did
not. Anastasia died, a victim of the Russian revo-
lution, before she had any children. Can we as-
sume that Anastasia would have been a carrier of
the disease? Would your answer be different if
the disease had been present in Nicholas II or in
Alexandra?
In 1986, National Geographic magazine conducted a
survey of its readers’ abilities to detect odors. About
7% of Caucasians in the United States could not
smell the odor of musk. If neither parent could smell
musk, none of their children were able to smell it. On
the other hand, if the two parents could smell musk,
their children generally could smell it, too, but a few
of the children in those families were unable to smell
it. Assuming that a single pair of alleles governs this
trait, is the ability to smell musk best explained as an
example of dominant or recessive inheritance?

 

PartIV_ Reproduction and Heredity

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

A couple with a newborn baby is troubled that the
child does not resemble either of them. Suspecting
that a mix-up occurred at the hospital, they check the
blood type of the infant. It is type O. As the father is
type A and the mother type B, they conclude a mix-
up must have occurred. Are they correct?

Mabel’s sister died of cystic fibrosis as a child. Mabel
does not have the disease, and neither do her parents.
Mabel is pregnant with her first child. If you were a
genetic counselor, what would you tell her about the
probability that her child will have cystic fibrosis?
How many chromosomes would you expect to find in
the karyotype of a person with Turner syndrome?

A woman is married for the second time. Her first
husband has blood type A and her child by that
marriage has type O. Her new husband has type B
blood, and when they have a child its blood type is
AB. What is the woman’s blood genotype and blood
type?

Two intensely freckled parents have five children.
Three eventually become intensely freckled and two
do not. Assuming this trait is governed by a single
pair of alleles, is the expression of intense freckles
best explained as an example of dominant or recessive
inheritance?

Total color blindness is a rare hereditary disorder
among humans. Affected individuals can see no col-
ors, only shades of gray. It occurs in individuals ho-
mozygous for a recessive allele, and it is not sex-
linked. A man whose father is totally color blind
intends to marry a woman whose mother is totally
color blind. What are the chances they will produce
offspring who are totally color blind?

Anormally pigmented man marries an albino woman.
They have three children, one of whom is an albino.
What is the genotype of the father?

Four babies are born in a hospital, and each has a dif-
ferent blood type: A, B, AB, and O. The parents of
these babies have the following pairs of blood groups:
A and B, O and O, AB and O, and B and B. Which
baby belongs to which parents?

A couple both work in an atomic energy plant, and
both are exposed daily to low-level background radia-
tion. After several years, they have a child who has
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a recessive genetic
defect caused by a mutation on the X chromosome.
Neither the parents nor the grandparents have the
disease. The couple sue the plant, claiming that
the abnormality in their child is the direct result of
radiation-induced mutation of their gametes, and that
the company should have protected them from this
radiation. Before reaching a decision, the judge hear-
ing the case insists on knowing the sex of the child.
Which sex would be more likely to result in an award
of damages, and why?
