18-5 THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

The First Law of Thermodynamics

You have just seen that when a system changes from a given initial state to a
given final state, both the work W and the heat Q depend on the nature of the
process. Experimentally, however, we find a surprising thing. The quantity Q — W
is the same for all processes. It depends only on the initial and final states and
does not depend at all on how the system gets from one to the other. All other
combinations of Q and W, including Q alone, W alone, Q + W, and Q — 2W, are
path dependent; only the quantity Q — Wis not.

The quantity Q — W must represent a change in some intrinsic property of
the system. We call this property the internal energy Ej, and we write

AE in = Ents — Einti = Q— W (first law). (18-26)

Equation 18-26 is the first law of thermodynamics. If the thermodynamic system
undergoes only a differential change, we can write the first law as*

dE ix = dQ — dW (first law). (18-27)

os The internal energy E,, of a system tends to increase if energy is added as heat Q
and tends to decrease if energy is lost as work W done by the system.

In Chapter 8, we discussed the principle of energy conservation as it applies
to isolated systems— that is, to systems in which no energy enters or leaves the
system. The first law of thermodynamics is an extension of that principle to
systems that are not isolated. In such cases, energy may be transferred into or out
of the system as either work W or heat Q. In our statement of the first law of ther-
modynamics above, we assume that there are no changes in the kinetic energy or
the potential energy of the system as a whole; that is, AK = AU = 0.

Rules. Before this chapter, the term work and the symbol W always meant
the work done on a system. However, starting with Eq. 18-24 and continuing
through the next two chapters about thermodynamics, we focus on the work
done by a system, such as the gas in Fig. 18-13.

The work done on a system is always the negative of the work done by the
system, so if we rewrite Eq. 18-26 in terms of the work W,, done on the system,
we have AEj, = Q + Won. This tells us the following: The internal energy of a
system tends to increase if heat is absorbed by the system or if positive work is
done on the system. Conversely, the internal energy tends to decrease if heat is
lost by the system or if negative work is done on the system.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

The figure here shows four paths on a p-V diagram
along which a gas can be taken from state ito state f.
Rank the paths according to (a) the change AEjy. in
the internal energy of the gas, (b) the work W done
by the gas, and (c) the magnitude of the energy trans-
ferred as heat Q between the gas and its environment,
greatest first.

 

*Here dQ and dW, unlike dEjq, are not true differentials; that is, there are no such functions as
Q(p. V) and W(p, V) that depend only on the state of the system. The quantities dQ and dW are
called inexact differentials and are usually represented by the symbols ¢Q and dW. For our purposes,
we can treat them simply as infinitesimally small energy transfers

531
