516 CHAPTER 18 TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

Figure 18-3 (a) Body T (a thermo-
scope) and body A are in thermal

equilibrium. (Body Sis a —

thermally insulating screen.) (b)
Body Tand body B are alsoin
thermal equilibrium, at the same
reading of the thermoscope. (c) If
(a) and (b) are true, the zeroth
law of thermodynamics states
that body A and body Bare also
in thermal equilibrium.

Gas
thermometer
bulb

    

a

Bees

      
  

wy
Ly

Figure 18-4 A triple-point cell, in which solid
ice, liquid water, and water vapor coexist in
thermal equilibrium. By international
agreement, the temperature of this mixture
has been defined to be 273.16 K. The bulb
of aconstant-volume gas thermometer is
shown inserted into the well of the cell.

Scale

Gas-filled
bulb.

 

Figure 18-5 A constant-volume gas ther-
mometer, its bulb immersed in a liquid
whose temperature Tis to be measured.

(@) (b) 1)

(the third body 7) into a thermometer, confident that its readings will have
physical meaning. All we have to do is calibrate it.

‘We use the zeroth law constantly in the laboratory. If we want to know whether
the liquids in two beakers are at the same temperature, we measure the tempera-
ture of each with a thermometer. We do not need to bring the two liquids into
intimate contact and observe whether they are or are not in thermal equilibrium.

The zeroth law, which has been called a logical afterthought, came to light
only in the 1930s, long after the first and second laws of thermodynamics had
been discovered and numbered. Because the concept of temperature is funda-
mental to those two laws, the law that establishes temperature as a valid concept
should have the lowest number —hence the zero.

Measuring Temperature

Here we first define and measure temperatures on the Kelvin scale. Then we
calibrate a thermoscope so as to make it a thermometer.

The Triple Point of Water

To set up a temperature scale, we pick some reproducible thermal phenomenon
and, quite arbitrarily, assign a certain Kelvin temperature to its environment; that
is, we select a standard fixed point and give it a standard fixed-point temperature.
‘We could, for example, select the freezing point or the boiling point of water but,
for technical reasons, we select instead the triple point of water.

Liquid water, solid ice, and water vapor (gaseous water) can coexist, in
thermal equilibrium, at only one set of values of pressure and temperature.
Figure 18-4 shows a triple-point cell, in which this so-called triple point of water
can be achieved in the laboratory. By international agreement, the triple point of
water has been assigned a value of 273.16K as the standard fixed-point
temperature for the calibration of thermometers; that is,

Ty = 273.16K — (triple-point temperature), (18-1)

in which the subscript 3 means “triple point.” This agreement also sets the size of
the kelvin as 1/273.16 of the difference between the triple-point temperature of
water and absolute zero.

Note that we do not use a degree mark in reporting Kelvin temperatures.
It is 300 K (not 300°K), and it is read “300 kelvins” (not “300 degrees Kelvin”).
The usual SI prefixes apply. Thus, 0.0035 K is 3.5 mK. No distinction in nomen-
clature is made between Kelvin temperatures and temperature differences, so
we can write, “the boiling point of sulfur is 717.8 K” and “the temperature of this
water bath was raised by 8.5 K.”

The Constant-Volume Gas Thermometer

The standard thermometer, against which all other thermometers are calibrated,
is based on the pressure of a gas in a fixed volume. Figure 18-5 shows such a
constant-volume gas thermometer; it consists of a gas-filled bulb connected by a
tube to a mercury manometer. By raising and lowering reservoir R, the mercury
