19-4 TRANSLATIONAL KINETIC ENERGY

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

19.19 For an ideal gas, relate the average kinetic energy of
the molecules to their rms speed.

19.20 Apply the relationship between the average kinetic
energy and the temperature of the gas.

Key Ideas

19-4 TRANSLATIONAL KINETIC ENERGY 557

19.21 Identify that a measurement of a gas temperature is
effectively a measurement of the average kinetic energy of
the gas molecules.

 

@ The average translational kinetic energy per molecule in an
ideal gas is
=1
Kayg = Vins:

@ The average translational kinetic energy is related to the
temperature of the gas:

Koyg = 3KT.

 

Translational Kinetic Energy

‘We again consider a single molecule of an ideal gas as it moves around in the box
of Fig. 19-4, but we now assume that its speed changes when it collides with other
molecules. Its translational kinetic energy at any instant is 3mv. Its average

translational kinetic energy over the time that we watch it is

Ky = GMv?)ayy = 31? ayy = 3V ss

(19-23)

in which we make the assumption that the average speed of the molecule during
our observation is the same as the average speed of all the molecules at any given
time. (Provided the total energy of the gas is not changing and provided we
observe our molecule for long enough, this assumption is appropriate.) Substi-

tuting for Vzms from Eq. 19-22 leads to
3RT

Kay = (Gm) 7:

However, M/m, the molar mass divided by the mass of a molecule, is simply

Avogadro’s number. Thus,
3RT
Kay = IVa”
Using Eq. 19-7 (k = R/Naq), we can then write

 

Kayy = KT.

This equation tells us something unexpected:

(19-24)

oO At a given temperature 7, all ideal gas molecules—no matter what their
mass—have the same average translational kinetic energy—namely, 3kT. When we
measure the temperature of a gas, we are also measuring the average translational

kinetic energy of its molecules.

| Checkpoint 2

A gas mixture consists of molecules of types 1,2, and 3, with molecular masses m; >
‘my > my, Rank the three types according to (a) average kinetic energy and (b) rms

speed, greatest first.
