18-4 ABSORPTION OF HEAT

Temperature and Heat

If you take a can of cola from the refrigerator and leave it on the kitchen table, its
temperature will rise—rapidly at first but then more slowly—until the tempera-
ture of the cola equals that of the room (the two are then in thermal equilibrium).
In the same way, the temperature of a cup of hot coffee, left sitting on the table,
will fall until it also reaches room temperature.

In generalizing this situation, we describe the cola or the coffee as a system
(with temperature 7) and the relevant parts of the kitchen as the environment
(with temperature T;) of that system. Our observation is that if Ts is not equal to
T,, then Ts will change (7; can also change some) until the two temperatures are
equal and thus thermal equilibrium is reached.

Such a change in temperature is due to a change in the thermal energy of the
system because of a transfer of energy between the system and the system’s
environment. (Recall that thermal energy is an internal energy that consists of the
kinetic and potential energies associated with the random motions of the atoms,
molecules, and other microscopic bodies within an object.) The transferred energy
is called heat and is symbolized Q. Heat is positive when energy is transferred to a
system’s thermal energy from its environment (we say that heat is absorbed by the
system). Heat is negative when energy is transferred from a system’s thermal en-
ergy to its environment (we say that heat is released or lost by the system).

This transfer of energy is shown in Fig. 18-12. In the situation of Fig. 18-12a,
in which T; > Tg, energy is transferred from the system to the environment, so
Q is negative. In Fig. 18-12, in which T; = T,, there is no such transfer, Q is
zero, and heat is neither released nor absorbed. In Fig. 18-12c, in which Ts < Tp,
the transfer is to the system from the environment; so Q is positive.

Environment i

The system has a p
bata .. it loses
higher temperature,
energy as heat.
SO...
Q
Ts> Tr Qe
(a)

Environment Try
The system has the .- NO energy
same temperature, Ga is transferred
SO... as heat.

ce =0

wo) Bat Q

Environment cm
The system has a .. it gains
lower temperature, energy as
SO ... heat.

Q
Ts < Tr Qe

(e)

Figure 18-12 If the temperature of a system exceeds that of its environment as in (a), heat 0
is lost by the system to the environment until thermal equilibrium (5) is established. (c) If
the temperature of the system is below that of the environment, heat is absorbed by the
system until thermal equilibrium is established.

523
