536 CHAPTER 18 TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

Edward Kinsman/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Figure 18-20 A false-color thermogram re-
veals the rate at which energy is radiated bya
cat. The rate is color-coded, with white and

red indicating the greatest radiation rate. The
nose is cool.

 

lv] Checkpoint 7

The figure shows the face and 9s, = ———
interface temperatures of a com-
posite slab consisting of four a ¢ a

materials, of identical thicknesses,
through which the heat transfer is steady. Rank the materials according to their ther-
mal conductivities, greatest first.

Convection

‘When you look at the flame of a candle or a match, you are watching thermal
energy being transported upward by convection. Such energy transfer occurs
when a fluid, such as air or water, comes in contact with an object whose tem-
perature is higher than that of the fluid. The temperature of the part of the fluid
that is in contact with the hot object increases, and (in most cases) that fluid
expands and thus becomes less dense. Because this expanded fluid is now lighter
than the surrounding cooler fluid, buoyant forces cause it to rise. Some of the
surrounding cooler fluid then flows so as to take the place of the rising warmer
fluid, and the process can then continue.

Convection is part of many natural processes. Atmospheric convection plays
a fundamental role in determining global climate patterns and daily weather vari-
ations. Glider pilots and birds alike seek rising thermals (convection currents of
warm air) that keep them aloft. Huge energy transfers take place within the
oceans by the same process. Finally, energy is transported to the surface of the
Sun from the nuclear furnace at its core by enormous cells of convection, in
which hot gas rises to the surface along the cell core and cooler gas around the
core descends below the surface.

Radiation

The third method by which an object and its environment can exchange energy
as heat is via electromagnetic waves (visible light is one kind of electromag-
netic wave). Energy transferred in this way is often called thermal radiation to
distinguish it from electromagnetic signals (as in, say, television broadcasts) and
from nuclear radiation (energy and particles emitted by nuclei). (To “radiate”
generally means to emit.) When you stand in front of a big fire, you are warmed
by absorbing thermal radiation from the fire; that is, your thermal energy
increases as the fire’s thermal energy decreases. No medium is required for heat
transfer via radiation—the radiation can travel through vacuum from, say, the
Sun to you.

The rate P,.q at which an object emits energy via electromagnetic radiation
depends on the object’s surface area A and the temperature T of that area in
kelvins and is given by

Pry = 08 AT#. (18-38)

Here o = 5.6704 x 10-8 W/m?: K* is called the Stefan— Boltzmann constant after
Josef Stefan (who discovered Eq. 18-38 experimentally in 1879) and Ludwig
Boltzmann (who derived it theoretically soon after). The symbol ¢ represents the
emissivity of the object’s surface, which has a value between 0 and 1, depending
on the composition of the surface. A surface with the maximum emissivity of 1.0
is said to be a blackbody radiator, but such a surface is an ideal limit and does not
occur in nature. Note again that the temperature in Eq. 18-38 must be in kelvins
so that a temperature of absolute zero corresponds to no radiation. Note also that
every object whose temperature is above 0 K—including you—emits thermal
radiation. (See Fig. 18-20.)
