Transplantation Experiments: Each
Cell Contains a Full Set of Genetic
Instructions

Because the nucleus is contained in the foot of Acetabu-
Jaria, Hammerling’s experiments suggested that the nu-
cleus is the repository of hereditary information in a cell.
A direct test of this hypothesis was carried out in 1952 by
American embryologists Robert Briggs and Thomas
King. Using a glass pipette drawn to a fine tip and work-
ing with a microscope, Briggs and King removed the nu-
cleus from a frog egg. Without the nucleus, the egg did
not develop. However, when they replaced the nucleus
with one removed from a more advanced frog embryo
cell, the egg developed into an adult frog. Clearly, the
nucleus was directing the egg’s development (fig-

ure 14.3).

Successfully Transplanting Nuclei

Can every nucleus in an organism direct the development
of an entire adult individual? The experiment of Briggs and
King did not answer this question definitively, because the
nuclei they transplanted from frog embryos into eggs often
caused the eggs to develop abnormally. Two experiments
performed soon afterward gave a clearer answer to the
question. In the first, John Gurdon, working with another
species of frog at Oxford and Yale, transplanted nuclei
from tadpole cells into eggs from which the nuclei had

us? 7
E -
(two nucleot) UV light destroys

nucleus, or it is removed|
with micropipette.

 

 

 

 

 

y Ze Embryo

been removed. The experiments were difficult—it was nec-
essary to synchronize the division cycles of donor and host.
However, in many experiments, the eggs went on to de-
velop normally, indicating that the nuclei of cells in later
stages of development retain the genetic information nec-
essary to direct the development of all other cells in an in-

dividual.

Totipotency in Plants

In the second experiment, F. C. Steward at Cornell Uni-
versity in 1958 placed small fragments of fully developed
carrot tissue (isolated from a part of the vascular system
called the phloem) in a flask containing liquid growth
medium. Steward observed that when individual cells broke
away from the fragments, they often divided and developed
into multicellular roots. When he immobilized the roots by
placing them in a solid growth medium, they went on to
develop normally into entire, mature plants. Steward’s ex-
periment makes it clear that, even in adult tissues, the nu-
clei of individual plant cells are “totipotent”—each contains
a full set of hereditary instructions and can generate an en-
tire adult individual. As you will learn in chapter 19, animal
cells, like plant cells, can be totipotent, and a single adult
animal cell can generate an entire adult animal.

 

Hereditary information is stored in the nucleus of
eukaryotic cells. Each nucleus in any eukaryotic cell
contains a full set of genetic instructions.

 

No growth

qe ©
Abnormal

embryo

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

hy
einen % Epithelial cell nucleus
— —_— S35 is inserted into a— —
(2 | o|8 Nucleus enucleate egg.
— Embryo =
Epithelial cells are] |. Temoved Occasionally, an adult
(on e oe clus) isolated from in micropipette. Tadpole frog develops. Its cells

 

 

 

 

 

tadpole intestine.

 

FIGURE 14.3

 

 

possess one nucleolus.

 

Briggs and King’s nuclear transplant experiment. Two strains of frogs were used that differed from each other in the number of
nucleoli their cells possessed. The nucleus was removed from an egg of one strain, either by sucking the egg nucleus into a micropipette
or, more simply, by destroying it with ultraviolet light. A nucleus obtained from a differentiated cell of the other strain was then injected
into this enucleate egg. The hybrid egg was allowed to develop. One of three results was obtained in individual experiments: (1) no growth
occurred, perhaps reflecting damage to the egg cell during the nuclear transplant operation; (2) normal growth and development occurred
up to an early embryo stage, but subsequent development was not normal and the embryo did not survive; and (3) normal growth and
development occurred, eventually leading to the development of an adult frog. That frog was of the strain that contributed the nucleus and
not of the strain that contributed the egg. Only a few experiments gave this third result, but they serve to clearly establish that the nucleus

directs frog development.

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 281
