592 CHAPTER 20 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

Temperature T

Entropy S
Figure 20-10 The Carnot cycle of Fig. 20-9
plotted on a temperature—entropy
diagram. During processes ab and cd the
temperature remains constant. During
processes bc and da the entropy remains
constant.

the working substance to the low-temperature reservoir as the gas undergoes an
isothermal compression from volume V, to volume V, (Fig.20-9b).

In the engine of Fig. 20-8, we assume that heat transfers to or from the work-
ing substance can take place only during the isothermal processes ab and cd of
Fig. 20-9. Therefore, processes be and da in that figure, which connect the two
isotherms at temperatures 7}; and 7;, must be (reversible) adiabatic processes;
that is, they must be processes in which no energy is transferred as heat.To ensure
this, during processes be and da the cylinder is placed on an insulating slab as the
volume of the working substance is changed.

During the processes ab and be of Fig. 20-9a, the working substance is
expanding and thus doing positive work as it raises the weighted piston. This
work is represented in Fig. 20-9a by the area under curve abc. During the
processes cd and da (Fig. 20-9b), the working substance is being compressed,
which means that it is doing negative work on its environment or, equivalently,
that its environment is doing work on it as the loaded piston descends. This work
is represented by the area under curve cda. The net work per cycle, which is repre-
sented by W in both Figs. 20-8 and 20-9, is the difference between these two areas
and is a positive quantity equal to the area enclosed by cycle abcda in Fig. 20-9.
This work W is performed on some outside object, such as a load to be lifted.

Equation 20-1 (AS = J dQ/T) tells us that any energy transfer as heat must
involve a change in entropy. To see this for a Carnot engine, we can plot the
Carnot cycle on a temperature—entropy (7-S) diagram as in Fig. 20-10. The
lettered points a, b, c, and d there correspond to the lettered points in the p-V
diagram in Fig. 20-9. The two horizontal lines in Fig. 20-10 correspond to the two
isothermal processes of the cycle. Process ab is the isothermal expansion of the
cycle. As the working substance (reversibly) absorbs energy |Q}| as heat at
constant temperature Tj; during the expansion, its entropy increases. Similarly,
during the isothermal compression cd, the working substance (reversibly) loses
energy !Q;! as heat at constant temperature Ty, and its entropy decreases.

The two vertical lines in Fig. 20-10 correspond to the two adiabatic processes
of the Carnot cycle. Because no energy is transferred as heat during the two
processes, the entropy of the working substance is constant during them.

The Work To calculate the net work done by a Carnot engine during a cycle, let
us apply Eq. 18-26, the first law of thermodynamics (A Ein, = Q — W), to the work-
ing substance. That substance must return again and again to any arbitrarily selected
state in the cycle. Thus, if Y represents any state property of the working substance,
such as pressure, temperature, volume, internal energy, or entropy, we must have
AX = 0 for every cycle. It follows that A Ej, = 0 for a complete cycle of the working
substance. Recalling that Q in Eq. 18-26 is the net heat transfer per cycle and W is the
net work, we can write the first law of thermodynamics for the Carnot cycle as

W =|Qu|—|Q.} (20-8)

Entropy Changes In a Carnot engine, there are two (and only two) reversible

energy transfers as heat, and thus two changes in the entropy of the working

substance —one at temperature Ty and one at T,. The net entropy change per
cycle is then 0,|

IQul
AS = AS, + AS, = = -
HH L Tx i.

(20-9)
Here AS} is positive because energy !Qy! is added to the working substance as
heat (an increase in entropy) and AS, is negative because energy |Q;! is removed
from the working substance as heat (a decrease in entropy). Because entropy is
a state function, we must have AS = 0 for a complete cycle. Putting AS = 0 in
Eg. 20-9 requires that

Qu) _ |Qu)

Th i.

Note that, because Ty > T;, we must have |Qyl > |x|; that is, more energy is

(20-10)
