584

CHAPTER 20 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

What Is Physics?

Time has direction, the direction in which we age. We are accustomed to many
one-way processes —that is, processes that can occur only in a certain sequence
(the right way) and never in the reverse sequence (the wrong way). An egg is
dropped onto a floor, a pizza is baked, a car is driven into a lamppost, large
waves erode a sandy beach—these one-way processes are irreversible, mean-
ing that they cannot be reversed by means of only small changes in their
environment.

One goal of physics is to understand why time has direction and why one-
way processes are irreversible. Although this physics might seem disconnected
from the practical issues of everyday life, it is in fact at the heart of any engine,
such as a car engine, because it determines how well an engine can run.

The key to understanding why one-way processes cannot be reversed
involves a quantity known as entropy.

Irreversible Processes and Entropy

The one-way character of irreversible processes is so pervasive that we take it for
granted. If these processes were to occur spontaneously (on their own) in the
wrong way, we would be astonished. Yet none of these wrong-way events would
violate the law of conservation of energy.

For example, if you were to wrap your hands around a cup of hot coffee, you
would be astonished if your hands got cooler and the cup got warmer. That is
obviously the wrong way for the energy transfer, but the total energy of the
closed system (hands + cup of coffee) would be the same as the total energy if
the process had run in the right way. For another example, if you popped a helium
balloon, you would be astonished if, later, all the helium molecules were to gather
together in the original shape of the balloon. That is obviously the wrong way for
molecules to spread, but the total energy of the closed system (molecules +
room) would be the same as for the right way.

Thus, changes in energy within a closed system do not set the direction of
irreversible processes. Rather, that direction is set by another property that we
shall discuss in this chapter —the change in entropy AS of the system. The change
in entropy of a system is defined later in this module, but we can here state its
central property, often called the entropy postulate:

& If an irreversible process occurs in a closed system, the entropy S of the system
always increases; it never decreases.

Entropy differs from energy in that entropy does not obey a conservation law.
The energy of a closed system is conserved; it always remains constant. For
irreversible processes, the entropy of a closed system always increases. Because of
this property, the change in entropy is sometimes called “the arrow of time.” For
example, we associate the explosion of a popcorn kernel with the forward
direction of time and with an increase in entropy. The backward direction of time
(a videotape run backwards) would correspond to the exploded popcorn re-
forming the original kernel. Because this backward process would result in an
entropy decrease, it never happens.

There are two equivalent ways to define the change in entropy of a system:
(1) in terms of the system’s temperature and the energy the system gains or loses
as heat, and (2) by counting the ways in which the atoms or molecules that make
up the system can be arranged. We use the first approach in this module and the
second in Module 20-4.
