14

DNA: The Genetic
Material

Concept Outline

14.1 What is the genetic material?

The Hammerling Experiment: Cells Store Hereditary
Information in the Nucleus

Transplantation Experiments: Each Cell Contains a
Full Set of Genetic Instructions

The Griffith Experiment: Hereditary Information Can
Pass between Organisms

The Avery and Hershey-Chase Experiments: The
Active Principle Is DNA

14.2 What is the structure of DNA?

The Chemical Nature of Nucleic Acids. Nucleic acids
are polymers containing four nucleotides.

The Three-Dimensional Structure of DNA. The
DNA molecule is a double helix, with two strands
held together by base-pairing.

14.3 How does DNA replicate?
The Meselson-Stahl Experiment: DNA Replication Is

Semiconservative

The Replication Process. DNA is replicated by the
enzyme DNA polymerase III, working in concert
with many other proteins. DNA replicates by
assembling a complementary copy of each strand
semidiscontinuously.

Eukaryotic DNA Replication. Eukaryotic
chromosomes consist of many zones of replication.

14.4 What is a gene?

The One-Gene/One-Polypeptide Hypothesis. A gene
encodes all the information needed to express a
functional protein or RNA molecule.

How DNA Encodes Protein Structure. The
nucleotide sequence of a gene dictates the amino acid
sequence of the protein it encodes.

 

FIGURE 14.1
DNA. The hereditary blueprint in each cell of all living

organisms is a very long, slender molecule called deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA).

he realization that patterns of heredity can be ex-

plained by the segregation of chromosomes in meio-
sis raised a question that occupied biologists for over 50
years: What is the exact nature of the connection between
hereditary traits and chromosomes? This chapter de-
scribes the chain of experiments that have led to our cur-
rent understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
heredity (figure 14.1). The experiments are among the
most elegant in science. Just as in a good detective story,
each conclusion has led to new questions. The intellectual
path taken has not always been a straight one, the best
questions not always obvious. But however erratic and
lurching the course of the experimental journey, our pic-
ture of heredity has become progressively clearer, the
image more sharply defined.

279
