tropy always increases? No, because the postulate holds only for irreversible
processes in closed systems. Here, the process is not irreverible and the system is
not closed (because of the energy transferred to and from the reservoir as heat).

However, if we include the reservoir, along with the gas, as part of the system,
then we do have a closed system. Let’s check the change in entropy of the
enlarged system gas + reservoir for the process that takes it from (b) to (a) in
Fig. 20-3. During this reversible process, energy is transferred as heat from the gas
to the reservoir—that is, from one part of the enlarged system to another. Let IQ!
represent the absolute value (or magnitude) of this heat. With Eq. 20-2, we can
then calculate separately the entropy changes for the gas (which loses |Q!) and
the reservoir (which gains |Q!). We get

|Ql
AS =
Q|
and AS, es = +12

The entropy change of the closed system is the sum of these two quantities: 0.
With this result, we can modify the entropy postulate to include both
reversible and irreversible processes:

Ok) If a process occurs in a closed system, the entropy of the system increases for
irreversible processes and remains constant for reversible processes. It never
decreases.

Although entropy may decrease in part of a closed system, there will always
be an equal or larger entropy increase in another part of the system, so that the
entropy of the system as a whole never decreases. This fact is one form of the
second law of thermodynamics and can be written as

AS=0O (second law of thermodynamics), (20-5)

where the greater-than sign applies to irreversible processes and the equals sign
to reversible processes. Equation 20-5 applies only to closed systems.

In the real world almost all processes are irreversible to some extent because
of friction, turbulence, and other factors, so the entropy of real closed systems
undergoing real processes always increases. Processes in which the system’s
entropy remains constant are always idealizations.

Force Due to Entropy

To understand why rubber resists being stretched, let’s write the first law of
thermodynamics

dE=dQ —dW

for a rubber band undergoing a small increase in length dx as we stretch it
between our hands. The force from the rubber band has magnitude F, is directed
inward, and does work dW = —F dx during length increase dx. From Eq. 20-2
(AS = Q/T), small changes in Q and S at constant temperature are related by
dS = dQIT, or dQ = T dS. So, now we can rewrite the first law as

dE=TdS + F dx. (20-6)

To good approximation, the change dE in the internal energy of rubber is 0 if the
total stretch of the rubber band is not very much. Substituting 0 for dE in Eq. 20-6
leads us to an expression for the force from the rubber band:

dS

F=-T—. 20-7
dx (20-7)

20-1 ENTROPY

589
