74 The average density of Earth’s crust 10 km beneath the conti-
nents is 2.7 g/cm*. The speed of longitudinal seismic waves at that
depth, found by timing their arrival from distant earthquakes, is
5.4 km/s. Find the bulk modulus of Earth’s crust at that depth. For
comparison, the bulk modulus of steel is about 16 x 10! Pa.

75 A certain loudspeaker system emits sound isotropically with
a frequency of 2000 Hz and an intensity of 0.960 mW/m? at a
distance of 6.10 m. Assume that there are no reflections. (a) What
is the intensity at 30.0 m? At 6.10 m, what are (b) the displacement
amplitude and (c) the pressure amplitude?

76 Find the ratios (greater to smaller) of the (a) intensities,
(b) pressure amplitudes, and (c) particle displacement amplitudes
for two sounds whose sound levels differ by 37 dB.

77 In Fig. 17-45, sound waves A and B, both of wavelength A, are
initially in phase and traveling right-
ward, as indicated by the two rays.
Wave A is reflected from four sur-
faces but ends up traveling in its
original direction. What multiple of
wavelength A is the smallest value of
distance L in the figure that puts A
and B exactly out of phase with each
other after the reflections?

B

Figure 17-45 Problem 77.

78 A trumpet player on a moving
railroad flatcar moves toward a sec-
ond trumpet player standing alongside the track while both play
a 440 Hz note. The sound waves heard by a stationary observer be-
tween the two players have a beat frequency of 4.0 beats/s. What is
the flatcar’s speed?

79 ® In Fig. 17-46, sound of wavelength 0.850 m is emitted
isotropically by point source S. Sound ray 1 extends directly to
detector D, at distance L = 10.0 m. Sound ray 2 extends to D via a
reflection (effectively, a “bouncing”) of the sound at a flat surface.
That reflection occurs on a perpendicular bisector to the SD line,
at distance d from the line. Assume that the reflection shifts the
sound wave by 0.500A. For what least value of d (other than zero)
do the direct sound and the reflected sound arrive at D (a) exactly
out of phase and (b) exactly in phase?

   

) Ray 1 \
-£ L
2 2
Figure 17-46 Problem 79.

80 © A detector initially moves at constant velocity directly
toward a stationary sound source and then (after passing it) di-
rectly from it. The emitted frequency is f. During the approach the
detected frequency is f',,, and during the recession it is f',.. If the
frequencies are related by (f'ypp — frec)/f = 0.500, what is the ratio
vp/v of the speed of the detector to the speed of sound?

81 ssm (a) If two sound waves, one in air and one in (fresh)
water, are equal in intensity and angular frequency, what is the
ratio of the pressure amplitude of the wave in water to that of
the wave in air? Assume the water and the air are at 20°C. (See
Table 14-1.) (b) If the pressure amplitudes are equal instead, what
is the ratio of the intensities of the waves?

 

PROBLEMS 511

82 Accontinuous sinusoidal longitudinal wave is sent along a very
long coiled spring from an attached oscillating source. The wave
travels in the negative direction of an x axis; the source frequency
is 25 Hz; at any instant the distance between successive points of
maximum expansion in the spring is 24 cm; the maximum longitu-
dinal displacement of a spring particle is 0.30 cm; and the particle
at x = 0 has zero displacement at time ¢ = 0. If the wave is written
in the form s(x, f) = sp, cos(kx + of), what are (a) sp, (b) k, (c) @,
(d) the wave speed, and (e) the cor-
rect choice of sign in front of w?

 

Incident
ultrasound --

83 ssM Ultrasound, which consists ea |
of sound waves with frequencies

above the human audible range, can Artery
be used to produce an image of the
interior of a human body. Moreover,
ultrasound can be used to measure
the speed of the blood in the body; it
does so by comparing the frequency of the ultrasound sent into the
body with the frequency of the ultrasound reflected back to the
body’s surface by the blood. As the blood pulses, this detected fre-
quency varies.

Suppose that an ultrasound image of the arm of a patient shows.
an artery that is angled at @ = 20° to the ultrasound’s line of travel
(Fig. 17-47). Suppose also that the frequency of the ultrasound
reflected by the blood in the artery is increased by a maximum of
5495 Hz from the original ultrasound frequency of 5.000 000 MHz.
(a) In Fig. 17-47, is the direction of the blood flow rightward or
leftward? (b) The speed of sound in the human arm is 1540 m/s.
What is the maximum speed of the blood? (Hint: The Doppler effect
is caused by the component of the blood’s velocity along the ultra-
sound’s direction of travel.) (c) If angle @ were greater, would the re-
flected frequency be greater or less?

Figure 17-47 Problem 83.

84 The speed of sound in a certain metal is v,,. One end of a
long pipe of that metal of length L is struck a hard blow.
A listener at the other end hears two sounds, one from the wave
that travels along the pipe’s metal wall and the other from the
wave that travels through the air inside the pipe. (a) If v is the
speed of sound in air, what is the time interval Ar between the ar-
rivals of the two sounds at the listener’s ear? (b) If Af = 1.00 s and
the metal is steel, what is the length L?

85 <= An avalanche of sand along some rare desert sand dunes
can produce a booming that is loud enough to be heard 10 km
away. The booming apparently results from a periodic oscillation
of the sliding layer of sand—the layer’s thickness expands and
contracts. If the emitted frequency is 90 Hz, what are (a) the period
of the thickness oscillation and (b) the wavelength of the sound?

86 A sound source moves along an x axis, between detectors A
and B. The wavelength of the sound detected at A is 0.500 that of
the sound detected at B. What is the ratio v,/v of the speed of the
source to the speed of sound?

87 SSM A siren emitting a sound of frequency 1000 Hz moves
away from you toward the face of a cliff at a speed of 10 m/s. Take
the speed of sound in air as 330 m/s. (a) What is the frequency of
the sound you hear coming directly from the siren? (b) What is the
frequency of the sound you hear reflected off the cliff? (c) What is
the beat frequency between the two sounds? Is it perceptible (less
than 20 Hz)?

88 At a certain point, two waves produce pressure variations
given by Ap, = Ap,, sin wf and Ap, = Ap,, sin(wt — 4).At this point,
