 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

G)QAATTC G)QAATTC G)QAATTC
CTTAA)QG CTTAA)(QG CTTAA)QG
A A A
Cut Cut Cut
L IL J
T I
Short fragment Medium-length fragment
{ls electrophoresis
Medium-length fragment
— Short fragment
Long ——————> Short
FIGURE 13.42 (a) No mutation
RELPs. Restriction fragment
length polymorphisms (RFLPs)
are playing an increasingly G)QAATIC AAATIC G)QAATIC
important role in genetic CTTAA)JG TTTAAG CTTAA)JG
identification. In (a), the JQ JQ:
restriction endonuclease cuts the a ay
DNA molecule in three places,
producing two fragments. In (b), Ll 1 |
the mutation of a single
nucleotide from G to A (see top tong edi ream nt
fragment) alters a restriction eeleeciennerees
endonuclease cutting site. Now
the enzyme no longer cuts the
DNA molecule at that site. As a Long-length fragment
result, a single long fragment is
obtained, rather than two
shorter ones. Such a change is
easy to detect when the
fragments are subjected to a . EO
(b) Mutation

technique called gel
electrophoresis.

tonuria), the absence of the enzyme responsible for the
breakdown of gangliosides indicates Tay-Sachs disease,
and so forth.

Third, genetic counselors can look for an association
with known genetic markers. For sickle cell anemia, Hunt-
ington’s disease, and one form of muscular dystrophy (a
genetic disorder characterized by weakened muscles), in-
vestigators have found other mutations on the same chro-
mosomes that, by chance, occur at about the same place as
the mutations that cause those disorders. By testing for
the presence of these other mutations, a genetic counselor
can identify individuals with a high probability of possess-
ing the disorder-causing mutations. Finding such muta-

tions in the first place is a little like searching for a needle
in a haystack, but persistent efforts have proved successful
in these three disorders. The associated mutations are de-
tectable because they alter the length of the DNA seg-
ments that restriction enzymes produce when they cut
strands of DNA at particular places (see chapter 18).
Therefore, these mutations produce what are called re-
striction fragment length polymorphisms, or RFLPs
(figure 13.42).

 

Many gene defects can be detected early in pregnancy,
allowing for appropriate planning by the prospective
parents.

 

Chapter 13 Patterns of Inheritance 273
