522

CHAPTER 18 TEMPERATURE, HEAT, AND THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS

Sample Problem 18.02 Thermal expansion of a volume

On a hot day in Las Vegas, an oil trucker loaded 37 000 L of
diesel fuel. He encountered cold weather on the way to
Payson, Utah, where the temperature was 23.0 K lower than
in Las Vegas, and where he delivered his entire load. How
many liters did he deliver? The coefficient of volume expan-
sion for diesel fuel is 9.50 x 10~-4/C°, and the coefficient of
linear expansion for his steel truck tank is 11 x 10~%/C°.

KEY IDEA

 

The volume of the diesel fuel depends directly on the tem-
perature. Thus, because the temperature decreased, the

18-4 apsonption oF HEAT

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

18.11 Identify that thermal energy is associated with the random
motions of the microscopic bodies in an object.

18.12 Identify that heat Q is the amount of transferred energy
(either to or from an object's thermal energy) due to a tempera-
ture difference between the object and its environment.

18.13 Convert energy units between various measurement systems.

18.14 Convert between mechanical or electrical energy and ther-
mal energy.

18.15 For a temperature change AT of a substance, relate
the change to the heat transfer Q and the substance's heat
capacity C.

18.16 For a temperature change AT of a substance, relate the

Key Ideas

@ Heat Q is energy that is transferred between a system and
its environment because of a temperature difference between
them. It can be measured in joules (J), calories (cal), kilocalo-
ries (Cal or kcal), or British thermal units (Btu), with

1 cal = 3.968 X 10-3 Btu = 4.1868 J.

@ If heat Q is absorbed by an object, the object's temperature
change T;— T;is related to Q by

Q=C(T;~ T),
in which C is the heat capacity of the object. If the object has
mass m, then

Q=cm(T,~ T),
where c is the specific heat of the material making up the
object.

volume of the fuel did also, as given by Eq. 18-10 (AV =
VB AT).
Calculations: We find
AV= (37 000 L)(9.50 x 10-4/C°)(—23.0 K) = —808 L.
Thus, the amount delivered was
Vaer = V + AV = 37000 L — 808 L

= 36190 L. (Answer)

Note that the thermal expansion of the steel tank has

nothing to do with the problem. Question: Who paid for the
“missing” diesel fuel?

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

change to the heat transfer Q and the substance’s
specific heat c and mass m.

18.17 Identify the three phases of matter.

18.18 For a phase change of a substance, relate the heat
transfer Q, the heat of transformation L, and the amount
of mass m transformed.

18.19 Identify that if a heat transfer Q takes a substance
across a phase-change temperature, the transfer must
be calculated in steps: (a) a temperature change to reach
the phase-change temperature, (b) the phase change,
and then (c) any temperature change that moves the
substance away from the phase-change temperature.

@ The molar specific heat of a material is the heat capacity
per mole, which means per 6.02 x 10° elementary units of
the material.
@ Heat absorbed by a material may change the material's
physical state —for example, from solid to liquid or from liquid
to gas. The amount of energy required per unit mass to
change the state (but not the temperature) of a particular
material is its heat of transformation L. Thus,

Q=Lm.
@ The heat of vaporization Ly is the amount of energy per unit
mass that must be added to vaporize a liquid or that must be
removed to condense a gas.
@ The heat of fusion L;-is the amount of energy per unit mass
that must be added to melt a solid or that must be removed to
freeze a liquid.
