596

Schematic of
a refrigerator

 

 

 

 

 

Ltt )
Qu ie

is lost.

<
’ = |

-

Work is done 5, Heat is

on the engine. . t absorbed.

 

 

 

 

Figure 20-14 The elements of a refrigerator.
The two black arrowheads on the central
loop suggest the working substance oper-
ating in a cycle, as if on a p-V plot. Energy
is transferred as heat Q, to the working
substance from the low-temperature reser-
voir. Energy is transferred as heat Qy to
the high-temperature reservoir from the
working substance. Work W is done on the
refrigerator (on the working substance) by
something in the environment.

Perfect refrigerator:
total transfer of heat
from cold to hot
without any work

| Ts J

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

(a)
Figure 20-15 The elements of a perfect
refrigerator—that is, one that transfers
energy from a low-temperature reservoir
to a high-temperature reservoir without
any input of work.

CHAPTER 20 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

Entropy in the Real World: Refrigerators

A refrigerator is a device that uses work in order to transfer energy from a low-
temperature reservoir to a high-temperature reservoir as the device continuously
repeats a set series of thermodynamic processes. In a household refrigerator, for
example, work is done by an electrical compressor to transfer energy from the
food storage compartment (a low-temperature reservoir) to the room (a high-
temperature reservoir).

Air conditioners and heat pumps are also refrigerators. For an air conditioner,
the low-temperature reservoir is the room that is to be cooled and the high-temper-
ature reservoir is the warmer outdoors. A heat pump is an air conditioner that can
be operated in reverse to heat a room; the room is the high-temperature reservoir,
and heatis transferred to it from the cooler outdoors.

Let us consider an ideal refrigerator:

Oo In an ideal refrigerator, all processes are reversible and no wasteful energy trans-
fers occur as a result of, say, friction and turbulence.

Figure 20-14 shows the basic elements of an ideal refrigerator. Note that its oper-
ation is the reverse of how the Carnot engine of Fig. 20-8 operates. In other
words, all the energy transfers, as either heat or work, are reversed from those of
a Carnot engine. We can call such an ideal refrigerator a Carnot refrigerator.

The designer of a refrigerator would like to extract as much energy |Q,! as pos-
sible from the low-temperature reservoir (what we want) for the least amount of
work |W/ (what we pay for).A measure of the efficiency of a refrigerator, then, is

__whatwe want — |Q;|

~ what we payfor — |W]

(coefficient of performance,
any refrigerator),

(20-14)
where K is called the coefficient of performance. For a Carnot refrigerator,
the first law of thermodynamics gives |W = !|Qy! — |Q;!, where |Qy! is the mag-
nitude of the energy transferred as heat to the high-temperature reservoir.
Equation 20-14 then becomes

\Qu|
Kez
© Onl = [Or]

Because a Carnot refrigerator is a Carnot engine operating in reverse, we can
combine Eq. 20-10 with Eq. 20-15; after some algebra we find

(20-15)

T. (coefficient of performance,

Ke= Ta - T. Carnot refrigerator).

(20-16)

For typical room air conditioners, K ~ 2.5. For household refrigerators,
K ~5. Perversely, the value of K is higher the closer the temperatures of the two
reservoirs are to each other. That is why heat pumps are more effective in
temperate climates than in very cold climates.

It would be nice to own a refrigerator that did not require some input of
work—that is, one that would run without being plugged in. Figure 20-15 rep-
resents another “inventor’s dream,” a perfect refrigerator that transfers energy as
heat Q from a cold reservoir to a warm reservoir without the need for work.
Because the unit operates in cycles, the entropy of the working substance does
not change during a complete cycle. The entropies of the two reservoirs, however,
do change: The entropy change for the cold reservoir is —!Q\/T,, and that for the
warm reservoir is +!QI/T;. Thus, the net entropy change for the entire system is

_ 101, Jol,

AS = T. Ty
