19-9 THE ADIABATIC EXPANSION OF AN IDEAL GAS

As the temperature increases, the value of Cy/R gradually increases to 2.5, im-
plying that two additional degrees of freedom have become involved. Quantum
theory shows that these two degrees of freedom are associated with the rota-
tional motion of the hydrogen molecules and that this motion requires a certain
minimum amount of energy. At very low temperatures (below 80 K), the mole-
cules do not have enough energy to rotate. As the temperature increases from 80
K, first a few molecules and then more and more of them obtain enough energy
to rotate, and the value of Cy/R increases, until all of the molecules are rotating
and Cy/R = 2.5.

Similarly, quantum theory shows that oscillatory motion of the molecules
requires a certain (higher) minimum amount of energy. This minimum amount is
not met until the molecules reach a temperature of about 1000 K, as shown in
Fig. 19-14. As the temperature increases beyond 1000 K, more and more mole-
cules have enough energy to oscillate and the value of Cy/R increases, until all of
the molecules are oscillating and Cy/R = 3.5. (In Fig. 19-14, the plotted curve
stops at 3200 K because there the atoms of a hydrogen molecule oscillate so
much that they overwhelm their bond, and the molecule then dissociates into two
separate atoms.)

The turning on of the rotation and vibration of the diatomic and polyatomic
molecules is due to the fact that the energies of these motions are quantized, that
is, restricted to certain values. There is a lowest allowed value for each type of mo-
tion. Unless the thermal agitation of the surrounding molecules provides those
lowest amounts, a molecule simply cannot rotate or vibrate.

19-9 THE ADIABATIC EXPANSION OF AN IDEAL GAS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

571

19.44 Onap-V diagram, sketch an adiabatic expansion 19.47 In an adiabatic expansion or contraction, relate the ini-
(or contraction) and identify that there is no heat exchange tial temperature and volume to the final temperature and
Q with the environment. volume.

19.45 Identify that in an adiabatic expansion, the gas does 19.48 Calculate the work done in an adiabatic process by
work on the environment, decreasing the gas's internal integrating the pressure with respect to volume.
energy, and that in an adiabatic contraction, work is done 19.49 Identify that a free expansion of a gas into a vacuum is
on the gas, increasing the internal energy. adiabatic but no work is done and thus, by the first law of

19.46 In an adiabatic expansion or contraction, relate the ini- thermodynamics, the internal energy and temperature of
tial pressure and volume to the final pressure and volume. the gas do not change.

Key Ideas

@ When an ideal gas undergoes a slow adiabatic volume in which y (= C,/Cy) is the ratio of molar specific heats for

change (a change for which Q = 0), the gas.

pV’=aconstant (adiabatic process), @ Fora free expansion, pV = a constant.

The Adiabatic Expansion of an Ideal Gas

‘We saw in Module 17-2 that sound waves are propagated through air and
other gases as a series of compressions and expansions; these variations in the
transmission medium take place so rapidly that there is no time for energy to
be transferred from one part of the medium to another as heat. As we saw in
Module 18-5, a process for which Q = 0 is an adiabatic process. We can ensure
that Q = 0 either by carrying out the process very quickly (as in sound waves) or
by doing it (at any rate) in a well-insulated container.
