20-2 ENTROPY IN THE REAL WORLD: ENGINES 591

in both its vapor and its liquid form. In an automobile engine the working sub-
stance is a gasoline—air mixture. If an engine is to do work on a sustained basis,
the working substance must operate in a cycle; that is, the working substance

Schematic of
a Carnot engine

 

 

 

 

 

 

must pass through a closed series of thermodynamic processes, called strokes, \ Ty
returning again and again to each state in its cycle. Let us see what the laws of i
thermodynamics can tell us about the operation of engines. Heat is Qu J
absorbed. aS
A Carnot Engine
We have seen that we can learn much about real gases by analyzing an ideal gas, = w
which obeys the simple law pV = nRT. Although an ideal gas does not exist, any <
real gas approaches ideal behavior if its density is low enough. Similarly, we can - Work is done
study real engines by analyzing the behavior of an ideal engine. piesvieicey & t by the engine.

 

 

 

| fi ]
o In an ideal engine, all processes are reversible and no wasteful energy transfers

occur due to, say, friction and turbulence. Figure 20-8 The elements of a Carnot

engine. The two black arrowheads on the

. . . . central loop suggest the working substance
We shall focus on a particular ideal engine called a Carnot engine after the operating in a cycle, as if on a p-V plot.

French scientist and engineer N. L. Sadi Carnot (pronounced “car-no”), who first Energy |Qul is transferred as heat from
proposed the engine’s concept in 1824. This ideal engine turns out to be the best _the high-temperature reservoir at temper-
(in principle) at using energy as heat to do useful work. Surprisingly, Carnot was _ ature Ty; to the working substance. Energy
able to analyze the performance of this engine before the first law of thermo- _!Qx/ is transferred as heat from the work-
dynamics and the concept of entropy had been discovered. ing substance to the low-temperature
Figure 20-8 shows schematically the operation of a Carnot engine. During _"@SetVoir at temperature T,. Work Wis
each cycle of the engine, the working substance absorbs energy |Qy! as heat from done ty the engine (actualy by ire work-
a thermal reservoir at constant temperature Ty; and discharges energy |Q;! as ing substance) on something tn the envi-
heat to a second thermal reservoir at a constant lower temperature T,. .
Figure 20-9 shows a p-V plot of the Carnot cycle—the cycle followed by
the working substance. As indicated by the arrows, the cycle is traversed in the
clockwise direction. Imagine the working substance to be a gas, confined to an
insulating cylinder with a weighted, movable piston. The cylinder may be placed
at will on either of the two thermal reservoirs, as in Fig. 20-6, or on an insulating
slab. Figure 20-9a shows that, if we place the cylinder in contact with the high-
temperature reservoir at temperature Ty, heat |Qy! is transferred to the working
substance from this reservoir as the gas undergoes an isothermal expansion from
volume V, to volume V;. Similarly, with the working substance in contact with
the low-temperature reservoir at temperature 7,, heat !Qy! is transferred from

 

Stages ofa
Carnot engine

 
  
 
    
 

 
    
   
 

Isothermal:

heat is absorbed Adiabatic:

. no heat
Positive work

is done.

Pressure
Pressure

Figure 20-9 A pressure-volume
plot of the cycle followed by the
working substance of the Carnot
engine in Fig. 20-8. The cycle con-
sists of two isothermal (ab and
cd) and two adiabatic processes 0
(bc and da). The shaded area

enclosed by the cycle is equal to

the work W per cycle done by

the Carnot engine. (a) (d)

  

0

Adiabatic: Negative work
no heat is done.

  
 

Volume Volume

Isothermal:
heat is lost
