The Griffith Experiment:
Hereditary Information Can Pass
between Organisms

The identification of the nucleus as the repository of
hereditary information focused attention on the chromo-
somes, which were already suspected to be the vehicles of
Mendelian inheritance. Specifically, biologists wondered
how the genes, the units of hereditary information studied
by Mendel, were actually arranged in the chromosomes.
They knew that chromosomes contained both protein and
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Which of these held the
genes? Starting in the late 1920s and continuing for about
30 years, a series of investigations addressed this question.
In 1928, British microbiologist Frederick Griffith made
a series of unexpected observations while experimenting
with pathogenic (disease-causing) bacteria. When he in-
fected mice with a virulent strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae
bacteria (then known as Pneumococcus), the mice died of
blood poisoning. However, when he infected similar mice
with a mutant strain of S. pneumoniae that lacked the viru-
lent strain’s polysaccharide coat, the mice showed no ill ef-
fects. The coat was apparently necessary for virulence. The
normal pathogenic form of this bacterium is referred to as

Live pathogenic
strain of S. pneumoniae

@Q @®

Live nonpathogenic
strain of S. pneumoniae

 

  

-

<a or on
(1) Mice die (2) Mice live
FIGURE 14.4

the S form because it forms smooth colonies on a culture
dish. The mutant form, which lacks an enzyme needed to
manufacture the polysaccharide capsule, is called the R
form because it forms rough colonies.

To determine whether the polysaccharide coat itself had
a toxic effect, Griffith injected dead bacteria of the virulent
S strain into mice; the mice remained perfectly healthy. As
a control, he injected mice with a mixture containing dead
S bacteria of the virulent strain and live coatless R bacteria,
each of which by itself did not harm the mice (figure 14.4).
Unexpectedly, the mice developed disease symptoms and
many of them died. The blood of the dead mice was found
to contain high levels of live, virulent Streptococcus type S
bacteria, which had surface proteins characteristic of the
live (previously R) strain. Somehow, the information speci-
fying the polysaccharide coat had passed from the dead,
virulent S bacteria to the live, coatless R bacteria in the
mixture, permanently transforming the coatless R bacteria
into the virulent S variety. Transformation is the transfer
of genetic material from one cell to another and can alter
the genetic makeup of the recipient cell.

 

Hereditary information can pass from dead cells to
living ones, transforming them.

 

Mixture of heat-killed pathogenic
and live nonpathogenic strains
of S. pneumoniae

Polysaccharide

te ie

Heat-killed pathogenic
strain of S. pneumoniae

 

 

Oe “= Mice die; their blood
a contains live pathogenic
(3) Mice live (4) strain of S. pneumoniae

Griffith’s discovery of transformation. (1) The pathogenic of the bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae kills many of the mice it is injected
into. The bacterial cells are covered with a polysaccharide coat, which the bacteria themselves synthesize. (2) Interestingly, an injection of
live, coatless bacteria produced no ill effects. However, the coat itself is not the agent of disease. (3) When Griffith injected mice with dead
bacteria that possessed polysaccharide coats, the mice were unharmed. (4) But when Griffith injected a mixture of dead bacteria with
polysaccharide coats and live bacteria without such coats, many of the mice died, and virulent bacteria with coats were recovered. Griffith
concluded that the live cells had been “transformed” by the dead ones; that is, genetic information specifying the polysaccharide coat had

passed from the dead cells to the living ones.

282 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics
