20-2 ENTROPY IN THE REAL WORLD: ENGINES

extracted as heat from the high-temperature reservoir than is delivered to the
low-temperature reservoir.
‘We shall now derive an expression for the efficiency of a Carnot engine.

Efficiency of a Carnot Engine

The purpose of any engine is to transform as much of the extracted energy Qy
into work as possible. We measure its success in doing so by its thermal efficiency
e, defined as the work the engine does per cycle (“energy we get”) divided by the
energy it absorbs as heat per cycle (“energy we pay for”):

energy weget |W |

energy we pay for \Ou|

 

(20-11)

(efficiency, any engine).

For a Carnot engine we can substitute for W from Eq. 20-8 to write Eq. 20-11 as

[Qu] — |Qu) [Qu
&¢ = 1 - ee 20-12
“ On ul -
Using Eq. 20-10 we can write this as
T,
eel 7 (efficiency, Carnot engine), (20-13)
H

where the temperatures 7; and Ty are in kelvins. Because T, < Ty, the Carnot
engine necessarily has a thermal efficiency less than unity—that is, less than
100%. This is indicated in Fig. 20-8, which shows that only part of the energy
extracted as heat from the high-temperature reservoir is available to do work,
and the rest is delivered to the low-temperature reservoir. We shall show in
Module 20-3 that no real engine can have a thermal efficiency greater than that
calculated from Eq. 20-13.

Inventors continually try to improve engine efficiency by reducing the
energy |Q;! that is “thrown away” during each cycle. The inventor’s dream is to
produce the perfect engine, diagrammed in Fig. 20-11, in which |Q,! is reduced to
zero and |Q};| is converted completely into work. Such an engine on an ocean
liner, for example, could extract energy as heat from the water and use it to drive
the propellers, with no fuel cost. An automobile fitted with such an engine could
extract energy as heat from the surrounding air and use it to drive the car, again
with no fuel cost. Alas, a perfect engine is only a dream: Inspection of Eq. 20-13
shows that we can achieve 100% engine efficiency (that is, e = 1) only if T, =0
or Ty— ©, impossible requirements. Instead, experience gives the following
alternative version of the second law of thermodynamics, which says in short,
there are no perfect engines:

Ok) No series of processes is possible whose sole result is the transfer of energy as heat
from a thermal reservoir and the complete conversion of this energy to work.

To summarize: The thermal efficiency given by Eq. 20-13 applies only to
Carnot engines. Real engines, in which the processes that form the engine cycle
are not reversible, have lower efficiencies. If your car were powered by a Carnot
engine, it would have an efficiency of about 55% according to Eq. 20-13; its actual
efficiency is probably about 25%. A nuclear power plant (Fig. 20-12), taken in its
entirety, is an engine. It extracts energy as heat from a reactor core, does work by
means of a turbine, and discharges energy as heat to a nearby river. If the power
plant operated as a Carnot engine, its efficiency would be about 40%; its actual
efficiency is about 30%. In designing engines of any type, there is simply no way
to beat the efficiency limitation imposed by Eq. 20-13.

593

Perfect engine:
\ Th ) total conversion

of heat to work
1}.

aa
=> wea)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Q.=0
Figure 20-11 The elements of a perfect
engine—that is, one that converts heat Qy
from a high-temperature reservoir directly
to work W with 100% efficiency.

 

© Richard Ustinich

Figure 20-12 The North Anna nuclear power
plant near Charlottesville, Virginia, which
generates electric energy at the rate of
900 MW. At the same time, by design, it
discards energy into the nearby river at
the rate of 2100 MW. This plant and all
others like it throw away more energy
than they deliver in useful form. They are
real counterparts of the ideal engine of
Fig, 20-8.
