566 CHAPTER 19 THE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES

temperature. (For now we neglect the possibility of also putting energy into oscil-
lations of the molecules.)

‘We can now generalize Eq. 19-38 for the internal energy of any ideal gas by
substituting Cy for 3R; we get

The paths are different,
but the change in the
internal energy is the
same.

 
    

Ex, =nCyT  (anyideal gas). (19-44)

This equation applies not only to an ideal monatomic gas but also to diatomic
and polyatomic ideal gases, provided the appropriate value of Cy is used. Just as
with Eq. 19-38, we see that the internal energy of a gas depends on the temper-
T+AT ature of the gas but not on its pressure or density.
T When a confined ideal gas undergoes temperature change AT, then from ei-
ther Eq. 19-41 or Eq. 19-44 the resulting change in its internal energy is

Pressure

 

Volume
Figure 19-10 Three paths representing three
different processes that take an ideal gas
from an initial state i at temperature Tto

AE jg =nCyAT (ideal gas, any process). (19-45)

This equation tells us:

some final state fat temperature T + AT. i)
The change AF; in the internal energy A change in the internal energy Ej, of a confined ideal gas depends on only the
of the gas is the same for these three change in the temperature, not on what type of process produces the change.

processes and for any others that result in

the same change of temperature. . . .
As examples, consider the three paths between the two isotherms in the p-V.

diagram of Fig. 19-10. Path 1 represents a constant-volume process. Path 2
represents a constant-pressure process (we examine it next). Path 3 represents a
process in which no heat is exchanged with the system’s environment (we discuss
this in Module 19-9). Although the values of heat Q and work W associated with
these three paths differ, as do py and Vy, the values of AE;,, associated with the
three paths are identical and are all given by Eq. 19-45, because they all involve
the same temperature change AT. Therefore, no matter what path is actually
taken between Tand T + AT, we can always use path 1 and Eq. 19-45 to compute
AE x.y easily.

Molar Specific Heat at Constant Pressure

‘We now assume that the temperature of our ideal gas is increased by the same
small amount AT as previously but now the necessary energy (heat Q) is added
with the gas under constant pressure. An experiment for doing this is shown in
Fig. 19-1 1a; the p-V diagram for the process is plotted in Fig. 19-11). From such
experiments we find that the heat Q is related to the temperature change AT by

Q=nC,AT (constant pressure), (19-46)

 

The temperature
increase is done
without changing
the pressure.

where C, is a constant called the molar specific heat at constant pressure. This
C, is greater than the molar specific heat at constant volume Cy, because energy
must now be supplied not only to raise the temperature of the gas but also for
the gas to do work —that is, to lift the weighted piston of Fig. 19-1 1a.

To relate molar specific heats C, and Cy, we start with the first law of ther-
modynamics (Eq. 18-26):

 
    

Pressure

AEin = Q — W. (19-47)

‘We next replace each term in Eq. 19-47. For AE;,,, we substitute from Eq. 19-45.
For Q, we substitute from Eq. 19-46. To replace W, we first note that since the
(%) Volume pressure remains constant, Eq. 19-16 tells us that W = p AV. Then we note that,
Figure 19-11 (a) The temperature of an ideal using the ideal gas equation (pV = nRT), we can write

gas is raised from T to T + AT ina constant-

pressure process. Heat is added and work W=pAV=nRAT. (19-48)
is done in lifting the loaded piston. (b) The

process on a p-V diagram. The work p AV. Making these substitutions in Eq. 19-47 and then dividing through by n AT,

is given by the shaded area. we find
Cv=C,-R
