Change in Entropy

Let’s approach this definition of change in entropy by looking again at a process
that we described in Modules 18-5 and 19-9: the free expansion of an ideal gas.
Figure 20-la shows the gas in its initial equilibrium state i, confined by a closed
stopcock to the left half of a thermally insulated container. If we open the
stopcock, the gas rushes to fill the entire container, eventually reaching the final
equilibrium state f shown in Fig. 20-1b. This is an irreversible process; all the
molecules of the gas will never return to the left half of the container.

The p-V plot of the process, in Fig. 20-2, shows the pressure and volume
of the gas in its initial state i and final state f. Pressure and volume are state
properties, properties that depend only on the state of the gas and not on how it
reached that state. Other state properties are temperature and energy. We now
assume that the gas has still another state property—its entropy. Furthermore,
we define the change in entropy S;— S; of a system during a process that takes
the system from an initial state / to a final state fas

dQ
AS = S,— S;= I TT (change in entropy defined). (20-1)
i
Here Q is the energy transferred as heat to or from the system during the process,
and T is the temperature of the system in kelvins. Thus, an entropy change
depends not only on the energy transferred as heat but also on the temperature
at which the transfer takes place. Because T is always positive, the sign of AS is
the same as that of Q. We see from Eq. 20-1 that the SI unit for entropy and
entropy change is the joule per kelvin.

There is a problem, however, in applying Eq. 20-1 to the free expansion of
Fig. 20-1. As the gas rushes to fill the entire container, the pressure, temperature,
and volume of the gas fluctuate unpredictably. In other words, they do not have a
sequence of well-defined equilibrium values during the intermediate stages of the
change from initial state i to final state f. Thus, we cannot trace a pressure-volume
path for the free expansion on the p-V plot of Fig, 20-2, and we cannot find a rela-
tion between Q and T that allows us to integrate as Eq. 20-1 requires.

However, if entropy is truly a state property, the difference in entropy
between states i and f must depend only on those states and not at all on the way
the system went from one state to the other. Suppose, then, that we replace the
irreversible free expansion of Fig. 20-1 with a reversible process that connects
states i and f. With a reversible process we can trace a pressure-volume path on
a p-V plot, and we can find a relation between Q and T that allows us to use
Eg. 20-1 to obtain the entropy change.

We saw in Module 19-9 that the temperature of an ideal gas does not change
during a free expansion: T; = T; = T. Thus, points i and f in Fig. 20-2 must be on
the same isotherm. A convenient replacement process is then a reversible
isothermal expansion from state i to state f, which actually proceeds along that
isotherm. Furthermore, because T is constant throughout a reversible isothermal
expansion, the integral of Eq. 20-1 is greatly simplified.

Figure 20-3 shows how to produce such a reversible isothermal expansion.
We confine the gas to an insulated cylinder that rests on a thermal reservoir
maintained at the temperature T. We begin by placing just enough lead shot on
the movable piston so that the pressure and volume of the gas are those of the
initial state i of Fig. 20-la. We then remove shot slowly (piece by piece) until
the pressure and volume of the gas are those of the final state f of Fig. 20-1b. The
temperature of the gas does not change because the gas remains in thermal
contact with the reservoir throughout the process.

The reversible isothermal expansion of Fig. 20-3 is physically quite different
from the irreversible free expansion of Fig. 20-1. However, both processes have
the same initial state and the same final state and thus must have the same change in

20-1 ENTROPY 585

 

Insulation

(a) Initial state i

Irreversible
process

Stopcock open

     

(d) Final state f

Figure 20-1 The free expansion of an ideal
gas. (a) The gas is confined to the left half
of an insulated container by a closed stop-
cock. (b) When the stopcock is opened,
the gas rushes to fill the entire container.
This process is irreversible; that is, it does
not occur in reverse, with the gas sponta-
neously collecting itself in the left half of
the container.

Pressure

Volume

Figure 20-2 A p-V diagram showing the ini-
tial state i and the final state f of the free
expansion of Fig.20-1.The intermediate
states of the gas cannot be shown because.
they are not equilibrium states.
