590

Bx

Coiled

(a)

 
 
    
 

Uncoiled

() F F

Figure 20-7 A section of a rubber band (a) un-
stretched and (b) stretched, and a polymer
within it (a) coiled and (b) uncoiled.

CHAPTER 20 ENTROPY AND THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS.

This tells us that F is proportional to the rate dS/dx at which the rubber band’s
entropy changes during a small change dx in the rubber band’s length. Thus, you
can feel the effect of entropy on your hands as you stretch a rubber band.

To make sense of the relation between force and entropy, let’s consider a
simple model of the rubber material. Rubber consists of cross-linked polymer
chains (long molecules with cross links) that resemble three-dimensional zig-zags
(Fig. 20-7). When the rubber band is at its rest length, the polymers are coiled up
in a spaghetti-like arrangement. Because of the large disorder of the molecules,
this rest state has a high value of entropy. When we stretch a rubber band, we un-
coil many of those polymers, aligning them in the direction of stretch. Because
the alignment decreases the disorder, the entropy of the stretched rubber band is
less. That is, the change dS/dx in Eq. 20-7 is a negative quantity because the en-
tropy decreases with stretching. Thus, the force on our hands from the rubber
band is due to the tendency of the polymers to return to their former disordered
state and higher value of entropy. =

20-2 ENTROPY IN THE REAL WORLD: ENGINES

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

20.09 Identify that a heat engine is a device that extracts
energy from its environment in the form of heat and does
useful work and that in an idea/ heat engine, all processes
are reversible, with no wasteful energy transfers.

20.10 Sketch a p-V diagram for the cycle of a Carnot engine,
indicating the direction of cycling, the nature of the
processes involved, the work done during each process
(including algebraic sign), the net work done in the cycle,
and the heat transferred during each process (including
algebraic sign).

20.11 Sketch a Carnot cycle on a temperature—entropy
diagram, indicating the heat transfers.

Key Ideas

@ Anengine is a device that, operating in a cycle, extracts
energy as heat | Q},! from a high-temperature reservoir and does
acertain amount of work | WI. The efficiency ¢ of any engine is
defined as

\w|

lQul”

@ In an ideal engine, all processes are reversible and no waste-
ful energy transfers occur due to, say, friction and turbulence.

energy we get

energy we pay for

 

e@ ACarmot engine is an ideal engine that follows the cycle of
Fig. 20-9. Its efficiency is

 

|Qu | =,-1
Ta’

20.12 Determine the net entropy change around a Camot cycle.

20.13 Calculate the efficiency e¢ of a Camot engine in terms
of the heat transfers and also in terms of the temperatures
of the reservoirs.

20.14 Identify that there are no perfect engines in which
the energy transferred as heat Q from a high temperature
reservoir goes entirely into the work W done by the engine.

20.15 Sketch a p-V diagram for the cycle of a Stirling engine,
indicating the direction of cycling, the nature of the
processes involved, the work done during each process
(including algebraic sign), the net work done in the cycle,
and the heat transfers during each process.

in which Ty and T;, are the temperatures of the high- and low-
temperature reservoirs, respectively. Real engines always have
an efficiency lower than that of a Camot engine. Ideal engines
that are not Carnot engines also have efficiencies lower than
that of a Camot engine.

@ Aperfect engine is an imaginary engine in which energy
extracted as heat from the high-temperature reservoir is
converted completely to work. Such an engine would
violate the second law of thermodynamics, which can be
restated as follows: No series of processes is possible
whose sole result is the absorption of energy as heat from
a thermal reservoir and the complete conversion of this
energy to work.

Entropy in the Real World: Engines

A heat engine, or more simply, an engine, is a device that extracts energy from its
environment in the form of heat and does useful work. At the heart of every
engine is a working substance. In a steam engine, the working substance is water,
