20-4 A STATISTICAL VIEW OF ENTROPY

Probability and Entropy

In 1877, Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (the Boltzmann of Boltzmann’s
constant k) derived a relationship between the entropy S of a configuration of a
gas and the multiplicity W of that configuration. That relationship is

S=kinW (Boltzmann's entropy equation). (20-21)

This famous formula is engraved on Boltzmann’s tombstone.

It is natural that S and W should be related by a logarithmic function. The
total entropy of two systems is the sum of their separate entropies. The proba-
bility of occurrence of two independent systems is the product of their separate
probabilities. Because In ab = Ina + In b, the logarithm seems the logical way to

connect these quantities.

Table 20-1 displays the entropies of the configurations of the six-molecule
system of Fig. 20-17, computed using Eq. 20-21. Configuration IV, which has the

greatest multiplicity, also has the greatest entropy.

When you use Eq. 20-20 to calculate W, your calculator may signal “OVER-
FLOW?” if you try to find the factorial of a number greater than a few hundred.

Instead, you can use Stirling’s approximation for In N!:

In N! ~ M(InN) — N _ (Stirling’s approximation).

(20-22)

The Stirling of this approximation was an English mathematician and not the

Robert Stirling of engine fame.

Vv] Checkpoint 5

A box contains 1 mol of a gas. Consider two configurations: (a) each half of the box
contains half the molecules and (b) each third of the box contains one-third of the

molecules. Which configuration has more microstates?

Sample Problem 20.06 Entropy change of free expansion using microstates

In Sample Problem 20.01, we showed that when n moles of
an ideal gas doubles its volume in a free expansion, the
entropy increase from the initial state i to the final state fis
S;— S; =nR In 2. Derive this increase in entropy by using
statistical mechanics.

KEY IDEA

 

We can relate the entropy S of any given configuration of
the molecules in the gas to the multiplicity W of microstates
for that configuration, using Eq. 20-21 (S = k In W).

Calculations: We are interested in two configurations: the
final configuration f (with the molecules occupying the full
volume of their container in Fig. 20-1b) and the initial con-
figuration i (with the molecules occupying the left half of
the container). Because the molecules are in a closed con-
tainer, we can calculate the multiplicity W of their mi-
crostates with Eq. 20-20. Here we have N molecules in the
n moles of the gas. Initially, with the molecules all in the left

 

half of the container, their (m;, m) configuration is (N, 0).
Then, Eq. 20-20 gives their multiplicity as
N!

Y= wor
Finally, with the molecules spread through the full volume,
their (1, n2) configuration is (N/2, N/2). Then, Eq. 20-20
gives their multiplicity as

N!
~ (NI2)! (N22)! °
From Eq. 20-21, the initial and final entropies are
S;=kinW,=kin1=0

W

and
Sp= kin W;= kIn(N!) — 2k In[(N/2)!]. (20-23)

In writing Eq. 20-23, we have used the relation

+ =ina—2Inb.

bs =
