Part

Molecular Genetics

Can Cancer Tumors Be
Starved to Death?

One of the most exciting recent developments in the war
against cancer is the report that it might be possible to
starve cancer tumors to death. Many laboratories have
begun to look into this possibility, although it’s not yet
clear that the approach will actually work to cure cancer.
One of the most exciting and frustrating things about
watching a developing science story like this one is that you
can't flip ahead and read the ending—in the real world of
research, you never know how things are going to turn out.

This story starts when a Harvard University researcher,
Dr. Judah Folkman, followed up on a familiar observation
made by many oncologists (cancer specialists), that removal
of a primary tumor often leads to more rapid growth of
secondary tumors. "Perhaps," Folkman reasoned, "the pri-
mary tumor is producing some substance that inhibits the
growth of the other tumors." Such a substance could be a
powerful weapon against cancer.

Folkman set out to see if he could isolate a chemical
from primary tumors that inhibited the growth of sec-
ondary ones. Three years ago he announced he had found
two. He called them angiostatin and endostatin.

To understand how these two proteins work, put your-
self in the place of a tumor. To grow, a tumor must obtain
from the body's blood supply all the food and_ nutrients it
needs to make more cancer cells. To facilitate this neces-
sary grocery shopping, tumors leak out substances into the
surrounding tissues that encourage angiogenesis, the for-
mation of small blood vessels. This call for more blood
vessels insures an ever-greater flow of blood to the tumor
as it grows larger.

When examined, Folkman's two cancer inhibitors
turned out to be angiogenesis inhibitors. Angiostatin and
endostatin kill a tumor by cutting off its blood supply.
This may sound like an unlikely approach to curing cancer,
but think about it—the cells of a growing tumor require a
plentiful supply of food and nutrients to fuel their produc-
tion of new cancer cells. Cut this off, and the tumor cells
die, literally starving to death.

By producing factors like angiostatin and endostatin, the
primary tumor holds back the growth of any competing

 

Primary tumor

  
 
 

1. Primary tumor
produces the
angiogenesis
inhibitor
endostatin.

Real People Doing Real Science umm

2. Endostatin
inhibits formation
of new blood
vessels.

3. Lacking a blood

© Secondary. supply,

 

 

 

Muscle = »\\ ¥ secondary tumor
tissue “s SE @, | cannot grow.
are 7.
a SE \ =

How primary tumors kill off the competition. Tumors require
an ample blood supply to fuel their growth. The growth of new
blood vessels is called angiogenesis. Inhibiting angiogenesis offers
a possible way to block tumor growth.

tumors, allowing the primary tumor to hog the available
resources for its own use (see above).

In laboratory tests the angiogenesis inhibitors caused
tumors in mice to regress to microscopic size, a result that
electrified researchers all over the world. Other scientists
were soon trying to replicate this exciting result. Some
have succeeded, others not. Five major laboratories have
isolated their own angiogenesis inhibitors and published
findings of antitumor activity. The National Cancer
Institute is proceeding with tests of angiostatin and other
angiogenesis inhibitors in humans. Preliminary results
are encouraging. While not a cure-all for all cancers,
angiogenesis inhibitors seem very effective against some,
particularly solid-tumor cancers.

Gaining a better understanding of how tumors induce
angiogenesis has become a high priority of cancer research.
One promising line of research concerns hypoxia. As a solid
tumor grows and outstrips its blood supply, its interior be-
comes hypoxic (oxygen depleted). In response to hypoxia, it
appears that genes are turned on that promote survival
under low oxygen pressure, including ones that increase
blood flow to the tumor by promoting angiogenesis. Un-
derstanding this process may give important clues as to
how angiogenesis inhibitors work to inhibit tumor growth.

So how does a lowering of oxygen pressure within a
tumor promote blood vessel formation? Dr. Randall Johnson
of the University of California, San Diego, is studying one
important response by a tumor to hypoxia—the induction
of a gene-specific transcription factor (that is, a protein that
activates the transcription of a particular gene) that pro-
motes angiogenesis. Called HIF-1, for hypoxia inducible
factor-I, this transcription factor appears to induce the tran-
scription of genes necessary for blood vessel formation.

277
