Coulomb’s Law

21-1 couLome’s Law

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

21.01 Distinguish between being electrically neutral, negatively
charged, and positively charged and identify excess charge.

21.02 Distinguish between conductors, nonconductors (insu-
lators), semiconductors, and superconductors.

21.03 Describe the electrical properties of the particles in-
side an atom.

21.04 Identify conduction electrons and explain their role in
making a conducting object negatively or positively charged.

21.05 Identify what is meant by “electrically isolated” and by
“grounding”

21.06 Explain how a charged object can set up induced
charge in a second object.

21.07 Identify that charges with the same electrical sign repel
each other and those with opposite electrical signs attract
each other.

21.08 For either of the particles in a pair of charged particles,
draw a free-body diagram, showing the electrostatic force
(Coulomb force) on it and anchoring the tail of the force
vector on that particle.

21.09 For either of the particles in a pair of charged particles,
apply Coulomb's law to relate the magnitude of the electro-
static force, the charge magnitudes of the particles, and the
separation between the particles.

21.10 Identify that Coulomb's law applies only to (point-like)
particles and objects that can be treated as particles.

21.11 If more than one force acts on a particle, find the net
force by adding all the forces as vectors, not scalars.

21.12 Identify that a shell of uniform charge attracts or repels
a charged particle that is outside the shell as if all the
shell's charge were concentrated as a particle at the
shell's center.

21.13 Identify that if a charged particle is located inside a shell
of uniform charge, there is no net electrostatic force on the
particle from the shell.

21.14 Identify that if excess charge is put on a spherical conduc-
tor, it spreads out uniformly over the external surface area.

21.15 Identify that if two identical spherical conductors touch
or are connected by conducting wire, any excess charge
will be shared equally.

21.16 Identify that a nonconducting object can have any given
distribution of charge, including charge at interior points.

21.17 Identify current as the rate at which charge moves
through a point.

21.18 For current through a point, apply the relationship be-
tween the current, atime interval, and the amount of charge
that moves through the point in that time interval.

 

Key Ideas
@ The strength of a particle's electrical interaction with ob-
jects around it depends on its electric charge (usually repre-
sented as q), which can be either positive or negative.
Particles with the same sign of charge repel each other, and
particles with opposite signs of charge attract each other.

@ An object with equal amounts of the two kinds of charge is
electrically neutral, whereas one with an imbalance is electri-
cally charged and has an excess charge.

@ Conductors are materials in which a significant number of
electrons are free to move. The charged particles in noncon-
ductors (insulators) are not free to move.

@ Electric current iis the rate dq/dt at which charge passes a
joint:
P ;- 4.
dt’
@ Coulomb's law describes the electrostatic force (or electric

force) between two charged particles. If the particles have
charges q and q, are separated by distance r, and are at rest
(or moving only slowly) relative to each other, then the magni-
tude of the force acting on each due to the other is given by

F= 1 allel

q 3 (Coulomb's law),
TE, r

where e) = 8.85 X 10-' C?/N- m?is the permittivity con-
stant. The ratio 1/47re9 is often replaced with the electrostatic
constant (or Coulomb constant) k = 8.99 x 10°N-m2/C?.

@ The electrostatic force vector acting on a charged particle
due to a second charged particle is either directly toward the
second particle (opposite signs of charge) or directly away
from it (same sign of charge).

@ If multiple electrostatic forces act on a particle, the net force
is the vector sum (not scalar sum) of the individual forces.

609
