18-5 THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS 529

ferred into the system from the thermal reservoir (positive heat) or vice versa
(negative heat). Also, work can be done by the system to raise the loaded piston
(positive work) or lower it (negative work). We assume that all such changes
occur slowly, with the result that the system is always in (approximate) thermal
equilibrium (every part is always in thermal equilibrium).

Suppose that you remove a few lead shot from the piston of Fig. 18-13, allowing
the gas to push the piston and remaining shot upward through a differential dis-
placement ds’ with an upward force F. Since the displacement is tiny, we can as-
sume that F is constant during the displacement. Then F hasa magnitude that is
equal to pA, where p is the pressure of the gas and A is the face area of the piston.
The differential work dW done by the gas during the displacement is

dW = F -ds’ = (pA)(ds) = p(A ds)
= pd, (18-24)

in which dV is the differential change in the volume of the gas due to the move-
ment of the piston. When you have removed enough shot to allow the gas to
change its volume from V; to V;, the total work done by the gas is

a
W= [aw- I pav. (18-25)
Vi

During the volume change, the pressure and temperature may also change. To
evaluate Eq. 18-25 directly, we would need to know how pressure varies with vol-
ume for the actual process by which the system changes from state i to state f.
One Path. There are actually many ways to take the gas from state i to state f.
One way is shown in Fig. 18-14a, which is a plot of the pressure of the gas versus its
volume and which is called a p-V diagram. In Fig. 18-14a, the curve indicates that the

It still goes from / to f, It still goes from / to f, 7
Gas moves from / to f, but now it does more but now it does /ess

doing positive work. work.
Figure 18-14 (a) The shaded

area represents the work W
done by a system as it goes
from an initial state i to a fi-
nal state f, Work W is posi-
tive because the system’s f f

Process,

Pressure
Pressure
8

  

The gas does work

Insulation colielpston)

 

We control the heat transfer
by adjusting the temperature.

Figure 18-13 A gas is confined toa cylinder
with a movable piston. Heat Q can be

added to or withdrawn from the gas by reg-
ulating the temperature T of the adjustable
thermal reservoir. Work W can be done by
the gas by raising or lowering the piston.

 

work.

Pressure

 

volume increases. (b) Wis
still positive, but now
greater. (c) Wis still posi-
tive, but now smaller. (d) W
can be even smaller (path
icdf) or larger (path ighf).
(e) Here the system goes
from state fto state i as the g h
gas is compressed to less
volume by an external
force. The work W done by
the system is now negative.
(f) The net work We: done
by the system during
acomplete cycle is repre-

(a) 0 Volume (5) 0 Volume

Pressure
Pressure

f f
¢ G

(c) 0 Volume

Cycling clockwise

We can control how Moving from f to /, yields a positive net
much work it does. it does negative work. work.

i

~" >0
f

Pressure

 

sented bythe shaded area. (4) 9 a (0 Volume

yo Volume
