19-2 IDEAL GASES 551

Key Ideas
@ An ideal gas is one for which the pressure p, volume V, and where the Boltzmann constant k is
temperature T are related by

PV =NnRT (ideal gas law).

 

R
k = —~= 138 x 10° JK.
Ng

Here nis the number of moles of the gas present and Risa @ The work done by an ideal gas during an isothermal
constant (8.31 J/mol -K) called the gas constant. (constant-temperature) change from volume V; to volume V; is
@ The ideal gas law can also be written as

V;
pV = NKT, W=nRTIn v (ideal gas, isothermal process).
7 . ;

 

Ideal Gases

Our goal in this chapter is to explain the macroscopic properties of a gas—such
as its pressure and its temperature —in terms of the behavior of the molecules
that make it up. However, there is an immediate problem: which gas? Should it
be hydrogen, oxygen, or methane, or perhaps uranium hexafluoride? They are
all different. Experimenters have found, though, that if we confine 1 mol samples
of various gases in boxes of identical volume and hold the gases at the same
temperature, then their measured pressures are almost the same, and at lower
densities the differences tend to disappear. Further experiments show that, at low
enough densities, all real gases tend to obey the relation

PV =nRT (ideal gas law), (19-5)

in which p is the absolute (not gauge) pressure, n is the number of moles of gas
present, and T is the temperature in kelvins. The symbol R is a constant called
the gas constant that has the same value for all gases —namely,

R = 831 J/mol-K. (19-6)

Equation 19-5 is called the ideal gas law. Provided the gas density is low, this law
holds for any single gas or for any mixture of different gases. (For a mixture,
nis the total number of moles in the mixture.)
We can rewrite Eq. 19-5 in an alternative form, in terms of a constant called
the Boltzmann constant k, which is defined as
_— R _ 831 S/mol:K

Nx 6.02 X 10 mol~!

This allows us to write R = kN. Then, with Eq. 19-2 (n = N/N), we see that
nR = Nk. (19-8)

Substituting this into Eq. 19-5 gives a second expression for the ideal gas law:

= 1.38 x 10-°,J/K. (19-7)

PV=NKT (ideal gas law). (19-9)

(Caution: Note the difference between the two expressions for the ideal gas
law—Eq. 19-5 involves the number of moles n, and Eq. 19-9 involves the number
of molecules N.)

You may well ask, “What is an ideal gas, and what is so ‘ideal’ about it?” The
answer lies in the simplicity of the law (Eqs. 19-5 and 19-9) that governs its
macroscopic properties. Using this law—as you will see—we can deduce many
properties of the ideal gas in a simple way. Although there is no such thing in
nature as a truly ideal gas, all real gases approach the ideal state at low enough
densities—that is, under conditions in which their molecules are far enough
apart that they do not interact with one another. Thus, the ideal gas concept
allows us to gain useful insights into the limiting behavior of real gases.
