 

6 | Hl Wild-type cells
HB HIF-10. null cells

Tumor weight (g)
o
+

 

 

0

 

9 days 21 days
Days in culture

 

(a)

300 | —— Wildtype cells
| —— HIF-tnull cells

 

 

4 8 es
Hours of hypoxic treatment

(b)

 

Tumor growth in HIF-10. nll cells and wild-type cells. (a) The size of tumors formed by the HIF-1ot mull cells were significantly
smaller compared to those formed by wild-type cells. (¢) HIF-1o. null cells had significantly lower levels of VEGF protein production
under hypoxic conditions compared to wild-type cells. VEGF promotes the formation of capillaries.

The Experiment

In order to examine the involvement of the hypoxia-
inducible transcriptional factor (HIF-1) in angiogenesis,
Johnson and his co-workers were faced with the problem
that HIF-1 has many other effects on cell growth. To get a
clear look at its role in angiogenesis, the researchers turned
to embryonic stem cells. Embryonic stem cells are cells
harvested from early embryos, before they have differenti-
ated, while they are still capable of unlimited division. Be-
cause such stem cells have the capacity to form tumors (ter-
atocarcinomas) when injected into certain kinds of mice,
they offer a good natural laboratory in which to study how
HIF-1 might influence cancer growth. The research team
first prepared a mutant HIF-1 embryonic stem cell line in
which the function of the transcription factor encoded by
HIEF-1 was completely destroyed or null.

The researchers then grew these HIF-1 null stem cells
under hypoxic conditions. If HIF-1 genes indeed foster
tumor growth in normal cells by promoting angiogenesis,
then it would be expected that these nui cells would be un-
able to promote tumor growth in this way.

The researchers tested the ability of null cells to
promote tumor growth by injecting HIF-1o null cells into
laboratory mice, and in control experiments injecting wild-
type stem cells. The injected cells were allowed to grow
and form tumors in both mu// and control host animals.
The tumors that formed were then examined and measured
for differences.

To get a closer look at what was really going on, the null
and wild-type cells were compared in their ability to actually
form new blood vessels. This was done by examining levels
of mRNA of a growth factor that plays a key role in the for-
mation and growth of blood vessels. This factor is a protein
called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The lev-
els of VEGF mRNA in the cells were determined by

 

hybridizing CDNA VEGF probes to mRNA isolated from
tumors, and measuring in each instance how much tumor
mRNA bound to the cDNA probe. In parallel studies, anti-
bodies were used to determine levels of VEGF protein.

The Results

The researchers found that the mull cells were greatly compro-
mised in their ability to form tumors compared to the wild-
type cells with the effects becoming more significant over time
(see graph a above). Tumors were five times larger in wild-
type cells than in the HIF-1 mui cells after 21 days. Clearly
knocking out HIF-1 retards tumor growth significantly.

This decrease in the size of tumors produced by null
cells is further supported by the results of the VEGF pro-
tein analysis (see graph b above). Levels of the protein
VEGF rise in wild-type cells under conditions of hypoxia,
increasing the immediate availability of oxygen to the
tumor by promoting capillary formation. The researchers
found levels of VEGF protein were lower in null cell tu-
mors, and responded to hypoxia at a lower rate.

Both the decrease in tumor size and the lower level of
VEGF in the HIF-1 mu/l cells supports the hypothesis that
HIF-1 plays an essential role in promoting angiogenesis in
a tumor, responding to a hypoxic condition by increasing
the levels of VEGF.

Do the angiogenesis inhibitors like angiostatin, being
tested as cancer cures, in fact act by inhibiting VEGF? The
sorts of experiments being carried out in Johnson’s labora-
tory, and in many other cancer centers, should soon cast
light on this still-murky question.

To explore this experiment further,
go to the Virtual Lab at
www.mhhe.com/raven6/vlab5.mhtml
