634 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

quantity at the point where the tail of the arrow is anchored. The vector is not
something that stretches froma “here” to a “there” as with a displacement vector.

In general, if several electric fields are set up at a given point by several
charged particles, we can find the net field by placing a positive test particle at
the point and then writing out the force acting on it due to each particle, such
as F,, due to particle 1. Forces obey the principle of superposition, so we just

OL
add the forces as vectors:

Fy= Fy t+ Rot 0 + Fe

To change over to electric field, we repeatedly use Eq. 22-1 for each of the indi-
vidual forces:

pei, in, ... , Fo
qo q q q
=E,+Ej+--- +E, (22-4)

This tells us that electric fields also obey the principle of superposition. If you want
the net electric field at a given point due to several particles, find the electric field
due to each particle (such as E, due to particle 1) and then sum the fields as vectors.
(As with electrostatic forces, you cannot just willy-nilly add up the magnitudes.)
This addition of fields is the subject of many of the homework problems.

Iv Checkpoint 1

The figure here shows a proton p and an electron e on an x axis. What is the direction of
the electric field due to the electron at (a) point

Sand (b) point R? What is the direction of the -¢ ——Q-*——_Q@—-«

neteelectric field at (c) point R and (d) point S? . Pp

Sample Problem 22.01 Net electric field due to three charged particles
Figure 22-7a shows three particles with charges g,; = +2Q, d

q2 = —2Q, and q; = —4Q, each a distance d from the origin. 1@,
What net electric field E' is produced at the origin? se

KEY IDEA

  

 

Charges q1, q2, and q3 produce electric field vectors E,, E), Find the net field d ——
%

and E;, respectively, at the origin, and the net electric field at this empty point.

is the vector sum E = E, + Ey + E,. To find this sum, we (@)

first must find the magnitudes and orientations of the three

field vectors. d d

 
  

 
  

Magnitudes and directions: To find the magnitude of E,,
which is due to q;, we use Eq. 22-3, substituting d for r and

Field toward
2Q for q and obtaining %

1 20 Field away.
1 dre, Pe ®

 

— Field toward
(2)

Snare a eo ee Figure 22-7 (a) Three particles with charges q;, qs, and qsare at the

 

1 20 1 40 same distance d from the origin. (b) The electric field vectors E;,
la a le E), and E;, at the origin due to the three particles. (c) The electric
‘0 “0 EB E. E,

field vector E, and the vector sum £, + E) at the origin.
