22-3 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A DIPOLE

We next must find the orientations of the three electric
field vectors at the origin. Because q; is a positive charge,
the field vector it produces points directly away from it,
and because q> and q; are both negative, the field vectors
they produce point directly toward each of them. Thus, the
three electric fields produced at the origin by the three
charged particles are oriented as in Fig. 22-7b. (Caution:
Note that we have placed the tails of the vectors at the
point where the fields are to be evaluated; doing so de-
creases the chance of error. Error becomes very probable
if the tails of the field vectors are placed on the particles
creating the fields.)

Adding the fields: We can now add the fields vectorially just
as we added force vectors in Chapter 21. However, here we
can use symmetry to simplify the procedure. From Fig. 22-7b,
we see that electric fields E, and E, have the same direction.
Hence, their vector sum has that direction and has the
magnitude

LEY

635

120, 1 2
4m P| Aare, @
1 40

“Ane, Be?

which happens to equal the magnitude of field Ey.

‘We must now combine two vectors, E, and the vector
sum. E, a E, that have the same magnitude and that are
oriented symmetrically about the x axis, as shown in Fig. 22-7c.
From the symmetry of Fig. 22-7c, we realize that the equal y
components of our two vectors cancel (one is upward and
the other is downward) and the equal x components add
(both are rightward). Thus, the net electric field E at the
origin is in the positive direction of the x axis and has the
magnitude

E = 2Ex, = 2E,cos 30°

 

 

E+ B=

 

6.930
Arey?

 

=(2 a (0.866) = (Answer)

gq
PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

22-3 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A DIPOLE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to .. .

22.10 Draw an electric dipole, identifying the charges
(sizes and signs), dipole axis, and direction of the elec-
tric dipole moment.

22.11 Identify the direction of the electric field at any
given point along the dipole axis, including between the
charges.

22.12 Outline how the equation for the electric field due
to an electric dipole is derived from the equations for
the electric field due to the individual charged particles
that form the dipole.

22.13 For a single charged particle and an electric dipole,
compare the rate at which the electric field magnitude

Key Ideas

decreases with increase in distance. That is, identify
which drops off faster.

22.14 For an electric dipole, apply the relationship be-
tween the magnitude p of the dipole moment, the sepa-
ration d between the charges, and the magnitude q of
either of the charges.

22.15 For any distant point along a dipole axis, apply the
relationship between the electric field magnitude E, the
distance z from the center of the dipole, and either the
dipole moment magnitude p or the product of charge
magnitude g and charge separation d.

 

@ Anelectric dipole consists of two particles with charges of
equal magnitude q but opposite signs, separated by a small
distance d.

@ The electric dipole moment p has magnitude gd and
points from the negative charge to the positive charge.

@ The magnitude of the electric field set up by an electric
dipole at a distant point on the dipole axis (which runs
through both particles) can be written in terms of either the
product qd or the magnitude p of the dipole moment:

1 qd@_ sl p

One, SB 2m, 23°

where z is the distance between the point and the center of
the dipole.

@ Because of the 1/z? dependence, the field magnitude of
an electric dipole decreases more rapidly with distance
than the field magnitude of either of the individual charges
forming the dipole, which depends on 1/r°.
