Our goals in this chapter are to (1) define electric field, (2) discuss how to cal-
culate it for various arrangements of charged particles and objects, and (3) dis-
cuss how an electric field can affect a charged particle (as in making it move).

The Electric Field

A lot of different fields are used in science and engineering. For example, a tem-
perature field for an auditorium is the distribution of temperatures we would find
by measuring the temperature at many points within the auditorium. Similarly,
we could define a pressure field in a swimming pool. Such fields are examples of
scalar fields because temperature and pressure are scalar quantities, having only
magnitudes and not directions.

In contrast, an electric field is a vector field because it is responsible for con-
veying the information for a force, which involves both magnitude and direction.
This field consists of a distribution of electric field vectors E, one for each point
in the space around a charged object. In principle, we can define E at some point
near the charged object, such as point P in Fig. 22-2a, with this procedure: At P,
we place a particle with a small positive charge qo, called a test charge because we
use it to test the field. (We want the charge to be small so that it does not disturb
the object’s charge distribution.) We then measure the electrostatic force F that
acts on the test charge. The electric field at that point is then
_F

E (clectric field). (22-1)

0

Because the test charge is positive, the two vectors in Eq. 22-1 are in the same
direction, so the direction of E is the direction we measure for F.The magnitude of
E at point P is Figo. As shown in Fig, 22-2b, we always represent an electric field
with an arrow with its tail anchored on the point where the measurement is made.
(This may sound trivial, but drawing the vectors any other way usually results in
errors. Also, another common error is to mix up the terms force and field because
they both start with the letter f. Electric force is a push or pull. Electric field is an
abstract property set up by a charged object.) From Eq. 22-1, we see that the ST
unit for the electric field is the newton per coulomb (N/C).

We can shift the test charge around to various other points, to measure the
electric fields there, so that we can figure out the distribution of the electric field
set up by the charged object. That field exists independent of the test charge. It is
something that a charged object sets up in the surrounding space (even vacuum),
independent of whether we happen to come along to measure it.

For the next several modules, we determine the field around charged parti-
cles and various charged objects. First, however, let’s examine a way of visualizing
electric fields.

Electric Field Lines

Look at the space in the room around you. Can you visualize a field of vectors
throughout that space—vectors with different magnitudes and directions? As im-
possible as that seems, Michael Faraday, who introduced the idea of electric fields
in the 19th century, found a way. He envisioned lines, now called electric field
lines, in the space around any given charged particle or object.

Figure 22-3 gives an example in which a sphere is uniformly covered with
negative charge. If we place a positive test charge at any point near the sphere
(Fig. 22-32), we find that an electrostatic force pulls on it toward the center of the
sphere. Thus at every point around the sphere, an electric field vector points
radially inward toward the sphere. We can represent this electric field with

22-1 THE ELECTRIC FIELD 631

 

 
   
  

Test charge q
at point P

+ + Charged

object

(a)

The rod sets up an
electric field, which
can create a force

on the test charge.

P

   
 
 

Electric field
at point P

(0)
Figure 22-2 (a) A positive test charge qo
placed at point P near a charged object. An
electrostatic force F acts on the test charge.
(b) The electric field F at point P produced
by the charged object.

 

F
Positive

test charge

(@)

    

Electric
field lines:

(d)

Figure 22-3 (a) The electrostatic force F
acting on a positive test charge near a
sphere of uniform negative charge.

(b) The electric field vector E at the
location of the test charge, and the electric
field lines in the space near the sphere.

The field lines extend toward the negative-
ly charged sphere. (They originate on
distant positive charges.)
