624 CHAPTER 21 COULOMB'S LAW

cles on the x axis are equidistant from the y axis. First, consider
the middle particle in situation 1; the middle particle experiences
an electrostatic force from each of the other two particles.
(a) Are the magnitudes F of those forces the same or different?
(b) Is the magnitude of the net force on the middle particle
equal to, greater than, or less than 2F? (c) Do the x components
of the two forces add or cancel? (d) Do their y components add
or cancel? (e) Is the direction of the net force on the middle particle
that of the canceling components or the adding components? (f)
What is the direction of that net force? Now consider the remaining
situations: What is the direction of the net force on the middle parti-
cle in (g) situation 2, (h) situation 3, and (i) situation 4? (In each
situation, consider the symmetry of the charge distribution and
determine the canceling components and the adding components.)

10 In Fig. 21-19, a central
particle of charge —2q is
surrounded by a square array
of charged particles, separated
by either distance d or d/2
along the perimeter of the
square. What are the magni-
tude and direction of the net
electrostatic force on the cen-
tral particle due to the other
particles? (Hint: Consideration
of symmetry can greatly re-
duce the amount of work re-
quired here.)

-7q

424! +4q

by -3q

+34!

+4
q' 14

Figure 21-19 Question 10.

11° Figure 21-20 shows
three identical conducting bubbles A, B, and C floating in a con-

Grounded
conducting
container

 

Figure 21-20 Question 11.

<Problems

ducting container that is grounded by a wire. The bubbles ini-
tially have the same charge. Bubble A bumps into the con-
tainer’s ceiling and then into bubble B. Then bubble B bumps
into bubble C, which then drifts to the container’s floor. When
bubble C reaches the floor, a charge of —3e is transferred up-
ward through the wire, from the ground to the container, as in-
dicated. (a) What was the initial charge of each bubble? When
(b) bubble A and (c) bubble B reach the floor, what is the
charge transfer through the wire? (d) During this whole
process, what is the total charge transfer through the wire?

12 Figure 21-21 shows four situations in which a central proton is
partially surrounded by protons or electrons fixed in place along a
half-circle. The angles @ are identical; the angles ¢ are also. (a) In
each situation, what is the direction of the net force on the central
proton due to the other particles? (b) Rank the four situations ac-
cording to the magnitude of that net force on the central proton,
greatest first.

y y

 

 

 

 

(3) (4)
Figure 21-21 Question 12.

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

o

SSM __Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
«= Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

 

WWW Worked-out solution is at
Interactive solution is at

LW

“CS Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 21-1 Coulomb’s Law
*1 SSM ILW Of the charge Q initially on a tiny sphere, a por-
tion q is to be transferred to a second, nearby sphere. Both spheres

can be treated as particles and are fixed with a certain separation.
For what value of g/Q will the electrostatic force between the two
spheres be maximized?
