particle and we separately determine the direction of the force by considering the
charge signs of the two particles.

Multiple Forces. As with all forces in this book, the electrostatic force obeys
the principle of superposition. Suppose we have n charged particles near a chosen
particle called particle 1; then the net force on particle 1 is given by the vector sum

Fis = Fin t Fiat Frat Fist +> + Fin (21-7)

in which, for example, F xis the force on particle 1 due to the presence of particle 4.

This equation is the key to many of the homework problems, so let’s state it
in words. If you want to know the net force acting on a chosen charged particle
that is surrounded by other charged particles, first clearly identify that chosen
particle and then find the force on it due to each of the other particles. Draw
those force vectors in a free-body diagram of the chosen particle, with the tails
anchored on the particle. (That may sound trivial, but failing to do so easily leads
to errors.) Then add all those forces as vectors according to the rules of Chapter 3,
not as scalars. (You cannot just willy-nilly add up their magnitudes.) The result is
the net force (or resultant force) acting on the particle.

Although the vector nature of the forces makes the homework problems
harder than if we simply had scalars, be thankful that Eq. 21-7 works. If two force
vectors did not simply add but for some reason amplified each other, the world
would be very difficult to understand and manage.

Shell Theories. Analogous to the shell theories for the gravitational force
(Module 13-1), we have two shell theories for the electrostatic force:

Oo Shell theory 1. A charged particle outside a shell with charge uniformly distrib-
uted on its surface is attracted or repelled as if the shell’s charge were concentrated
as a particle at its center.

Oo Shell theory 2. A charged particle inside a shell with charge uniformly distributed
on its surface has no net force acting on it due to the shell.

(In the first theory, we assume that the charge on the shell is much greater than
the particle’s charge. Thus the presence of the particle has negligible effect on the
distribution of charge on the shell.)

Spherical Conductors

If excess charge is placed ona spherical shell that is made of conducting material, the
excess charge spreads uniformly over the (external) surface. For example, if we place
excess electrons on a spherical metal shell, those electrons repel one another and
tend to move apart, spreading over the available surface until they are uniformly dis-
tributed. That arrangement maximizes the distances between all pairs of the excess
electrons. According to the first shell theorem, the shell then will attract or repel an
external charge as if all the excess charge on the shell were concentrated at its center.

If we remove negative charge from a spherical metal shell, the resulting pos-
itive charge of the shell is also spread uniformly over the surface of the shell. For
example, if we remove n electrons, there are then n sites of positive charge (sites
missing an electron) that are spread uniformly over the shell. According to the
first shell theorem, the shell will again attract or repel an external charge as if all
the shell’s excess charge were concentrated at its center.

| Checkpoint 2

The figure shows two protons ———-Q—————_Q—————_@——
(symbol p) and one electron e P P
(symbole) on an axis. On the central proton, what is the direction of (a) the force due to the
electron, (b) the force due to the other proton, and (c) the net force?

21-1 COULOMB’S LAW

615
