Field Due to a Charged Disk The electric field magnitude
at a point on the central axis through a uniformly charged disk is
given by

o

E= 1- .
mal eee)

where zis the distance along the axis from the center of the disk, R
is the radius of the disk, and ois the surface charge density.

(22-26)

Force on a Point Charge in an Electric Field When a
point charge q is placed in an external electric field E, the electro-
static force F that acts on the point charge is

F=4E.
<Questions

1 Figure 22-22 shows three arrangements of electric field lines. In
each arrangement, a proton is released from rest at point A and is
then accelerated through point B by the electric field. Points A and
B have equal separations in the three arrangements. Rank the
arrangements according to the linear momentum of the proton at
point B, greatest first.

(22-28)

— ee ———
>
—e——e-+- ee» e+ +
A B A B A B
(a) (d) [G)

Figure 22-22 Question 1.

2 Figure 22-23 shows two
square arrays of charged par-
ticles. The squares, which are
centered on point P, are mis-
aligned. The particles are sep-
arated by either d or d/2
along the perimeters of the
squares. What are the magni-
tude and direction of the net
electric field at P?

3 In Fig, 22-24, two particles
of charge —g are arranged
symmetrically about the y
axis; each produces an elec-
tric field at point P on that axis. (a) Are the magnitudes of the fields
at P equal? (b) Is each electric field directed toward or away from
the charge producing it? (c) Is the magnitude of the net electric
field at P equal to the sum of the
magnitudes E of the two field vec-
tors (is it equal to 2E)? (d) Do the x
components of those two field vec-
tors add or cancel? (e) Do their y
components add or cancel? (f) Is
the direction of the net field at P
that of the canceling components or
the adding components? (g) What is
the direction of the net field?

Figure 22-23 Question 2.

Figure 22-24 Question 3.

 

 

QUESTIONS 651

Force F has the same direction as E if q is positive and the
opposite direction if q is negative.

Dipole in an Electric Field When an electric dipole of dipole
moment f is placed in an electric field E, the field exerts a torque 7
on the dipole:

7=pxeE. (22-34)
The dipole has a potential energy U associated with its orientation
in the field: .

U=-p-E. (22-38)
This potential energy is defined to be zero when B is perpendicular
to E;it is least (U = —pE) when P is aligned with E and greatest
(U = pE) whenf is directed opposite E.

4 Figure 22-25 shows four
situations in which four
charged particles are evenly
spaced to the left and right
of a central point. The
charge values are indicated.
Rank the situations accord -
ing to the magnitude of the
net electric field at the
central point, greatest first.

(3) -@—_@—+-—_9—\o—

ete te te

(4) -@—_@—\_+>+—_0—_0—

ee +e ne
Peden te dopa
Figure 22-25 Question 4.

5 Figure 22-26 shows two
charged particles fixed in

place on an axis. (a) Where

on the axis (other than at an infinite
distance) is there a point at which
their net electric field is zero: be- +4 349

tween the charges, to their left, or to Figure 22-26 Question 5.
their right? (b) Is there a point of

zero net electric field anywhere off the axis (other than at an infinite
distance)?

 

6 In Fig, 22-27, two identical circu-
lar nonconducting rings are centered
on the same line with their planes
perpendicular to the line. Each ring
has charge that is uniformly distrib-
uted along its circumference. The
rings each produce electric fields at points along the line. For three
situations, the charges on rings A and B are, respectively, (1) gy and
qo. (2) —qo and —qo, and (3) —q) and qo. Rank the situations
according to the magnitude of the net electric field at (a) point P;
midway between the rings, (b) point P, at the center of ring B, and
(c) point P; to the right of ring B, greatest first.

 

Figure 22-27 Question 6.

7 The potential energies associated with four orientations of an
electric dipole in an electric field are (1) —5Up, (2) —7Up, (3) 3Up,
and (4) 5U), where Uyis positive. Rank the orientations according
to (a) the angle between the electric dipole moment p and the elec-
tric field E and (b) the magnitude of the torque on the electric
dipole, greatest first.

8 (a) In Checkpoint 4, if the dipole rotates from orientation 1 to
orientation 2, is the work done on the dipole by the field positive,
negative, or zero? (b) If, instead, the dipole rotates from orienta-
tion 1 to orientation 4, is the work done by the field more than, less
than, or the same as in (a)?
