22-3 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A DIPOLE

were doubled and d simultaneously halved. Although Eq. 22-9 holds only for dis-
tant points along the dipole axis, it turns out that E for a dipole varies as 1/r? for
all distant points, regardless of whether they lie on the dipole axis; here r is the
distance between the point in question and the dipole center.

Inspection of Fig. 22-9 and of the field lines in Fig. 22-8 shows that the direc-
tion of F for distant points on the dipole axis is always the direction of the dipole
moment vector p . This is true whether point P in Fig. 22-9a is on the upper or the
lower part of the dipole axis.

Inspection of Eq. 22-9 shows that if you double the distance of a point from a
dipole, the electric field at the point drops by a factor of 8. If you double the distance
from a single point charge, however (see Eq. 22-3), the electric field drops only by a
factor of 4. Thus the electric field of a dipole decreases more rapidly with distance
than does the electric field of a single charge. The physical reason for this rapid
decrease in electric field for a dipole is that from distant points a dipole looks like
two particles that almost—but not quite—coincide. Thus, because they have
charges of equal magnitude but opposite signs, their electric fields at distant points
almost— but not quite —cancel each other.

Sample Problem 22.02 Electric dipole and atmospheric sprites

637

Sprites (Fig. 22-10a) are huge flashes that occur far above a
large thunderstorm. They were seen for decades by pilots
flying at night, but they were so brief and dim that most pi-
lots figured they were just illusions. Then in the 1990s sprites
were captured on video. They are still not well understood
but are believed to be produced when especially powerful
lightning occurs between the ground and storm clouds, par-
ticularly when the lightning transfers a huge amount of neg-
ative charge —q from the ground to the base of the clouds
(Fig. 22-10b).

Just after such a transfer, the ground has a complicated
distribution of positive charge. However, we can model the
electric field due to the charges in the clouds and the ground
by assuming a vertical electric dipole that has charge —gq at
cloud height h and charge +q at below-ground depth h
(Fig. 22-10c). If g = 200 C and h = 6.0 km, what is the magni-
tude of the dipole’s electric field at altitude z, = 30 km some-
what above the clouds and altitude z, = 60km somewhat
above the stratosphere?

   

(@ Courtesy NASA

KEY IDEA
‘We can approximate the magnitude E of an electric dipole’s elec-
tric field on the dipole axis with Eq. 22-8.
Calculations: We write that equation as
1 qh)

a
2m 2”

 

where 2h is the separation between —q and +q in Fig. 22-10c.
For the electric field at altitude z, = 30 km, we find

1 (200 C)2)(6.0 x 10° m)

278 (30 x 10° m)*
= 1.6 x 10 NIC. (Answer)

Similarly, for altitude z, = 60 km, we find
E=2.0 X10?N/C. (Answer)

As we discuss in Module 22-6, when the magnitude of

Cloud

 

(o)

Figure 22-10 (a) Photograph ofa sprite. (b) Lightning in which a large amount of negative charge is transferred from ground to cloud base.

(c) The cloud—ground system modeled as a vertical electric dipole.
