24-3 POTENTIAL DUE TO A CHARGED PARTICLE 695

Solving for V and switching R to r, we then have

 

ves (24-26)

Amey) r

as the electric potential V due to a particle of charge q at any radial distance
r from the particle.

Although we have derived Eq. 24-26 for a positively charged particle, the
derivation holds also for a negatively charged particle, in which case, q is a nega-
tive quantity. Note that the sign of V is the same as the sign of q:

os A positively charged particle produces a positive electric potential. A negatively
charged particle produces a negative electric potential.

Figure 24-10 shows a computer-generated plot of Eq. 24-26 for a positively
charged particle; the magnitude of V is plotted vertically. Note that the magni-
tude increases as r— 0. In fact, according to Eq. 24-26, V is infinite at r = 0,
although Fig. 24-10 shows a finite, smoothed-off value there.

Equation 24-26 also gives the electric potential either outside or on the exter-
nal surface of a spherically symmetric charge distribution. We can prove this by
using one of the shell theorems of Modules 21-1 and 23-6 to replace the actual
spherical charge distribution with an equal charge concentrated at its center.
Then the derivation leading to Eq. 24-26 follows, provided we do not consider
a point within the actual distribution.

Potential Due to a Group of Charged Particles

We can find the net electric potential at a point due to a group of charged parti-
cles with the help of the superposition principle. Using Eq. 24-26 with the plus or
minus sign of the charge included, we calculate separately the potential resulting
from each charge at the given point. Then we sum the potentials. Thus, for n
charges, the net potential is

n
y-z ye (n charged particles). (24-27)
Weg i= i

 

Here q;is the value of the ith charge and r; is the radial distance of the given point
from the ith charge. The sum in Eq. 24-27 is an algebraic sum, not a vector sum
like the sum that would be used to calculate the electric field resulting from
a group of charged particles. Herein lies an important computational advantage
of potential over electric field: It is a lot easier to sum several scalar quantities
than to sum several vector quantities whose directions and components must
be considered.

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure here shows three arrangements of two protons. Rank the arrangements ac-
cording to the net electric potential produced at point P by the protons, greatest first.

fart i a

a

0)

x

Figure 24-10 A computer-generated plot of
the electric potential V(r) due to a positive-
ly charged particle located at the origin of
an xy plane. The potentials at points in the
xy plane are plotted vertically. (Curved
lines have been added to help you visual-
ize the plot.) The infinite value of V pre-
dicted by Eq. 24-26 for r = 0 is not plotted.
