Sample Problem 22.04

Figure 22-19 shows the de- »
flecting plates of an ink-jet
printer, with superimposed
coordinate axes. An ink drop
with a mass m of 1.3 x 107"
kg and a negative charge of
magnitude Q=15x 10-2
C enters the region between
the plates, initially moving
along the x axis with speed
v, = 18 m/s. The length L of
each plate is 1.6cm. The
plates are charged and thus
produce an electric field at all
points between them. Assume that field E is downward
directed, is uniform, and has a magnitude of 1.4 x 10° NIC.
What is the vertical deflection of the drop at the far edge
of the plates? (The gravitational force on the drop is small
relative to the electrostatic force acting on the drop and
can be neglected.)

 

Figure 22-19 An ink drop of
mass m and charge magnitude
Q is deflected in the electric
field of an ink-jet printer.

KEY IDEA

 

The drop is negatively charged and the electric field is directed
downward. From Eq. 22-28, a constant electrostatic force of

AILEY

Motion of a charged particle in an electric field

 

22-7 A DIPOLE IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD 647

magnitude QE acts upward on the charged drop. Thus, as the
drop travels parallel to the x axis at constant speed y,, it
accelerates upward with some constant acceleration ay.

Calculations: Applying Newton’s second law (F = ma) for
components along the y axis, we find that

cE

a=
ym m

(22-30)

Let t represent the time required for the drop to pass
through the region between the plates. During t the vertical

and horizontal displacements of the drop are
y=5aP and L=v,t, (22-31)

respectively. Eliminating t between these two equations and
substituting Eq. 22-30 for a,, we find

_ QEL*
y= 2mv2
_ (1.5 x 1078 C)(1.4 x 10° N/C)(1.6 x 10-? m?
(2)(1.3 x 107! kg)(18 m/s)?
64 x 104m
= 0.64mm.

 

(Answer)

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

22-7 A DIPOLE IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

22.25 On asketch of an electric dipole in an external electric
field, indicate the direction of the field, the direction of the
dipole moment, the direction of the electrostatic forces on
the two ends of the dipole, and the direction in which
those forces tend to rotate the dipole, and identify the
value of the net force on the dipole.

22.26 Calculate the torque on an electric dipole in an exter-
nal electric field by evaluating a cross product of the dipole
moment vector and the electric field vector, in magnitude-
angle notation and unit-vector notation.

Key Ideas
@ The torque on an electric dipole of dipole moment p when
placed in an external electric field E is given by a cross product:

F=pxeE.
@ A potential energy U is associated with the orientation of
the dipole moment in the field, as given by a dot product:

U=—p-E.

22.27 For an electric dipole in an external electric field, relate
the potential energy of the dipole to the work done by a
torque as the dipole rotates in the electric field.

22.28 For an electric dipole in an external electric field, calcu-
late the potential energy by taking a dot product of the dipole
moment vector and the electric field vector, in magnitude-
angle notation and unit-vector notation.

22.29 For an electric dipole in an external electric field, iden-
tify the angles for the minimum and maximum potential en-
ergies and the angles for the minimum and maximum
torque magnitudes.

@ If the dipole orientation changes, the work done by the
electric field is

W= —AU.

If the change in orientation is due to an external agent, the
work done by the agent is W, = —W.
