652 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

9 Figure 22-28 shows two disks and a flat ring, each with the same
uniform charge Q. Rank the objects according to the magnitude of
the electric field they create at points P (which are at the same ver-
tical heights), greatest first.

 

 

‘> GE»
(a) (d) (C)
Figure 22-28 Question 9.

 

 

 

10 In Fig. 22-29, an electron e trav-
els through a small hole in plate A
and then toward plate B. A uniform
electric field in the region between

the plates then slows the electron +42
without deflecting it. (a) What is the *%
direction of the field? (b) Four other ~t

particles similarly travel through
small holes in either plate A or plate
B and then into the region between
the plates. Three have charges +q;,
+qp, and —q3. The fourth (labeled n) is a neutron, which is electri-
cally neutral. Does the speed of each of those four other particles
increase, decrease, or remain the same in the region between the
plates?

A Bi
Figure 22-29 Question 10.

11 In Fig, 22-30a, a circular plastic rod with uniform charge
+Q produces an electric field of magnitude E at the center of

y y
YN .

(a (d)

 

 

 

 

(od (d)
Figure 22-30 Question 11.

<Problems

curvature (at the origin). In Figs. 22-30b, c, and d, more circular
rods, each with identical uniform charges +Q, are added until the
circle is complete. A fifth arrangement (which would be labeled e)
is like that in d except the rod in the fourth quadrant has charge
—@Q. Rank the five arrangements according to the magnitude of
the electric field at the center of curvature, greatest first.

12 When three electric dipoles are near each other, they each
experience the electric field of the other two, and the three-di-
pole system has a certain potential energy. Figure 22-31 shows
two arrangements in which three electric dipoles are side by side.
Each dipole has the same magnitude of electric dipole moment,
and the spacings between adjacent dipoles are identical. In which
arrangement is the potential energy of the three-dipole system
greater?

(@) (o)
Figure 22-31 Question 12.

13 Figure 22-32 shows three rods, each with the same charge Q
spread uniformly along its length. Rods a (of length L) and b (of
length L/2) are straight, and points P are aligned with their mid-
points. Rod c (of length L/2) forms a complete circle about point P.
Rank the rods according to the magnitude of the electric field they
create at points P, greatest first.

 

L L/2 L/2
(a) (b) (©)
Figure 22-32 Question 13.

14 Figure 22-33 shows five protons that are launched in a uni-
form electric field E; the magnitude and direction of the launch ve-
locities are indicated. Rank the protons according to the magni-
tude of their accelerations due to the field, greatest first.

 

 

E
3m/s 5m/s
+
b d
a ©
10 m/s 16 m/s

Figure 22-33 Question 14.

©® __Tioring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM _ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
*— ss» Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty ILw

WWW Worked-out solution is at

“CHF Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 22-1 The Electric Field
*1 Sketch qualitatively the electric field lines both between and
outside two concentric conducting spherical shells when a uniform

positive charge q; is on the inner shell and a uniform negative

charge —qp is on the outer. Consider the cases q; > q2,q; = q2,and
Usd
