646 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

 

Adam Hart-Davis/Photo Researc!

Figure 22-18 The metal wires are so charged
that the electric fields they produce in the
surrounding space cause the air there to un-
dergo electrical breakdown.

Input
signals

Deflecting plate

 

 

 

Deflecting
plate

Figure 22-17 Ink-jet printer. Drops shot from generator G receive a charge in charging unit
C.An input signal from a computer controls the charge and thus the effect of field E on
where the drop lands on the paper.

values of q were always given by
qz=ne,  forn=0,+1,+2,+3,..., (22-29)

in which e turned out to be the fundamental constant we call the elementary
charge, 1.60 X 10-"° C. Millikan’s experiment is convincing proof that charge is
quantized, and he earned the 1923 Nobel Prize in physics in part for this work.
Modern measurements of the elementary charge rely on a variety of interlocking
experiments, all more precise than the pioneering experiment of Millikan.

Ink-Jet Printing

The need for high-quality, high-speed printing has caused a search for an
alternative to impact printing, such as occurs in a standard typewriter. Building
up letters by squirting tiny drops of ink at the paper is one such alternative.

Figure 22-17 shows a negatively charged drop moving between two conduct-
ing deflecting plates, between which a uniform, downward-directed electric field E
has been set up. The drop is deflected upward according to Eq. 22-28 and then
strikes the paper at a position that is determined by the magnitudes of E and the
charge q of the drop.

In practice, E is held constant and the position of the drop is determined by
the charge q delivered to the drop in the charging unit, through which the drop
must pass before entering the deflecting system. The charging unit, in turn, is
activated by electronic signals that encode the material to be printed.

Electrical Breakdown and Sparking

If the magnitude of an electric field in air exceeds a certain critical value E., the
air undergoes electrical breakdown, a process whereby the field removes elec-
trons from the atoms in the air. The air then begins to conduct electric current
because the freed electrons are propelled into motion by the field. As they
move, they collide with any atoms in their path, causing those atoms to emit
light. We can see the paths, commonly called sparks, taken by the freed elec-
trons because of that emitted light. Figure 22-18 shows sparks above charged
metal wires where the electric fields due to the wires cause electrical break-
down of the air. eS

Iv] Checkpoint 3

(a) In the figure, what is the direction of the electro- y
static force on the electron due to the external

electric field shown? (b) In which direction will the

electron accelerate if it is moving parallel to the y axis

before it encounters the external field? (c) If,instead,

the electron is initially moving rightward, will its ¢
speed increase, decrease, or remain constant?

ty
