24-6 CALCULATING THE FIELD FROM THE POTENTIAL 701

24-6 CALCULATING THE FIELD FROM THE POTENTIAL

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.23 Given an electric potential as a function of position and the separation Ax and potential difference AV
along an axis, find the electric field along that axis. between adjacent equipotential lines.

24.24 Given a graph of electric potential versus position 24.26 Relate the direction of the electric field and
along an axis, determine the electric field along the axis. the directions in which the potential decreases and

24.25 For a uniform electric field, relate the field magnitude E increases.

Key Ideas

@ The component of Ein any direction is the negative of the rate at. When E is uniform, all this reduces to

which the potential changes with distance in that direction:

 

av AV
E=-s Beas"
as As
@ The x, y, and z components of E may be found from where s is perpendicular to the equipotential surfaces.
av av @ The electric field is zero parallel to an equipotential
y= 3 z= TT surface.
ay az

 

Calculating the Field from the Potential

In Module 24-2, you saw how to find the potential at a point f if you know
the electric field along a path from a reference point to point f. In this module,
we propose to go the other way—that is, to find the electric field when we know
the potential. As Fig. 24-5 shows, solving this problem graphically is easy: If we
know the potential V at all points near an assembly of charges, we can draw in
a family of equipotential surfaces. The electric field lines, sketched perpendicular
to those surfaces, reveal the variation of E.What we are seeking here is the math-
ematical equivalent of this graphical procedure.

Figure 24-17 shows cross sections of a family of closely spaced equipo-
tential surfaces, the potential difference between each pair of adjacent surfaces
being dV. As the figure suggests, the field E at any point P is perpendicular to the
equipotential surface through P.

Suppose that a positive test charge qy moves through a displacement ds”
from one equipotential surface to the adjacent surface. From Eq. 24-6, we see that
the work the electric field does on the test charge during the move is —qo dV.
From Eq. 24-16 and Fig. 24-17, we see that the work done by the electric field may
also be written as the scalar product (qoE) + ds, or qgE(cos @) ds. Equating these
two expressions for the work yields

—qodV = qoE(cos 6) ds, (24-38)
dV
Ecos 9= —2. 24-39
or cos 6 ds ( )

Since E cos @is the component of E in the direction of 5, Eq. 24-39 becomes

av
meet 24-40
== (24-40)
‘We have added a subscript to E and switched to the partial derivative symbols
to emphasize that Eq. 24-40 involves only the variation of V along a specified axis
(here called the s axis) and only the component of E along that axis. In words,
Eq. 24-40 (which is essentially the reverse operation of Eq. 24-18) states:

 

\
\\ equipotential
1 surfaces

Figure 24-17 A test charge go moves a
distance ds from one equipotential sur-
face to another. (The separation between
the surfaces has been exaggerated for clar-
ity.) The displacement d5 makes an angle
@with the direction of the electric field E.
