22-5 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A CHARGED DISK

Straight line, with point P at perpendicular dis-
tance y from the line of charge, as in Fig. 22-14b. In the
expression for dE, replace r with an expression involving x
and y. If P is on the perpendicular bisector of the line of
charge, find an expression for the adding component of. dE.
That will introduce either sin @ or cos @. Reduce the result-
ing two variables x and @ to one, x, by replacing the

643

nus sign; discard the minus sign. If the result is to be stated
in terms of the total charge Q of the distribution, replace A
with Q/L,in which L is the length of the distribution.

Eee x
P
(@

trigonometric function with an expression (its definition)
i j P i
involving x and y. Integrate over x from end to end of the | I

line of charge. If P is not on a line of symmetry, as in y y
ee ee ae
(4) (¢)

Fig. 22-14c, set up an integral to sum the components dE,,
Figure 22-14 (a) Point P is on an extension of the line of charge.

and integrate over x to find E,. Also set up an integral

to sum the components dE,, and integrate over x again to
(6) Pis ona line of symmetry of the line of charge, at perpendicu-
lar distance y from that line. (c) Same as (b) except that P is not on

find E,. Use the components E, and E, in the usual way to
find the magnitude E and the orientation of E.
a line of symmetry.

Step 6. One arrangement of the integration limits gives a
positive result. The reverse gives the same result with a mi-

AWILeY

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Iv] Checkpoint 2 } 1 1
The figure here shows three nonconducting rods, one circular and “2 +Q| +Q
two straight. Each has a uniform charge of magnitude Q along its top lb Pi
half and another along its bottom half. For each rod, what is the @ @ @
direction of the net electric field at point P?
) HQ -Q|
(a) (d) (oO
Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...
22.19 Sketch a disk with uniform charge and indicate the di-
rection of the electric field at a point on the central axis if
the charge is positive and if it is negative.

22.20 Explain how the equation for the electric field on the
central axis of a uniformly charged ring can be used to find

 

the equation for the electric field on the central axis of a
uniformly charged disk.

22.21 For a point on the central axis of a uniformly charged
disk, apply the relationship between the surface charge den-
sity 0; the disk radius R, and the distance z to that point.

Key Idea
@ On the central axis through a uniformly charged disk,

 

gives the electric field magnitude. Here z is the distance
along the axis from the center of the disk, R is the radius of
the disk, and ois the surface charge density.

o

rt ae
289 2+ R

 

The Electric Field Due to a Charged Disk

Now we switch froma line of charge to a surface of charge by examining the elec-
tric field of a circular plastic disk, with a radius R and a uniform surface charge
density o (charge per unit area, Table 22-1) on its top surface. The disk sets up a
