 

 
  
  

  

 

   

 

"Se
Usp
er,
or
: cry, First subunit of
Leading ear, DNA polymerase III
strand ior) Single-strand
AN), binding proteins
Oi =
3 Parental
kerala a oe DNA helix
azaki rot an . ,
fragment primer 4 VPRGOP wh 5
f Helicase
Lagging siti Primase
strand Pui a x Second subunit of
pal he DNA | DNA polymerase Ill
GP DNA ligase polymerase
5'e
FIGURE 14.16

A DNA replication fork. Helicase enzymes separate the strands of the double helix, and single-strand binding proteins stabilize the
single-stranded regions. Replication occurs by two mechanisms. (1) Continuous synthesis: After primase adds a short RNA primer, DNA
polymerase III adds nucleotides to the 3’ end of the leading strand. DNA polymerase I then replaces the RNA primer with DNA
nucleotides. (2) Discontinuous synthesis: Primase adds a short RNA primer (green) ahead of the 5’ end of the lagging strand. DNA polymerase
III then adds nucleotides to the primer until the gap is filled in. DNA polymerase I replaces the primer with DNA nucleotides, and DNA

ligase attaches the short segment of nucleotides to the lagging strand.

The Need for a Primer

One of the features of DNA polymerase III is that it can
add nucleotides only to a chain of nucleotides that is al-
ready paired with the parent strands. Hence, DNA poly-
merase cannot link the first nucleotides in a newly synthe-
sized strand. Instead, another enzyme, an RNA polymerase
called primase, constructs an RNA primer, a sequence of
about 10 RNA nucleotides complementary to the parent
DNA template. DNA polymerase III recognizes the primer
and adds DNA nucleotides to it to construct the new DNA
strands. The RNA nucleotides in the primers are then re-
placed by DNA nucleotides.

The Two Strands of DNA Are Assembled in
Different Ways

Another feature of DNA polymerase III is that it can add
nucleotides only to the 3’ end of a DNA strand (the end
with an —OH group attached to a 3’ carbon atom). This
means that replication always proceeds in the 5’ — 3 direc-
tion on a growing DNA strand. Because the two parent
strands of a DNA molecule are antiparallel, the new strands
are oriented in opposite directions along the parent templates
at each replication fork (figure 14.16). Therefore, the new
strands must be elongated by different mechanisms! The
leading strand, which elongates toward the replication
fork, is built up simply by adding nucleotides continuously

292 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

to its growing 3’ end. In contrast, the lagging strand,
which elongates away from the replication fork, is synthe-
sized discontinuously as a series of short segments that are
later connected. These segments, called Okazaki frag-
ments, are about 100 to 200 nucleotides long in eukaryotes
and 1000 to 2000 nucleotides long in prokaryotes. Each
Okazaki fragment is synthesized by DNA polymerase IIT in
the 5’ — 3’ direction, beginning at the replication fork and
moving away from it. When the polymerase reaches the 5’
end of the lagging strand, another enzyme, DNA ligase,
attaches the fragment to the lagging strand. The DNA is
further unwound, new RNA primers are constructed, and
DNA polymerase III then jumps ahead 1000 to 2000 nu-
cleotides (toward the replication fork) to begin construct-
ing another Okazaki fragment. If one looks carefully at
electron micrographs showing DNA replication in
progress, one can sometimes see that one of the parent
strands near the replication fork appears single-stranded
over a distance of about 1000 nucleotides. Because the syn-
thesis of the leading strand is continuous, while that of the
lagging strand is discontinuous, the overall replication of
DNA is said to be semidiscontinuous.

The Replication Process

The replication of the DNA double helix is a complex
process that has taken decades of research to understand. It
takes place in five interlocking steps:
