650 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

Sample Problem 22.05 Torque and energy of an electric dipole in an electric field

A neutral water molecule (HO) in its vapor state has an
electric dipole moment of magnitude 6.2 x 10-°°C-m.

(a) How far apart are the molecule’s centers of positive and
negative charge?

KEY IDEA

 

A molecule’s dipole moment depends on the magnitude q
of the molecule’s positive or negative charge and the charge
separation d.

Calculations: There are 10 electrons and 10 protons in a
neutral water molecule; so the magnitude of its dipole mo-

mentis
p= qd = (10e)(d),

in which d is the separation we are seeking and e¢ is the ele-
mentary charge. Thus,

Pp __ 62x 10-"C-m

nee ae a
10e  (10)(1.60 x 10°®C)

=3.9 x 10°? m =3.9pm. (Answer)

This distance is not only small, but it is also actually smaller
than the radius of a hydrogen atom.

(b) If the molecule is placed in an electric field of 1.5 x
10* N/C, what maximum torque can the field exert on it?
(Such a field can easily be set up in the laboratory.)

Review & Summary

Electric Field To explain the electrostatic force between two
charges, we assume that each charge sets up an electric field in the
space around it. The force acting on each charge is then due to the
electric field set up at its location by the other charge.

Definition of Electric Field The electric field E at any point
is defined in terms of the electrostatic force F that would be ex-
erted on a positive test charge qo placed there:

z-+.

I
Electric Field Lines Electric field lines provide a means for visu-
alizing the direction and magnitude of electric fields. The electric field
vector at any point is tangent to a field line through that point. The
density of field lines in any region is proportional to the magnitude of
the electric field in that region. Field lines originate on positive
charges and terminate on negative charges.

(22-1)

Field Due to a Point Charge The magnitude of the electric
field E set up by a point charge q at a distance r from the charge is

1
p=
Amey

(22:3)

KEY IDEA

The torque on a dipole is maximum when the angle @ be-
tween p and E is 90°.
Calculation: Substituting @ = 90° in Eq. 22-33 yields
7=pEsin@
= (6.2 x 10° C-m)(1.5 X 10* N/C)(sin 90°)
= 93 x 10-°N-m. (Answer)
(c) How much work must an external agent do to rotate this

molecule by 180° in this field, starting from its fully aligned
position, for which @ = 0?

KEY IDEA

 

The work done by an external agent (by means of a
torque applied to the molecule) is equal to the change in
the molecule’s potential energy due to the change in
orientation.

Calculation: From Eq. 22-40, we find
W, = Urge — Uo
= (—pE cos 180°) — (—pE cos 0)
= 2pE = (2)(6.2 X 10° C-m)(1.5 x 10! N/C)
=19x10J. (Answer)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

The direction of E is away from the point charge if the charge is
positive and toward it if the charge is negative.

Field Due to an Electric Dipole An electric dipole consists
of two particles with charges of equal magnitude q but opposite
sign, separated by a small distance d. Their electric dipole moment
P has magnitude qd and points from the negative charge to the
positive charge. The magnitude of the electric field set up by the
dipole at a distant point on the dipole axis (which runs through
both charges) is

1p

© 2me, 2°

(22-9)

where z is the distance between the point and the center of the
dipole.

Field Due to a Continuous Charge Distribution The
electric field due to a continuous charge distribution is found by
treating charge elements as point charges and then summing, via
integration, the electric field vectors produced by all the charge el-
ements to find the net vector.
