24-7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGED PARTICLES 703

24-7 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGED PARTICLES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.27 Identify that the total potential energy of a system of cles, then the system's total potential energy is equal to the
charged particles is equal to the work an applied force sum of the potential energies of every pair of the particles.
must do to assemble the system, starting with the particles 24.30 Apply the principle of the conservation of mechanical
infinitely far apart. energy to a system of charged particles.

24.28 Calculate the potential energy of a pair of charged 24.31 Calculate the escape speed of a charged particle
particles. from a system of charged particles (the minimum initial

24.29 Identify that if a system has more than two charged parti- speed required to move infinitely far from the system).

Key Idea

@ The electric potential energy of a system of charged particles is equal to the work needed to assemble the system with the
particles initially at rest and infinitely distant from each other. For two particles at separation r,

U=W= 1 mn
Amen 1

 

Electric Potential Energy of a System of Charged Particles

In this module we are going to calculate the potential energy of a system of two n ©
charged particles and then briefly discuss how to expand the result to a system of o—__—_——-®
more than two particles. Our starting point is to examine the work we must do (as Figure 24-18 ‘Two charges held a fixed

an external agent) to bring together two charged particles that are initially infi- °
nitely far apart and that end up near each other and stationary. If the two parti-
cles have the same sign of charge, we must fight against their mutual repulsion.
Our work is then positive and results in a positive potential energy for the final
two-particle system. If, instead, the two particles have opposite signs of charge,
our job is easy because of the mutual attraction of the particles. Our work is then
negative and results in a negative potential energy for the system.

Let’s follow this procedure to build the two-particle system in Fig. 24-18, where
particle 1 (with positive charge q,) and particle 2 (with positive charge q») have sep-
aration r. Although both particles are positively charged, our result will apply also
to situations where they are both negatively charged or have different signs.

We start with particle 2 fixed in place and particle 1 infinitely far away, with
an initial potential energy Uj; for the two-particle system. Next we bring particle 1
to its final position, and then the system’s potential energy is U;. Our work
changes the system’s potential energy by AU = U; — Uj.

With Eq. 24-4 (AU = q(V; — V;)), we can relate AU to the change in potential
through which we move particle 1:

U,— U;= (Vy ~ Vi). (24-43)

Let’s evaluate these terms. The initial potential energy is U; = 0 because the parti-
cles are in the reference configuration (as discussed in Module 24-1). The two
potentials in Eq. 24-43 are due to particle 2 and are given by Eq. 24-26:

distance r apart.

lL &
vV=———. 24-44
4iey ¢ )
This tells us that when particle 1 is initially at distance r = ~, the potential at its
location is V; = 0. When we move it to the final position at distance r, the poten-
tial at its location is

y= & (24-45)

I 4rey 1
