702

CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

o The component of £ in any direction is the negative of the rate at which the
electric potential changes with distance in that direction.

If we take the s axis to be, in turn, the x, y, and z axes, we find that the x, y, and
z components of EF at any point are

ee a pe
ox oy

 

=-—. (24-41)

 

Thus, if we know V for all points in the region around a charge distribution —that
is, if we know the function V(x, y, z)—we can find the components of E, and thus
E itself, at any point by taking partial derivatives.

For the simple situation in which the electric field E is uniform, Eg. 24-40

becomes
-Av (24-42)

where s is perpendicular to the equipotential surfaces. The component of the
electric field is zero in any direction parallel to the equipotential surfaces because
there is no change in potential along the surfaces.

lv] Checkpoint 5

The figure shows
three pairs of parallel

plates with the same

separation, and the

electric potential of

each plate.Theelec-  -50V +150V -20V +200V -200V —400V
tric field between the () (2) (3)

plates is uniform and

perpendicular to the plates. (a) Rank the pairs according to the magnitude of the elec-
tric field between the plates, greatest first. (b) For which pair is the electric field point-
ing rightward? (c) If an electron is released midway between the third pair of plates,
does it remain there, move rightward at constant speed, move leftward at constant
speed, accelerate rightward, or accelerate leftward?

Sample Problem 24.05 Finding the field from the potential

The electric potential at any point on the central axis of a
uniformly charged disk is given by Eq. 24-37,

Va5 (V+ R 2).
i)

Starting with this expression, derive an expression for the
electric field at any point on the axis of the disk.

KEY IDEAS

 

We want the electric field Eas a function of distance z z along
the axis of the disk. For any value of z, the direction of E must
be along that axis because the disk has circular symmetry

AWiLey

about that axis. Thus, we want the component E, of E in the
direction of z. This component is the negative of the rate at
which the electric potential changes with distance z.

Calculation: Thus, from the last of Eqs. 24-41, we can write
av
EB, = —-— = -— —(V2+4 R-
ays a + 2)
= (1 = 2
2e V2 + R2

This is the same expression that we derived in Module 22-5
by integration, using Coulomb’s law.

(Answer)

 

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
