22-4 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A LINE OF CHARGE 639

density A (the charge per unit length), with the SI unit of coulomb per meter. _ Table 22-1 Some Measures of Electric
Table 22-1 shows the other charge densities that we shall be using for charged Charge

surfaces and volumes. Name Symbol — SI Unit

First Big Problem. So far, we have an equation for the electric field of a par-
ticle. (We can combine the field of several particles as we did for the electric di- Charge q Cc
pole to generate a special equation, but we are still basically using Eq. 22-3). Linear charge
Now take a look at the ring in Fig. 22-11. That clearly is not a particle and so Eq. density A Cm
22-3 does not apply. So what do we do? Surface charge

The answer is to mentally divide the ring into differential elements of charge density o Cm?
that are so small that we can treat them as though they are particles. Then we can Volume charge
apply Eq. 22-3. density Pp Cm}

Second Big Problem. We now know to apply Eq. 22-3 to each charge ele-
ment dq (the front d emphasizes that the charge is very small) and can write an
expression for its contribution of electric field dE (the front d emphasizes that
the contribution is very small). However, each such contributed field vector at P
is in its own direction. How can we add them to get the net field at P?

The answer is to split the vectors into components and then separately
sum one set of components and then the other set. However, first we check to
see if one set simply all cancels out. (Canceling out components saves lots of
work.)

Third Big Problem. There is a huge number of dq elements in the ring and
thus a huge number of dE components to add up, even if we can cancel out one
set of components. How can we add up more components than we could even
count? The answer is to add them by means of integration.

Do It. Let’s do all this (but again, be aware of the general procedure, not just
the fine details). We arbitrarily pick the charge element shown in Fig. 22-11. Let
ds be the arc length of that (or any other) dq element. Then in terms of the linear
density A (the charge per unit length), we have

dq = Ads. (22-10)

An Element’s Field. This charge element sets up the differential electric
field dE at P, at distance r from the element, as shown in Fig. 22-11. (Yes, we are
introducing a new symbol that is not given in the problem statement, but soon we
shall replace it with “legal symbols.”) Next we rewrite the field equation for a
particle (Eq. 22-3) in terms of our new symbols dE and dq, but then we replace dq
using Eq.22-10.The field magnitude due to the charge element is

1d Loads
4 c (22-11)

 

 

 

dE=

Amey r? Amey 1

Notice that the illegal symbol r is the hypotenuse of the right triangle dis-
played in Fig. 22-11. Thus, we can replace r by rewriting Eq. 22-11 as

1 Ads

aE Trey (+ RY”

 

(22-12)

Because every charge element has the same charge and the same distance
from point P, Eq. 22-12 gives the field magnitude contributed by each of them.
Figure 22-11 also tells us that each contributed dE leans at angle @ to the cen-
tral axis (the z axis) and thus has components perpendicular and parallel to
that axis.

 

 

C ling Ce Ne he h limi Figure 22-11 A ring of uniform positive
‘anceling Components. Now comes the neat part, where we eliminate one charge. A differential element of charge

set of those components. In Fig. 22-11, consider the charge element on the oppo- occupies a length ds (greatly exaggerated for
site side of the ring. It too contributes the field magnitude dE but the field vector larity). This element sets up an electric field
leans at angle @ in the opposite direction from the vector from our first charge dE at point P.
