670 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

Gauss’ law (Eq. 23-6) becomes

from which we find

eyEA = 0A,

(conducting surface). (23-11)

o
E=—
£0

Thus, the magnitude of the electric field just outside a conductor is proportional
to the surface charge density on the conductor. The sign of the charge gives us the
direction of the field. If the charge on the conductor is positive, the electric field is
directed away from the conductor as in Fig. 23-12. It is directed toward the con-
ductor if the charge is negative.

The field lines in Fig. 23-12 must terminate on negative charges somewhere
in the environment. If we bring those charges near the conductor, the charge den-
sity at any given location on the conductor’s surface changes, and so does the
magnitude of the electric field. However, the relation between o and E is still

given by Eq. 23-11.

Sample Problem 23.05 Spherical metal shell, electric field and enclosed charge

Gaussian \ {

Figure 23-13a shows a cross section of a spherical metal shell
of inner radius R. A particle with a charge of —5.0 uC is lo-
cated at a distance R/2 from the center of the shell. If the shell
is electrically neutral, what are the (induced) charges on its in-
ner and outer surfaces? Are those charges uniformly distrib-
uted? What is the field pattern inside and outside the shell?

KEY IDEAS

 

Figure 23-13b shows a cross section of a spherical Gaussian
surface within the metal, just outside the inner wall of the
shell. The electric field must be zero inside the metal (and
thus on the Gaussian surface inside the metal). This means
that the electric flux through the Gaussian surface must also
be zero. Gauss’ law then tells us that the net charge enclosed
by the Gaussian surface must be zero.

Reasoning: With a particle of charge —5.0 uC within the
shell, a charge of +5.0 wC must lie on the inner wall of
the shell in order that the net enclosed charge be zero. If the
particle were centered, this positive charge would be uni-
formly distributed along the inner wall. However, since the
particle is off-center, the distribution of positive charge is
skewed, as suggested by Fig. 23-13b, because the positive
charge tends to collect on the section of the inner wall near-
est the (negative) particle.

Because the shell is electrically neutral, its inner wall
can have a charge of +5.0 uC only if electrons, with a total
charge of —5.0 uC, leave the inner wall and move to the
outer wall. There they spread out uniformly, as is also sug-
gested by Fig. 23-13b. This distribution of negative charge is

 

(a) ()
Figure 23-13 (a) A negatively charged particle is located within a
spherical metal shell that is electrically neutral. (b) As a result,
positive charge is nonuniformly distributed on the inner wall of
the shell, and an equal amount of negative charge is uniformly
distributed on the outer wall.

uniform because the shell is spherical and because the
skewed distribution of positive charge on the inner wall
cannot produce an electric field in the shell to affect the dis-
tribution of charge on the outer wall. Furthermore, these
negative charges repel one another.

The field lines inside and outside the shell are shown
approximately in Fig. 23-13). All the field lines intersect the
shell and the particle perpendicularly. Inside the shell the pat-
tern of field lines is skewed because of the skew of the
positive charge distribution. Outside the shell the pattern is
the same as if the particle were centered and the shell were
missing. In fact, this would be true no matter where inside
the shell the particle happened to be located.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
