22-6 A POINT CHARGE IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD 645

22-6 A POINT CHARGE IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

22.22 For a charged particle placed in an external electric and the field when the particle is positively charged and
field (a field due to other charged objects), apply the rela- negatively charged.
tionship between the electric field E at that point, the parti- 22.23 Explain Millikan's procedure of measuring the elemen-
cle's charge q, and the electrostatic force F that acts on tary charge.
the particle, and identify the relative directions of the force 22.24 Explain the general mechanism of ink-jet printing.
Key Ideas —
@ If a particle with charge q is placed in an external electric @ If charge q is positive, the force vector is in the same direc-
field E, an electrostatic force F acts on the particle: tion as the field vector. If charge q is negative, the force vec-
SS tor is in the opposite direction (the minus sign in the equation
F=qE. reverses the force vector from the field vector).

A Point Charge in an Electric Field

In the preceding four modules we worked at the first of our two tasks: given a
charge distribution, to find the electric field it produces in the surrounding space.
Here we begin the second task: to determine what happens to a charged particle
when it is in an electric field set up by other stationary or slowly moving charges.
‘What happens is that an electrostatic force acts on the particle, as given by

F=gE, (22-28)

in which q is the charge of the particle (including its sign) and E is the electric
field that other charges have produced at the location of the particle. (The field is
not the field set up by the particle itself; to distinguish the two fields, the field
acting on the particle in Eq. 22-28 is often called the external field. A charged
particle or object is not affected by its own electric field.) Equation 22-28 tells us

oO The electrostatic force F acting on a charged particle located in an external electric
field E has the direction of F if the charge q of the particle is positive and has the
opposite direction if q is negative.

Measuring the Elementary Charge

Equation 22-28 played a role in the measurement of the elementary charge e by
American physicist Robert A. Millikan in 1910-1913. Figure 22-16 is a represen-
tation of his apparatus. When tiny oil drops are sprayed into chamber A, some of
them become charged, either positively or negatively, in the process. Consider a
drop that drifts downward through the small hole in plate P; and into chamber C.
Let us assume that this drop has a negative charge q.

If switch S in Fig. 22-16 is open as shown, battery B has no electrical effect on
chamber C. If the switch is closed (the connection between chamber C and the
positive terminal of the battery is then complete), the battery causes an excess
positive charge on conducting plate P; and an excess negative charge on conduct-
ing plate P,. The charged plates set up a downward-directed electric field E in
chamber C. According to Eq. 22-28, this field exerts an electrostatic force on any
charged drop that happens to be in the chamber and affects its motion. In partic-
ular, our negatively charged drop will tend to drift upward.

By timing the motion of oil drops with the switch opened and with it closed
and thus determining the effect of the charge q, Millikan discovered that the

Insulating
chamber
wall

   
  

Microscope

Figure 22-18 The Millikan oil-drop apparatus
for measuring the elementary charge e.
When a charged oil drop drifted into cham-
ber C through the hole in plate P;, its mo-
tion could be controlled by closing and
opening switch S and thereby setting up or
eliminating an electric field in chamber C.
The microscope was used to view the drop,
to permit timing of its motion.
