694 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

24-3 POTENTIAL DUE TO A CHARGED PARTICLE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.14 For a given point in the electric field of a charged parti-
cle, apply the relationship between the electric potential V,
the charge of the particle q, and the distance r from the
particle.

24.15 Identify the correlation between the algebraic signs of the
potential set up by a particle and the charge of the particle.

24.16 For points outside or on the surface of a spherically

Key Ideas
@ The electric potential due to a single charged particle at a
distance r from that charged particle is

lq

 

symmetric charge distribution, calculate the electric
potential as if all the charge is concentrated as a particle
at the center of the sphere.

24.17 Calculate the net potential at any given point due to
several charged particles, identifying that algebraic addi-
tion is used, not vector addition.

24.18 Draw equipotential lines for a charged particle.

@ The potential due to a collection of charged particles is

n n
V=dVe 1 4

i=l Amey 1 1

 

Amey
where V has the same sign as q.

To find the potential of
the charged particle,

we move this test charge
out to infinity.

Ele

 

Figure 24-9 The particle with positive charge
q produces an electric field E and an elec-
tric potential V at point P. We find the
potential by moving a test charge q) from
P to infinity. The test charge is shown at
distance r from the particle, during differ-
ential displacement d3’.

Thus, the potential is the algebraic sum of the individual po-
tentials, with no consideration of directions.

Potential Due to a Charged Particle

‘We now use Eg. 24-18 to derive, for the space around a charged particle, an
expression for the electric potential V relative to the zero potential at infinity.
Consider a point P at distance R from a fixed particle of positive charge q (Fig. 24-9).
To use Eq. 24-18, we imagine that we move a positive test charge qo from point P to
infinity. Because the path we take does not matter, let us choose the simplest one —
a line that extends radially from the fixed particle through P to infinity.
To use Eq. 24-18, we must evaluate the dot product

E-d¥ = Ecos 0ds. (24-22)
The electric field E in Fig. 24-9 is directed radially outward from the fixed
particle. Thus, the differential displacement d¥ of the test particle along its path has
the same direction as E. That means that in Eq. 24-22, angle @ = 0 and cos @ = 1.
Because the path is radial, let us write ds as dr.Then, substituting the limits R and ~,
we can write Eq. 24-18 as

Vi- Va -['e ar. (24-23)

R

Next, we set V;=0 (at ©) and V; = V (at R). Then, for the magnitude of the
electric field at the site of the test charge, we substitute from Eq. 22-3:

 

 

 

-Jt<4
E= ame, (24-24)
With these changes, Eq. 24-23 then gives us
q_ {°1 q Jil
0-V=- sz dr= —
de) InP Ame [; I
Lia@
= - =: 24-25,
Ame, R ( )
