mass of a proton, Eq. 21-2 gives us

 

2
= Ge
F=G 2
_ (6.67 x 10-1! N-mPikg2)(1.67 x 10-” kg)?
(4.0 x 10-5 my?
=12X10-3N. (Answer)

Weak versus strong: This result tells us that the (attractive)
gravitational force is far too weak to counter the repulsive
electrostatic forces between protons in a nucleus. Instead,
the protons are bound together by an enormous force called

21-3 CHARGE IS CONSERVED

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

21.21 Identify that in any isolated physical process, the net
charge cannot change (the net charge is always conserved).

Key Ideas

21-3 CHARGE IS CONSERVED 621

(aptly) the strong nuclear force—a force that acts between
protons (and neutrons) when they are close together, as in a
nucleus.

Although the gravitational force is many times weaker
than the electrostatic force, it is more important in large-
scale situations because it is always attractive. This means that
it can collect many small bodies into huge bodies with huge
masses, such as planets and stars, that then exert large gravita-
tional forces. The electrostatic force, on the other hand, is re-
pulsive for charges of the same sign, so it is unable to collect
either positive charge or negative charge into large concen-
trations that would then exert large electrostatic forces.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

21.22 Identify an annihilation process of particles and a pair
production of particles.

21.23 Identify mass number and atomic number in terms of
the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons.

 

@ The net electric charge of any isolated system is always
conserved.

@ If two charged particles undergo an annihilation process,

Charge Is Conserved

they have opposite signs of charge.

@ If two charged particles appear as a result of a pair produc-
tion process, they have opposite signs of charge.

If you rub a glass rod with silk, a positive charge appears on the rod. Measure-
ment shows that a negative charge of equal magnitude appears on the silk. This
suggests that rubbing does not create charge but only transfers it from one body
to another, upsetting the electrical neutrality of each body during the process.
This hypothesis of conservation of charge, first put forward by Benjamin
Franklin, has stood up under close examination, both for large-scale charged
bodies and for atoms, nuclei, and elementary particles. No exceptions have ever
been found. Thus, we add electric charge to our list of quantities—including
energy and both linear momentum and angular momentum—that obey a con-

servation law.

Important examples of the conservation of charge occur in the radioactive
decay of nuclei, in which a nucleus transforms into (becomes) a different type of
nucleus. For example, a uranium-238 nucleus (**U) transforms into a thorium-
234 nucleus (*Th) by emitting an alpha particle. Because that particle has the
same makeup as a helium-4 nucleus, it has the symbol “He. The number used in
the name of a nucleus and as a superscript in the symbol for the nucleus is called
the mass number and is the total number of the protons and neutrons in the
nucleus. For example, the total number in *°U is 238. The number of protons in
a nucleus is the atomic number Z, which is listed for all the elements in Appendix F.

From that list we find that in the decay

238 > 24Th + 4He.

(21-13)
