632 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

 

Figure 22-5 Field lines for two particles with
equal positive charge. Doesn’t the pattern
itself suggest that the particles repel each

other?

 

Positive test
/ sharge

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) (b) (o)

Figure 22-4 (a) The force on a positive test charge near a very large, nonconducting sheet
with uniform positive charge on one side. (b) The electric field vector E at the test
charge’s location, and the nearby electric field lines, extending away from the sheet.

(c) Side view.

electric field lines as in Fig. 22-3b. At any point, such as the one shown, the direc-
tion of the field line through the point matches the direction of the electric vector
at that point.

The rules for drawing electric fields lines are these: (1) At any point, the elec-
tric field vector must be tangent to the electric field line through that point and in
the same direction. (This is easy to see in Fig. 22-3 where the lines are straight, but
we'll see some curved lines soon.) (2) In a plane perpendicular to the field lines,
the relative density of the lines represents the relative magnitude of the field
there, with greater density for greater magnitude.

If the sphere in Fig. 22-3 were uniformly covered with positive charge, the
electric field vectors at all points around it would be radially outward and thus so
would the electric field lines. So, we have the following rule:

Oo Electric field lines extend away from positive charge (where they originate) and
toward negative charge (where they terminate).

In Fig. 22-35, they originate on distant positive charges that are not shown.

For another example, Fig. 22-4a shows part of an infinitely large, nonconduct-
ing sheet (or plane) with a uniform distribution of positive charge on one side. If
we place a positive test charge at any point near the sheet (on either side), we
find that the electrostatic force on the particle is outward and perpendicular to
the sheet. The perpendicular orientation is reasonable because any force compo-
nent that is, say, upward is balanced out by an equal component that is down-
ward. That leaves only outward, and thus the electric field vectors and the electric
field lines must also be outward and perpendicular to the sheet, as shown in
Figs. 22-4b and c.

Because the charge on the sheet is uniform, the field vectors and the field
lines are also. Such a field is a uniform electric field, meaning that the electric field
has the same magnitude and direction at every point within the field. (This is a lot
easier to work with than a nonuniform field, where there is variation from point
to point.) Of course, there is no such thing as an infinitely large sheet. That is just
a way of saying that we are measuring the field at points close to the sheet rela-
tive to the size of the sheet and that we are not near an edge.

Figure 22-5 shows the field lines for two particles with equal positive charges.
Now the field lines are curved, but the rules still hold: (1) the electric field vector
at any given point must be tangent to the field line at that point and in the same
direction, as shown for one vector, and (2) a closer spacing means a larger field
magnitude. To imagine the full three-dimensional pattern of field lines around
the particles, mentally rotate the pattern in Fig. 22-5 around the axis of symmetry,
which is a vertical line through both particles.
