620 CHAPTER 21

Table 21-1
Particles

Particle

Electron
Proton
Neutron

The Charges of Three

symbol Charge
eore” —e
Pp +e
n 0

COULOMB'S LAW

fluids themselves, such as air and water, are not continuous but are made up of
atoms and molecules; matter is discrete. Experiment shows that “electrical fluid”
is also not continuous but is made up of multiples of a certain elementary charge.
Any positive or negative charge q that can be detected can be written as

qzne, n=+1,+2,+3,..., (21-11)
in which e, the elementary charge, has the approximate value
e = 1.602 x 10°C. (21-12)

The elementary charge e is one of the important constants of nature. The electron
and proton both have a charge of magnitude e (Table 21-1). (Quarks, the con-
stituent particles of protons and neutrons, have charges of +e/3 or +2e/3, but they
apparently cannot be detected individually. For this and for historical reasons, we
do not take their charges to be the elementary charge.)

You often see phrases—such as “the charge on a sphere,” “the amount of
charge transferred,” and “the charge carried by the electron” — that suggest that
charge is a substance. (Indeed, such statements have already appeared in this
chapter.) You should, however, keep in mind what is intended: Particles are the
substance and charge happens to be one of their properties, just as mass is.

When a physical quantity such as charge can have only discrete values rather
than any value, we say that the quantity is quantized. It is possible, for example, to
find a particle that has no charge at all or a charge of +10e or —6e, but not a parti-
cle with a charge of, say, 3.57e.

The quantum of charge is small. In an ordinary 100 W lightbulb, for example,
about 10! elementary charges enter the bulb every second and just as many
leave. However, the graininess of electricity does not show up in such large-scale
phenomena (the bulb does not flicker with each electron).

Vv] Checkpoint 4

Initially, sphere A has a charge of —50e and sphere B has a charge of +20e. The
spheres are made of conducting material and are identical in size. If the spheres then
touch, what is the resulting charge on sphere A?

Sample Problem 21.04 Mutual electric repulsion in a nucleus

The nucleus in an iron atom has a radius of about 4.0 x No explosion: This is a small force to be acting on a macro-
10-* mand contains 26 protons.

(a) What is the magnitude of the repulsive electrostatic force be-
tween two of the protons that are separated by 4.0 x 10-5 m?

KEY IDEA

scopic object like a cantaloupe, but an enormous force to be
acting on a proton. Such forces should explode the nucleus
of any element but hydrogen (which has only one proton in
its nucleus). However, they don’t, not even in nuclei with a
great many protons. Therefore, there must be some enor-
mous attractive force to counter this enormous repulsive

 

The protons can be treated as charged particles, so the mag- _¢lectrostatic force.

nitude of the electrostatic force on one from the other is

given by Coulomb’s law.

(b) What is the magnitude of the gravitational force
between those same two protons?

Calculation: Table 21-1 tells us that the charge of a proton is
+e.Thus, Eq. 21-4 gives us

 

 

KEY IDEA
ee
_ Amey r Because the protons are particles, the magnitude of the
= itational force on one from the other is given by
(8.99 x 10° N-m7/C?)(1.602 x 10-1 C)? Gena , sou) 3 Y
= 40x10 my X 10-5 my Newton’s equation for the gravitational force (Eq. 21-2).
= 14N. (Answer) Calculation: With m, (= 1.67 x 10~*7kg) representing the
