698

The electric field shifts the positive
and negative charges, creating a dipole.

E
et

(a) )

Figure 24-14 (a) An atom, showing the posi-
tively charged nucleus (green) and the
negatively charged electrons (gold
shading). The centers of positive and nega-
tive charge coincide. (b) If the atom is
placed in an external electric field E, the
electron orbits are distorted so that the
centers of positive and negative charge no
longer coincide. An induced dipole
moment p appears. The distortion is great-
ly exaggerated here.

CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

Vv] Checkpoint 4

Suppose that three points are set at equal (large) distances r from the center of the
dipole in Fig, 24-13: Point a is on the dipole axis above the positive charge, point b is on
the axis below the negative charge, and point c is on a perpendicular bisector through
the line connecting the two charges. Rank the points according to the electric potential
of the dipole there, greatest (most positive) first.

Induced Dipole Moment

Many molecules, such as water, have permanent electric dipole moments. In other
molecules (called nonpolar molecules) and in every isolated atom, the centers of
the positive and negative charges coincide (Fig. 24-14a) and thus no dipole
moment is set up. However, if we place an atom or a nonpolar molecule in an
external electric field, the field distorts the electron orbits and separates the centers
of positive and negative charge (Fig. 24-14b). Because the electrons are negatively
charged, they tend to be shifted in a direction opposite the field. This shift sets up a
dipole moment p that points in the direction of the field. This dipole moment is
said to be induced by the field, and the atom or molecule is then said to be polar-
ized by the field (that is, it has a positive side and a negative side). When the field is
removed, the induced dipole moment and the polarization disappear.

24-5 POTENTIAL DUE TO A CONTINUOUS CHARGE DISTRIBUTION

Learning Objective

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

24,22 For charge that is distributed uniformly along a line or over a surface, find the net potential at a given point by splitting the
distribution up into charge elements and summing (by integration) the potential due to each one.

Key Ideas

@ For a continuous distribution of charge (over an extended
object), the potential is found by (1) dividing the distribution
into charge elements dq that can be treated as particles and
then (2) summing the potential due to each element by inte-

grating over the full distribution:
- |“
Amey) J ro

 

@ In order to carry out the integration, dq is replaced with the
product of either a linear charge density A and a length ele-
ment (such as dx), or a surface charge density oand area ele-
ment (such as dx dy).

@ In some cases where the charge is symmetrically distrib-
uted, a two-dimensional integration can be reduced to a one-
dimensional integration.

Potential Due to a Continuous Charge Distribution

‘When a charge distribution g is continuous (as on a uniformly charged thin rod
or disk), we cannot use the summation of Eq. 24-27 to find the potential V at a point
P. Instead, we must choose a differential element of charge dq, determine the
potential dV at P due to dq, and then integrate over the entire charge distribution.

Let us again take the zero of potential to be at infinity. If we treat the element of
charge dq as a particle, then we can use Eq. 24-26 to express the potential dV at point
P due to dq:

1d
av =—— “4
r

(positive or negative dq).

(24-31)

Here r is the distance between P and dq. To find the total potential V at P, we
