706 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

24-8 PoTeNTIAL OF A CHARGED ISOLATED CONDUCTOR

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.32 Identify that an excess charge placed on an isolated
conductor (or connected isolated conductors) will distrib-
ute itself on the surface of the conductor so that all points
of the conductor come to the same potential.

24.33 For anisolated spherical conducting shell, sketch
graphs of the potential and the electric field magnitude
versus distance from the center, both inside and outside
the shell.

24.34 For an isolated spherical conducting shell, identify that
internally the electric field is zero and the electric potential

has the same value as the surface and that externally the
electric field and the electric potential have values as
though all of the shell’s charge is concentrated as a
particle at its center.

24.35 For an isolated cylindrical conducting shell, identify
that internally the electric field is zero and the electric
potential has the same value as the surface and that exter-
nally the electric field and the electric potential have values
as though all of the cylinder’s charge is concentrated as a
line of charge on the central axis.

 

Key Ideas
@ An excess charge placed on a conductor will, in the equilib-
rium state, be located entirely on the outer surface of the
conductor.

@ The entire conductor, including interior points, is ata
uniform potential.

@ If an isolated charged conductor is placed in an external

electric field, then at every internal point, the electric field due
to the charge cancels the external electric field that otherwise
would have been there.

@ Also, the net electric field at every point on the surface is
perpendicular to the surface.

 

o 1 2 3 4

o ol 2 3 4
r(m)

()
Figure 24-21 (a) A plot of V(r) both inside
and outside a charged spherical shell of

radius 1.0 m.(b) A plot of E(r) for the
same shell.

Potential of a Charged Isolated Conductor

In Module 23-3, we concluded that E = 0 forall points inside an isolated conduc-
tor. We then used Gauss’ law to prove that an excess charge placed on an isolated
conductor lies entirely on its surface. (This is true even if the conductor has an
empty internal cavity.) Here we use the first of these facts to prove an extension
of the second:

) An excess charge placed on an isolated conductor will distribute itself on the sur-
face of that conductor so that all points of the conductor—whether on the surface
or inside—come to the same potential. This is true even if the conductor has an
internal cavity and even if that cavity contains a net charge.

Our proof follows directly from Eq. 24-18, which is
f
V,-Vi= -{ E-ds-
i

Since E = 0 for all points within a conductor, it follows directly that V; = V; for
all possible pairs of points i and f in the conductor.

Figure 24-21a is a plot of potential against radial distance r from the center
for an isolated spherical conducting shell of 1.0 m radius, having a charge of
1.0 uC. For points outside the shell, we can calculate V(r) from Eq. 24-26
because the charge g behaves for such external points as if it were concentrated at
the center of the shell. That equation holds right up to the surface of the shell. Now
let us push a small test charge through the shell—assuming a small hole exists—to
its center. No extra work is needed to do this because no net electric force acts on
the test charge once it is inside the shell. Thus, the potential at all points inside the
shell has the same value as that on the surface, as Fig. 24-21a shows.
