Note that only conduction electrons, with their negative charges, can move;
positive ions are fixed in place. Thus, an object becomes positively charged only
through the removal of negative charges.

Blue Flashes from a Wintergreen LifeSaver

Indirect evidence for the attraction of charges with opposite signs can be seen
with a wintergreen LifeSaver (the candy shaped in the form of a marine
lifesaver). If you adapt your eyes to darkness for about 15 minutes and then have
a friend chomp on a piece of the candy in the darkness, you will see a faint blue
flash from your friend’s mouth with each chomp. Whenever a chomp breaks a
sugar crystal into pieces, each piece will probably end up with a different number
of electrons. Suppose a crystal breaks into pieces A and B, with A ending up with
more electrons on its surface than B (Fig. 21-4). This means that B has positive
ions (atoms that lost electrons to A) on its surface. Because the electrons on A
are strongly attracted to the positive ions on B, some of those electrons jump
across the gap between the pieces.

As A and B move away from each other, air (primarily nitrogen, N>) flows
into the gap, and many of the jumping electrons collide with nitrogen molecules
in the air, causing the molecules to emit ultraviolet light. You cannot see this type
of light. However, the wintergreen molecules on the surfaces of the candy pieces
absorb the ultraviolet light and then emit blue light, which you can see —it is the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

blue light coming from your friend’s mouth. eS
Iv] Checkpoint 1
The figure shows five 4
pairs of plates: A, B,and
Dare charged plastic t i = ? =
plates and Cis an elec-
trically neutral copper *
plate. The electrostatic B A D A D
forces between the pairs t

of plates are shown for
three of the pairs. For the remaining two pairs, do the plates repel or attract each other?

Coulomb’s Law

Now we come to the equation for Coulomb’s law, but first a caution. This equa-
tion works for only charged particles (and a few other things that can be treated
as particles). For extended objects, with charge located in many different places,
we need more powerful techniques. So, here we consider just charged particles
and not, say, two charged cats.

If two charged particles are brought near each other, they each exert an elec-
trostatic force on the other. The direction of the force vectors depends on the
signs of the charges. If the particles have the same sign of charge, they repel each
other. That means that the force vector on each is directly away from the other
particle (Figs. 21-5a and b). If we release the particles, they accelerate away from
each other. If, instead, the particles have opposite signs of charge, they attract
each other. That means that the force vector on each is directly toward the other
particle (Fig.21-5c). If we release the particles, they accelerate toward each other.

The equation for the electrostatic forces acting on the particles is called
Coulomb’s law after Charles-Augustin de Coulomb, whose experiments in 1785 led
him to it. Let’s write the equation in vector form and in terms of the particles shown
in Fig. 21-6, where particle 1 has charge q, and particle 2 has charge qo. (These sym-
bols can represent either positive or negative charge.) Let’s also focus on particle 1
and write the force acting on it in terms of a unit vector f that points along a radial

21-1 COULOMB’S LAW 613

  

rn’
Be + {
C2

Figure 21-4 Two pieces of a wintergreen
LifeSaver candy as they fall away from
each other. Electrons jumping from the
negative surface of piece A to the positive
surface of piece B collide with nitrogen
(N;) molecules in the air.

Always draw the force
vector with the tail on
the particle.

   
 
 

The forces push the
(a) particles apart.

ane

(b)

But here the forces
pull the particles
together.

Figure 21-5 Two charged particles repel each
other if they have the same sign of charge,
either (a) both positive or (5) both negative.
(c) They attract each other if they have op-
posite signs of charge.

 

Figure 21-6 The electrostatic force on parti-
cle 1 can be described in terms of a unit
vector f along an axis through the two
particles, radially away from particle 2.
