22-2 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A CHARGED PARTICLE 633

22-2 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A CHARGED PARTICLE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

22.05 Ina sketch, draw a charged particle, indicate its sign,
pick a nearby point, and then draw the electric field vector
Eat that point, with its tail anchored on the point.

22.06 For a given point in the electric field of a charged particle,
identify the direction of the field vector Ewhen the particle is
positively charged and when itis negatively charged.

22.07 For a given point in the electric field of a charged
particle, apply the relationship between the field

Key Ideas

magnitude E, the charge magnitude |g|, and the distance r
between the point and the particle.

22.08 Identify that the equation given here for the magnitude
of an electric field applies only to a particle, not an extended
object.

22.09 If more than one electric field is set up at a point, draw
each electric field vector and then find the net electric field by
adding the individual electric fields as vectors (not as scalars).

 

@ The magnitude of the electric field Eset up by a particle
with charge q at distance r from the particle is

-1 id
Amey 1°
@ The electric field vectors set up by a positively charged
particle all point directly away from the particle. Those set up

by a negatively charged particle all point directly toward the
particle.

@ If more than one charged particle sets up an electric field
at a point, the net electric field is the vector sum of the
individual electric fields—electric fields obey the superposition
principle.

 

The Electric Field Due to a Point Charge

To find the electric field due to a charged particle (often called a point charge),we place
a positive test charge at any point near the particle, at distance r. From Coulomb's law
(Eq.21-4), the force on the test charge due to the particle with charge q is

1 4% 2

- 4m) 7°

As previously, the direction of F is directly away from the particle if q is positive (be-
cause qo is positive) and directly toward it if g is negative. From Eq. 22-1, we can now
write the electric field set up by the particle (at the location of the test charge) as

p-fi 14
q Amey 17

 

f (charged particle).

(22-2)

Let's think through the directions again. The direction of E' matches that of the

force on the positive test charge: directly away from the point charge if q is

positive and directly toward it if q is negative.

So, if given another charged particle, we can immediately determine the
directions of the electric field vectors near it by just looking at the sign of
the charge q. We can find the magnitude at any given distance r by converting

Eq. 22-2 to a magnitude form:

1 {dl
= —— > (charged particle).
ae] (charg ).

We write |g| to avoid the danger of getting a negative E when q is negative, and
then thinking the negative sign has something to do with direction. Equation 22-3
gives magnitude E only. We must think about the direction separately.

Figure 22-6 gives a number of electric field vectors at points around a
positively charged particle, but be careful. Each vector represents the vector

R : Fa
oN
“SIN

esp th
Figure 22-6 The electric field vectors at

various points around a positive point
charge.

(22-3)
