684 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

doubled, how much flux would pass through the surface? (b) What
is the charge of the particle?

67 SSM The electric field at point P just outside the outer sur-
face of a hollow spherical conductor of inner radius 10cm and
outer radius 20 cm has magnitude 450 N/C and is directed outward.
When a particle of unknown charge Q is introduced into the center
of the sphere, the electric field at P is still directed outward but is
now 180 NIC. (a) What was the net charge enclosed by the outer
surface before Q was introduced? (b) What is charge Q? After Q is
introduced, what is the charge on the (c) inner and (d) outer sur-
face of the conductor?

GB) The net electric flux through each face of a die (singular of
dice) has a magnitude in units of 10° N-m’/C that is exactly equal
to the number of spots N on the face (1 through 6). The flux is in-
ward for N odd and outward for N even. What is the net charge in-
side the die?

69 Figure 23-59 shows, in Pe
cross section, three infinitely 0;
large nonconducting sheets on y
which charge is uniformly |

spread. The surface charge x ok
densities are 0, = +2.00

uCim?, o,= +4.00nCim’, g,

and 0; = —5.00 ¢C/m?, and”
distance L = 1.50 cm. In unit-
vector notation, what is the net
electric field at point P?

L/2

 

 

Figure 23-59 Problem 69.

70 Charge of uniform vol-

ume density p = 3.2 C/m’ fills a nonconducting solid sphere of
radius 5.0 cm. What is the magnitude of the electric field (a) 3.5
cm and (b) 8.0 cm from the sphere’s center?

77 A Gaussian surface in the form of a hemisphere of radius R =
5.68 cm lies in a uniform electric field of magnitude E = 2.50 N/C.
The surface encloses no net charge. At the (flat) base of the sur-
face, the field is perpendicular to the surface and directed into the
surface. What is the flux through (a) the base and (b) the curved
portion of the surface?

72 What net charge is enclosed by the Gaussian cube of
Problem 2?

73 A nonconducting solid sphere has a uni-
form volume charge density p. Let 7 be the
vector from the center of the sphere to a gen-
eral point P within the sphere. (a) Show that
the electric field at P is given by E = prey.
(Note that the result is independent of the ra-
dius of the sphere.) (b) A spherical cavity is
hollowed out of the sphere, as shown in Fig. 23-
60. Using superposition concepts, show that
the electric field at all points within the cavity
is uniform and equal to E = pa/3eo, where 7 is the position vector
from the center of the sphere to the center of the cavity.

ae

Figure 23-60
Problem 73.

74 A uniform charge density of 500 nC/m* is distributed through-
out a spherical volume of radius 6.00cm. Consider a cubical
Gaussian surface with its center at the center of the sphere. What is
the electric flux through this cubical surface if its edge length is
(a) 4.00 cm and (b) 14.0 cm?

75) Figure 23-61 shows a Geiger counter, a device used to detect
ionizing radiation, which causes ionization of atoms. A thin, posi-

 

   
  

tively charged central wire is sur- Particle

rounded by a concentric, circular, con-
ducting cylindrical shell with an equal
negative charge, creating a strong ra-
dial electric field. The shell contains a
low-pressure inert gas. A particle of ra-
diation entering the device through
the shell wall ionizes a few of the gas
atoms. The resulting free electrons (e)
are drawn to the positive wire.
However, the electric field is so intense
that, between collisions with gas
atoms, the free electrons gain energy
sufficient to ionize these atoms also.
More free electrons are thereby cre-
ated, and the process is repeated until
the electrons reach the wire. The re-
sulting “avalanche” of electrons is col-
lected by the wire, generating a signal that is used to record the
passage of the original particle of radiation. Suppose that the ra-
dius of the central wire is 25 um, the inner radius of the shell 1.4
cm, and the length of the shell 16 cm. If the electric field at the
shell’s inner wall is 2.9 X 104 N/C, what is the total positive charge
on the central wire?

76 Charge is distributed uniformly throughout the volume of an in-
finitely long solid cylinder of radius R. (a) Show that, at a distance r <
R from the cylinder axis,

Signal

Charged
cylindrical shell

Figure 23-61 Problem 75.

 

 

 

=
26)"

where pis the volume charge density. (b) Write an expression for E
whenr > R.

77 SSM A spherical conducting shell has a charge of —14 C on
its outer surface and a charged particle in its hollow. If the net
charge on the shell is —10 jC, what is the charge (a) on the inner
surface of the shell and (b) of the particle?

78 A charge of 6.00 pC is spread uniformly throughout the volume
of a sphere of radius r = 4.00 cm. What is the magnitude of the electric
field at a radial distance of (a) 6.00 cm and (b) 3.00 cm?

79 Water in an irrigation ditch of width w = 3.22 mand depth d =
1.04 m flows with a speed of 0.207 m/s. The mass flux of the flowing
water through an imaginary surface is the product of the water’s
density (1000 kg/m) and its volume flux through that surface. Find
the mass flux through the following imaginary surfaces: (a) a sur-
face of area wd, entirely in the water, perpendicular to the flow;
(b) a surface with area 3wd/2, of which wd is in the water, perpendi-
cular to the flow; (c) a surface of area wd/2, entirely in the water, per-
pendicular to the flow; (d) a surface of area wd, half in the water and
half out, perpendicular to the flow; (e) a surface of area wd, entirely in
the water, with its normal 34.0° from the direction of flow.

80 Charge of uniform surface density 8.00nC/m? is distributed
over an entire xy plane; charge of uniform surface density 3.00 nC/m?
is distributed over the parallel plane defined by z=2.00m.
Determine the magnitude of the electric field at any point having a z
coordinate of (a) 1.00 m and (b) 3.00 m.

81 A spherical ball of charged particles has a uniform charge
density. In terms of the ball’s radius R, at what radial distances
(a) inside and (b) outside the ball is the magnitude of the ball’s
electric field equal to } of the maximum magnitude of that field?
