Electric Potential

24-1 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.01 Identify that the electric force is conservative and thus
has an associated potential energy.

24.02 Identify that at every point in a charged object's electric
field, the object sets up an electric potential V, whichis a
scalar quantity that can be positive or negative depending
on the sign of the object's charge.

24.03 For a charged particle placed at a point in an object's
electric field, apply the relationship between the object's
electric potential V at that point, the particle's charge q,
and the potential energy U of the particle—-object system.

24.04 Convert energies between units of joules and
electron-volts.

24.05 If a charged particle moves from an initial point to a
final point in an electric field, apply the relationships

Key Ideas

@ The electric potential V at a point P in the electric field of a
charged object is

 

 

q q

where W, is the work that would be done by the electric
force ona positive test charge qo were it brought from an
infinite distance to P, and U's the electric potential energy
that would then be stored in the test charge—object system.

@ If a particle with charge q is placed at a point where the

electric potential of a charged object is V, the electric

potential energy U of the particle-object system is
U=qV.

@ If the particle moves through a potential difference AV, the
change in the electric potential energy is

between the change AV in the potential, the particle's
charge q, the change AU in the potential energy, and the
work W done by the electric force.

24.06 If a charged particle moves between two given points
in the electric field of a charged object, identify that the
amount of work done by the electric force is path
independent.

24.07 If a charged particle moves through a change AV in
electric potential without an applied force acting on it, relate
AV and the change AK in the particle's kinetic energy.

24.08 If a charged particle moves through a change AV in
electric potential while an applied force acts on it, relate
AV, the change AK in the particle's kinetic energy, and the
work Wapp done by the applied force.

AU =qAV=d(V;- V)).

@ Ifa particle moves through a change AV in electric
potential without an applied force acting on it, applying
the conservation of mechanical energy gives the change in
kinetic energy as

AK = —q AV.

@ If, instead, an applied force acts on the particle, doing work
Wapp the change in kinetic energy is

AK = —q AV + Wapp.
@ Inthe special case when AK = 0, the work of an applied

force involves only the motion of the particle through a
potential difference:

Wop = q AV.

 

What Is Physics?

One goal of physics is to identify basic forces in our world, such as the electric
force we discussed in Chapter 21.A related goal is to determine whether a force
is conservative—that is, whether a potential energy can be associated with it. The
motivation for associating a potential energy with a force is that we can then

685
