14.2. What is the structure of DNA?

The Chemical Nature of
Nucleic Acids

A German chemist, Friedrich Miescher, discovered DNA
in 1869, only four years after Mendel’s work was published.
Miescher extracted a white substance from the nuclei of
human cells and fish sperm. The proportion of nitrogen
and phosphorus in the substance was different from that in
any other known constituent of cells, which convinced Mi-
escher that he had discovered a new biological substance.
He called this substance “nuclein,” because it seemed to be
specifically associated with the nucleus.

Levene’s Analysis: DNA Is a Polymer

Because Miescher’s nuclein was slightly acidic, it came to
be called nucleic acid. For 50 years biologists did little
research on the substance, because nothing was known of
its function in cells. In the 1920s, the basic structure of
nucleic acids was determined by the biochemist P. A.
Levene, who found that DNA contains three main com-
ponents (figure 14.6): (1) phosphate (PO4) groups;
(2) five-carbon sugars; and (3) nitrogen-containing bases
called purines (adenine, A, and guanine, G) and pyrim-
idines (thymine, T, and cytosine, C; RNA contains
uracil, U, instead of T). From the roughly equal propor-
tions of these components, Levene concluded correctly
that DNA and RNA molecules are made of repeating
units of the three components. Each unit, consisting of a
sugar attached to a phosphate group and a base, is called
a nucleotide. The identity of the base distinguishes one
nucleotide from another.

To identify the various chemical groups in DNA and
RNA, it is customary to number the carbon atoms of the
base and the sugar and then refer to any chemical group
attached to a carbon atom by that number. In the sugar,
four of the carbon atoms together with an oxygen atom
form a five-membered ring. As illustrated in figure 14.7,
the carbon atoms are numbered 1’ to 5’, proceeding
clockwise from the oxygen atom; the prime symbol (’) in-
dicates that the number refers to a carbon in a sugar
rather than a base. Under this numbering scheme, the
phosphate group is attached to the 5’ carbon atom of the
sugar, and the base is attached to the 1’ carbon atom. In
addition, a free hydroxyl (—OH) group is attached to the
3’ carbon atom.

The 5’ phosphate and 3’ hydroxyl groups allow DNA
and RNA to form long chains of nucleotides, because
these two groups can react chemically with each other.
The reaction between the phosphate group of one nu-
cleotide and the hydroxyl group of another is a dehydra-
tion synthesis, eliminating a water molecule and forming
a covalent bond that links the two groups (figure 14.8).
The linkage is called a phosphodiester bond because

284 PartV Molecular Genetics

i i
HO—C—H oH HO—C—H on
O. O.
| ee | ee
Neue” \y \Noumee” \y
7 i |

 

— 4 ‘Co!
OH H OH OH
Deoxyribose Ribose
(DNA only) (RNA only)
1
ROCs
|
on
Phosphate
NH, °
i
Cc N H c N
nZ >o \ Swi \
wh Be De
Sy Sn HN Sy “y
H H
Adenine Guanine
Purines
V" i i
C. C. H Cc. CH:
“4 ae He ' ~g ae
c C—H c c. c c
a Za ™~ a ™~,
0% Sw of Sy 4 07 Sw H
H H H
Cytosine Uracil Thymine
(RNA only) (DNA only)
l
T
Pyrimidines
FIGURE 14.6

Nucleotide subunits of DNA and RNA. The nucleotide
subunits of DNA and RNA are composed of three elements: a
five-carbon sugar (deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA), a
phosphate group, and a nitrogenous base (either a purine or a
pyrimidine).

FIGURE 14.7
('0,) Numbering the carbon

atoms in a nucleotide. The
carbon atoms in the sugar of
the nucleotide are numbered
1’ to 5’, proceeding clockwise
from the oxygen atom. The
“prime” symbol (’) indicates
that the carbon belongs to the
sugar rather than the base.

 
