638 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

an electric field exceeds a certain critical value E,, the
field can pull electrons out of atoms (ionize the atoms),
and then the freed electrons can run into other atoms,
causing those atoms to emit light. The value of E. depends
on the density of the air in which the electric field exists.
At altitude z. = 60 km the density of the air is so low that

E = 2.0 x 10? N/Cexceeds E,, and thus light is emitted by
the atoms in the air. That light forms sprites. Lower down,
just above the clouds at z, = 30 km, the density of the air
is much higher, E = 1.6 x 10° N/C does not exceed E,,
and no light is emitted. Hence, sprites occur only far
above storm clouds.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

22-4 THE ELECTRIC FIELD DUE TO A LINE OF CHARGE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

22.16 For auniform distribution of charge, find the linear charge
density A for charge along a line, the surface charge density
ofor charge ona surface, and the volume charge density p
for charge in a volume.

22.17 For charge that is distributed uniformly along a line, find
the net electric field at a given point near the line by

Key Ideas

splitting the distribution up into charge elements dq and
then summing (by integration) the electric field vectors dE
set up at the point by each element.

22.18 Explain how symmetry can be used to simplify the
calculation of the electric field at a point near a line of
uniformly distributed charge.

 

@ The equation for the electric field set up by a particle does
not apply to an extended object with charge (said to have a
continuous charge distribution).

@ To find the electric field of an extended object at a point, we
first consider the electric field set up by a charge element dq in
the object, where the element is small enough for us to apply

the equation for a particle. Then we sum, via integration, com-
ponents of the electric fields dE from all the charge elements.
@ Because the individual electric fields dE have different
magnitudes and point in different directions, we first see if
symmetry allows us to cancel out any of the components of
the fields, to simplify the integration.

The Electric Field Due to a Line of Charge

So far we have dealt with only charged particles, a single particle or a simple col-
lection of them. We now turn to a much more challenging situation in which a
thin (approximately one-dimensional) object such as a rod or ring is charged with
a huge number of particles, more than we could ever even count. In the next
module, we consider two-dimensional objects, such as a disk with charge spread
over a surface. In the next chapter we tackle three-dimensional objects, such as a
sphere with charge spread through a volume.

Heads Up. Many students consider this module to be the most difficult in
the book for a variety of reasons. There are lots of steps to take, a lot of vector
features to keep track of, and after all that, we set up and then solve an integral.
The worst part, however, is that the procedure can be different for different
arrangements of the charge. Here, as we focus on a particular arrangement (a
charged ring), be aware of the general approach, so that you can tackle other
arrangements in the homework (such as rods and partial circles).

Figure 22-11 shows a thin ring of radius R with a uniform distribution of posi-
tive charge along its circumference. It is made of plastic, which means that the
charge is fixed in place. The ring is surrounded by a pattern of electric field lines,
but here we restrict our interest to an arbitrary point P on the central axis (the
axis through the ring’s center and perpendicular to the plane of the ring), at dis-
tance z from the center point.

The charge of an extended object is often conveyed in terms of a charge
density rather than the total charge. For a line of charge, we use the linear charge
