14.3 How does DNA replicate?

The Meselson-Stahl Experiment:
DNA Replication Is Semiconservative

The Watson—Crick model immediately suggested that
the basis for copying the genetic information is comple-
mentarity. One chain of the DNA molecule may have
any conceivable base sequence, but this sequence com-
pletely determines the sequence of its partner in the du-
plex. For example, if the sequence of one chain is 5’-
ATTGCAT-3’, the sequence of its partner must be
3’-TAACGTA-5’. Thus, each chain in the duplex is a
complement of the other.

The complementarity of the DNA duplex provides a
ready means of accurately duplicating the molecule. If one
were to “unzip” the molecule, one would need only to as-
semble the appropriate complementary nucleotides on the
exposed single strands to form two daughter duplexes with
the same sequence. This form of DNA replication is called
semiconservative, because while the sequence of the origi-
nal duplex is conserved after one round of replication, the
duplex itself is not. Instead, each strand of the duplex be-
comes part of another duplex.

Two other hypotheses of gene replication were also
proposed. The conservative model stated that the parental
double helix would remain intact and generate DNA
copies consisting of entirely new molecules. The disper-
sive model predicted that parental DNA would become
dispersed throughout the new copy so that each strand of
all the daughter molecules would be a mixture of old and
new DNA.

The three hypotheses of DNA replication were evalu-
ated in 1958 by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl of
the California Institute of Technology. These two scien-
tists grew bacteria in a medium containing the heavy iso-
tope of nitrogen, '°N, which became incorporated into the
bases of the bacterial DNA. After several generations, the
DNA of these bacteria was denser than that of bacteria
grown in a medium containing the lighter isotope of nitro-
gen, '4N. Meselson and Stahl then transferred the bacteria
from the 5N medium to the "N medium and collected the
DNA at various intervals.

By dissolving the DNA they had collected in a heavy
salt called cesium chloride and then spinning the solution
at very high speeds in an ultracentrifuge, Meselson and
Stahl were able to separate DNA strands of different den-
sities. The enormous centrifugal forces generated by the
ultracentrifuge caused the cesium ions to migrate toward
the bottom of the centrifuge tube, creating a gradient of
cesium concentration, and thus of density. Each DNA
strand floats or sinks in the gradient until it reaches the
position where its density exactly matches the density of
the cesium there. Because !5N strands are denser than '4N

288 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

Rounds of
| Taplication

ite

 

 

FIGURE 14.11

The key result of the Meselson and Stahl experiment. These
bands of DNA, photographed on the left and scanned on the
right, are from the density-gradient centrifugation experiment of
Meselson and Stahl. At 0 generation, all DNA is heavy; after one
replication all DNA has a hybrid density; after two replications,
all DNA is hybrid or light.

strands, they migrate farther down the tube to a denser
region of the cesium gradient.

The DNA collected immediately after the transfer was
all dense. However, after the bacteria completed their first
round of DNA replication in the '{N medium, the density
of their DNA had decreased to a value intermediate be-
tween 4N-DNA and 5N-DNA. After the second round of
replication, two density classes of DNA were observed, one
intermediate and one equal to that of '4N-DNA (figure
14.11).

Meselson and Stahl interpreted their results as follows:
after the first round of replication, each daughter DNA du-
plex was a hybrid possessing one of the heavy strands of the
parent molecule and one light strand; when this hybrid du-
plex replicated, it contributed one heavy strand to form an-
other hybrid duplex and one light strand to form a light du-
plex (figure 14.12). Thus, this experiment clearly confirmed
the prediction of the Watson-Crick model that DNA repli-
cates in a semiconservative manner.

 

The basis for the great accuracy of DNA replication is
complementarity. A DNA molecule is a duplex,
containing two strands that are complementary mirror
images of each other, so either one can be used as a
template to reconstruct the other.

 
