By substituting Eq. 23-4, the definition of flux, we can also write Gauss’ law as

af E-dA = deg (Gawss' law). (23-7)

Equations 23-6 and 23-7 hold only when the net charge is located in a vacuum or
(what is the same for most practical purposes) in air. In Chapter 25, we modify Gauss’
law to include situations in which a material such as mica, oil, or glass is present.

In Eqs. 23-6 and 23-7, the net charge q.,. is the algebraic sum of all the enclosed
positive and negative charges, and it can be positive, negative, or zero. We include
the sign, rather than just use the magnitude of the enclosed charge, because the sign
tells us something about the net flux through the Gaussian surface: If dene is posi-
tive, the net flux is outward; if den: is negative, the net flux is inward.

Charge outside the surface, no matter how large or how close it may be,is not in-
cluded in the term q.,, in Gauss’ law. The exact form and location of the charges in-
side the Gaussian surface are also of no concern; the only things that matter on the
right side of Eqs. 23-6 and 23-7 are the magnitude and sign of the net enclosed
charge. The quantity E on the left side of Eq.23-7, however, is the electric field result-
ing from all charges, both those inside and those outside the Gaussian surface. This
statement may seem to be inconsistent, but keep this in mind: The electric field due
to a charge outside the Gaussian surface contributes zero net flux through the sur-
face, because as many field lines due to that charge enter the surface as leave it.

Let us apply these ideas to Fig. 23-8, which shows two particles, with charges
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign, and the field lines describing the electric
fields the particles set up in the surrounding space. Four Gaussian surfaces are
also shown, in cross section. Let us consider each in turn.

Surface S,._ The electric field is outward for all points on this surface. Thus, the
flux of the electric field through this surface is positive, and so is the net
charge within the surface, as Gauss’ law requires. (That is, in Eq. 23-6, if ® is
Positive, Jeq¢ Must be also.)

Surface S,._ The electric field is inward for all points on this surface. Thus, the flux
of the electric field through this surface is negative and so is the enclosed charge,
as Gauss’ law requires.

Surface S;. This surface encloses no charge, and thus dea, = 0. Gauss’ law
(Eq. 23-6) requires that the net flux of the electric field through this surface
be zero. That is reasonable because all the field lines pass entirely through
the surface, entering it at the top and leaving at the bottom.

Surface S,. This surface encloses no net charge, because the enclosed positive
and negative charges have equal magnitudes. Gauss’ law requires that the net
flux of the electric field through this surface be zero. That is reasonable
because there are as many field lines leaving surface S, as entering it.

‘What would happen if we were to bring an enormous charge Q up close to sur-

face S, in Fig. 23-8? The pattern of the field lines would certainly change, but the

net flux for each of the four Gaussian surfaces would not change. Thus, the value
of Q would not enter Gauss’ law in any way, because Q lies outside all four of the

Gaussian surfaces that we are considering.

Vv] Checkpoint 2 ee

The figure shows three situations in which a Gaussian cube sits in a
an electric field. The arrows and the values indicate the directions

of the field lines and the magnitudes (in N -m?/C) of the flux

through the six sides of each cube. (The lighter arrows are for the ,
hidden faces.) In which situation does the cube enclose (a) a posi-

tive net charge, (b) a negative net charge,and (e)zeronetcharge? 4

 

23-2 GAUSS’ LAW

665

 

Figure 23-8 Two charges, equal in magnitude
but opposite in sign, and the field lines that
represent their net electric field. Four
Gaussian surfaces are shown in cross sec-
tion. Surface S; encloses the positive
charge. Surface S, encloses the negative
charge. Surface 5; encloses no charge.
Surface S, encloses both charges and thus
no net charge.

 

 
