Table 14.1  Chargaff’s Analysis of DNA Nucleotide Base Compositions

Base Composition (Mole Percent)

 

 

Organism A T G c

Escherichia coli (K12) 26.0 Bg 24.9 25.2
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 15.1 14.6 34.9 35.4
Yeast 313 32.9 18.7 17.1
Herring 278 27.5 2.2 22.6
Rat 28.6 28.4 21.4 21.5
Human 30.9 29.4 19.9 19.8

Source: Data from E. Chargaffand J. Davidson (editors), The Nucleic Acides, 1955, Academic Press, New York, NY.

the phosphate group is now linked to the
two sugars by means of a pair of ester (P—
O—C) bonds. The two-unit polymer re-
sulting from this reaction still has a free 5’
phosphate group at one end and a free 3’
hydroxyl group at the other, so it can link
to other nucleotides. In this way, many
thousands of nucleotides can join together
in long chains.

Linear strands of DNA or RNA, no mat-
ter how long, will almost always have a free
5’ phosphate group at one end and a free 3’
hydroxyl group at the other. Therefore,

CH,
kA
‘

Chargaff’s Analysis: DNA Is Not a
Simple Repeating Polymer

When Levene’s chemical analysis of DNA
was repeated using more sensitive tech-
niques that became available after World
War II, quite a different result was ob-
tained. The four nucleotides were not pre-
sent in equal proportions in DNA mole-
cules after all. A careful study carried out
by Erwin Chargaff showed that the nu-
cleotide composition of DNA molecules
varied in complex ways, depending on the
source of the DNA (table 14.1). This

every DNA and RNA molecule has an in- -O-P=0

trinsic directionality, and we can refer un- & strongly suggested that DNA vit have
ambiguously to each end of the molecule. | simpic repeating Polymer and might have
By convention, the sequence of bases is usu- CH, the information-encoding properties ge~
ally expressed in the 5’-to-3’ direction. ° netic material must have. Despite DNA’s
Thus, the base sequence “GTCCAT” refers complexity, however, Chargaff observed an
to the sequence, important underlying regularity in double-
> stranded DNA: the amount of adenine present
5’ pGpTpCpCpApT—OH 3° in DNA always equals the amount of thymine,
where the phosphates are indicated by “p.” - and the amount of guanine akvays equals the
Note that this is not the same molecule as 3" amount of cytosine. These findings are com-

that represented by the reverse sequence: monly referred to as ChargafPs rules:

5’ pTpApCpCpTpG—OH 3’ FIGURE 14.8 1. The proportion of A always equals

A phosphodiester bond. that of T, and the proportion of G

Levene’s early studies indicated that all
four types of DNA nucleotides were present
in roughly equal amounts. This result,
which later proved to be erroneous, led to
the mistaken idea that DNA was a simple polymer in
which the four nucleotides merely repeated (for instance,
GCAT...GCAT. GCAT. ..GCAT.. )). If the
sequence never varied, it was difficult to see how DNA
might contain the hereditary information; this was why
Avery’s conclusion that DNA is the transforming princi-
ple was not readily accepted at first. It seemed more plau-
sible that DNA was simply a structural element of the
chromosomes, with proteins playing the central genetic
role.

 

always equals that of C:
A=T,andG=C.
2. It follows that there is always an

equal proportion of purines (A and

G) and pyrimidines (C and T).

 

A single strand of DNA or RNA consists of a series of
nucleotides joined together in a long chain. In all
natural double-stranded DNA molecules, the
proportion of A equals that of T, and the proportion of
G equals that of C.

 

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 285
