660 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

Gaussian
/ surface

  
     

Field line

Figure 23-1 Electric field vectors and field
lines pierce an imaginary, spherical
Gaussian surface that encloses a particle
with charge +Q.

 

Figure 23-2 Now the enclosed particle has
charge +20.

 

Figure 23-3 Can you tell what the enclosed
charge is now?

Figure 23-4 (a) An electric field vector pierces
a small square patch on a flat surface. (b)
Only the x component actually pierces the
patch; the y component skims across it. (c)
The area vector of the patch is perpendicu-
lar to the patch, with a magnitude equal to
the patch’s area.

electric field that allows us, in certain symmetric situations, to find the electric
field of an extended charged object with a few lines of algebra. The relationship is
called Gauss’ law, which was developed by German mathematician and physicist
Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855).

Let’s first take a quick look at some simple examples that give the spirit of
Gauss’ law. Figure 23-1 shows a particle with charge +Q that is surrounded by an
imaginary concentric sphere. At points on the sphere (said to be a Gaussian surface),
the electric field vectors have a moderate magnitude (given by E = kQ/r’) and point
radially away from the particle (because it is positively charged). The electric field
lines are also outward and have a moderate density (which, recall, is related to the
field magnitude). We say that the field vectors and the field lines pierce the surface.

Figure 23-2 is similar except that the enclosed particle has charge +2Q.
Because the enclosed charge is now twice as much, the magnitude of the field
vectors piercing outward through the (same) Gaussian surface is twice as much
as in Fig. 23-1, and the density of the field lines is also twice as much. That sen-
tence, in a nutshell, is Gauss’ law.

oO Guass’ law relates the electric field at points on a (closed) Gaussian surface to the
net charge enclosed by that surface.

Let’s check this with a third example with a particle that is also enclosed by the
same spherical Gaussian surface (a Gaussian sphere, if you like, or even the catchy
G-sphere) as shown in Fig. 23-3. What is the amount and sign of the enclosed
charge? Well, from the inward piercing we see immediately that the charge must be
negative. From the fact that the density of field lines is half that of Fig. 23-1, we also
see that the charge must be 0.5Q. (Using Gauss’ law is like being able to tell what is
inside a gift box by looking at the wrapping paper on the box.)

The problems in this chapter are of two types. Sometimes we know the
charge and we use Gauss’ law to find the field at some point. Sometimes we know
the field on a Gaussian surface and we use Gauss’ law to find the charge enclosed
by the surface. However, we cannot do all this by simply comparing the density of
field lines in a drawing as we just did. We need a quantitative way of determining
how much electric field pierces a surface. That measure is called the electric flux.

Electric Flux

Flat Surface, Uniform Field. We begin with a flat surface with area A in a uni-
form electric field E. Figure 23-4a shows one of the electric field vectors E pierc-
ing a small square patch with area AA (where A indicates “small”). Actually, only
the x component (with magnitude E, = E cos @ in Fig. 23-4b) pierces the patch.
The y component merely skims along the surface (no piercing in that) and does
not come into play in Gauss’ law. The amount of electric field piercing the patch is
defined to be the electric flux A® through it:

A® = (E cos 0) AA.

 

sy E
ya . pot «
AA
‘A
(a) (6) (
