690 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

24-2 EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES AND THE ELECTRIC FIELD

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

24.09 Identify an equipotential surface and describe how it is
related to the direction of the associated electric field.

24.10 Given an electric field as a function of position, calcu-
late the change in potential AV from an initial point to a
final point by choosing a path between the points and
integrating the dot product of the field E anda length
element ds’ along the path.

Key Ideas

@ The points on an equipotential surface all have the same
electric potential. The work done on a test charge in moving it
from one such surface to another is independent of the loca-
tions of the initial and final points on these surfaces and of the
path that joins the points. The electric field E is always directed
perpendicularly to corresponding equipotential surfaces.

@ The electric potential difference between two points i and fis
fo.
V-V=- [ E «ds,
i

where the integral is taken over any path connecting the
points. If the integration is difficult along any particular path,

24.11 Fora uniform electric field, relate the field magnitude
E and the separation Ax and potential difference AV
between adjacent equipotential lines.

24.12 Given a graph of electric field E versus position along
an axis, calculate the change in potential AV from an initial
point to a final point by graphical integration.

24.13 Explain the use of a zero-potential location.

we can choose a different path along which the integration
might be easier.

@ If we choose V; = 0, we have, for the potential at a particu-
lar point,

ve-[B-ae

@ In auniform field of magnitude E, the change in potential
from a higher equipotential surface to a lower one, separated
by distance Ax, is

AV=—E Ax.

Equipotential Surfaces

Adjacent points that have the same electric potential form an equipotential
surface, which can be either an imaginary surface or a real, physical surface. No
net work W is done on a charged particle by an electric field when the particle
moves between two points i and f on the same equipotential surface. This follows
from Eq. 24-6, which tells us that W must be zero if V;= V;. Because of the path
independence of work (and thus of potential energy and potential), W = 0 for
any path connecting points i and fon a given equipotential surface regardless of
whether that path lies entirely on that surface.

Figure 24-4 shows a family of equipotential surfaces associated with the elec-
tric field due to some distribution of charges. The work done by the electric field
on a charged particle as the particle moves from one end to the other of paths

 

Equal work is done along
these paths between the
same surfaces.

No work is done along

this path on an
equipotential su

Figure 24-4 Portions of four equipotential
surfaces at electric potentials V; = 100 V,
V> = 80 V, V; = 60 V, and V, = 40 V. Four
paths along which a test charge may move
are shown. Two electric field lines are also
indicated.

 

No work is done along this path
that returns to the same surface.

Be

ee

  
