708 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

involves only the motion of the particle through a potential
difference:

Wapp = QAV. (for K;= K;). (24-12)
Equipotential Surfaces The points on an equipotential sur-
face all have the same electric potential. The work done on a test
charge in moving it from one such surface to another is independent
of the locations of the initial and final points on these surfaces and of
the path that joins the points. The electric field E is always directed
perpendicularly to corresponding equipotential surfaces.

Finding V from E The electric potential difference between
two points i and fis
fi

y-v=-[ Boas. (24-18)
where the integral is taken over any path connecting the points. If the
integration is difficult along any particular path, we can choose a differ-
ent path along which the integration might be easier. If we choose V; =
0, we have, for the potential at a particular point,

ds. (24-19)

 

In the special case of a uniform field of magnitude E, the po-
tential change between two adjacent (parallel) equipotential lines
separated by distance Av is

AV = —E Ax. (24-21)

Potential Due to a Charged Particle The electric potential

due toa single charged particle at a distance r from that particle is
Lia (24-26)

4me) rv

 

where V has the same sign as g. The potential due to a collection of
charged particles is

v=Su-Z

A Are9

 

(24-27)

 

Potential Due to an Electric Dipole At a distance r from
an electric dipole with dipole moment magnitude p = qd, the elec-
tric potential of the dipole is

<Questions

1 Figure 24-24 shows eight parti-
cles that form a square, with dis-
tance d between adjacent particles.
What is the net electric potential at
point P at the center of the square
if we take the electric potential to
be zero at infinity?

2 Figure 24-25 shows three sets of
cross sections of equipotential sur-
faces in uniform electric fields; all
three cover the same size region of ~4 —2q
space. The electric potential is indi- Figure 24-24 Question 1.

 

+4q

1 pcosé
tm Pp

4m)

 

 

(24-30)
for r > d; the angle @ is defined in Fig. 24-13.

Potential Due to a Continuous Charge Distribution
For a continuous distribution of charge, Eq. 24-27 becomes

fl
dre, J or?

in which the integral is taken over the entire distribution.

 

(24-32)

Calculating E from V The component of E in any direction
is the negative of the rate at which the potential changes with dis-
tance in that direction:

E,=-—. (24-40)

(24-41)

  

E=-s,

where s is perpendicular to the equipotential surfaces.

(24-42)

Electric Potential Energy of a System of Charged
Particles The electric potential energy of a system of charged
particles is equal to the work needed to assemble the system with
the particles initially at rest and infinitely distant from each other.
For two particles at separation r,

 

vew-—b ah,
4mey 1

(24-46)
Potential of a Charged Conductor An excess charge placed
on a conductor will, in the equilibrium state, be located entirely on
the outer surface of the conductor. The charge will distribute itself so
that the following occur: (1) The entire conductor, including interior
points, is at a uniform potential. (2) At every internal point, the elec-
tric field due to the charge cancels the external electric field that oth-
erwise would have been there. (3) The net electric field at every
point on the surface is perpendicular to the surface.

cated for each equipotential surface. (a) Rank the arrangements
according to the magnitude of the electric field present in the re-
gion, greatest first. (b) In which is the electric field directed down
the page?

 

Figure 24-25 Question 2.
