668 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

23-3 A CHARGED ISOLATED CONDUCTOR

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to. . .

23.14 Apply the relationship between surface charge density
oand the area over which the charge is uniformly spread.

23.15 Identify that if excess charge (positive or negative) is
placed on an isolated conductor, that charge moves to the
surface and none is in the interior.

23.16 Identify the value of the electric field inside an isolated
conductor.

23.17 For a conductor with a cavity that contains a charged

Key Ideas
@ An excess charge on an isolated conductor is located
entirely on the outer surface of the conductor.

@ The internal electric field of a charged, isolated conductor
is zero, and the external field (at nearby points) is perpendicu-

object, determine the charge on the cavity wall and on the
extemal surface.

23.18 Explain how Gauss’ law is used to find the electric field
magnitude E near an isolated conducting surface with a
uniform surface charge density a.

23.19 For a uniformly charged conducting surface, apply the
relationship between the charge density a and the electric
field magnitude E at points near the conductor, and iden-
tify the direction of the field vectors.

lar to the surface and has a magnitude that depends on the
surface charge density a:

Copper
surface
Gaussian
surface

(a)

Gaussian
surface

Copper

surface

(5)
Figure 23-11 (a) A lump of copper with a
charge q hangs from an insulating thread.
A Gaussian surface is placed within the
metal, just inside the actual surface. (b) The
lump of copper now has a cavity within it.
A Gaussian surface lies within the metal,
close to the cavity surface.

A Charged Isolated Conductor

Gauss’ law permits us to prove an important theorem about conductors:

Oo If an excess charge is placed on an isolated conductor, that amount of charge will
move entirely to the surface of the conductor. None of the excess charge will be
found within the body of the conductor.

This might seem reasonable, considering that charges with the same sign repel
one another. You might imagine that, by moving to the surface, the added charges
are getting as far away from one another as they can. We turn to Gauss’ law for
verification of this speculation.

Figure 23-11a shows, in cross section, an isolated lump of copper hanging
from an insulating thread and having an excess charge qg. We place a Gaussian
surface just inside the actual surface of the conductor.

The electric field inside this conductor must be zero. If this were not so, the
field would exert forces on the conduction (free) electrons, which are always
present in a conductor, and thus current would always exist within a conductor.
(That is, charge would flow from place to place within the conductor.) Of
course, there is no such perpetual current in an isolated conductor, and so the
internal electric field is zero.

(An internal electric field does appear as a conductor is being charged.
However, the added charge quickly distributes itself in such a way that the net
internal electric field—the vector sum of the electric fields due to all the
charges, both inside and outside —is zero. The movement of charge then ceases,
because the net force on each charge is zero; the charges are then in electro-
static equilibrium.)

If E is zero everywhere inside our copper conductor, it must be zero for all
points on the Gaussian surface because that surface, though close to the surface
of the conductor, is definitely inside the conductor. This means that the flux
through the Gaussian surface must be zero. Gauss’ law then tells us that the net
charge inside the Gaussian surface must also be zero. Then because the excess
charge is not inside the Gaussian surface, it must be outside that surface, which
means it must lie on the actual surface of the conductor.
