24-2 EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES AND THE ELECTRIC FIELD

693

Sample Problem 24.02 Finding the potential change from the electric field

(a) Figure 24-8a shows two points i and f in a uniform elec-
tric field E. The points lie on the same electric field line (not
shown) and are separated by a distance d. Find the potential
difference V;— V; by moving a positive test charge qo from
i to f along the path shown, which is parallel to the field
direction.

KEY IDEA

‘We can find the potential difference between any two points
in an electric field by integrating E-dx along a path con-
necting those two points according to Eq. 24-18.
Calculations: We have actually already done the calculation
for such a path in the direction of an electric field line in a
uniform field when we derived Eq. 24-21. With slight changes in
notation, Eq.24-21 gives us

V,— V; = —Ed. (Answer)

(b) Now find the potential difference V;— V; by moving the
positive test charge qo from i to f along the path icf shown in
Fig. 24-8).

Calculations: The Key Idea of (a) applies here too, except
now we move the test charge along a path that consists of
two lines: ic and cf. At all points along line ic, the displace-

The electric field points from
higher potential to lower potential.

WT |
d d
ni Y

Lower potential

 

 

(a)

ment d¥ of the test charge is perpendicular to E. Thus, the
angle @ between E and ds" is 90°, and the dot product E-ds"
is 0. Equation 24-18 then tells us that points i and c are at the
same potential: V. — V; = 0. Ah, we should have seen this
coming. The points are on the same equipotential surface,
which is perpendicular to the electric field lines.

For line cf we have @ = 45° and, from Eq. 24-18,

f f
V,-Vj= -{ E-ds = -f E(cos 45°) ds
c lc

f
= —E(cos 459 [ ds.
lc

The integral in this equation is just the length of line cf;
from Fig. 24-8), that length is d/cos 45°. Thus,

d
cos 45°

 

V; — V; = —E(cos 45°) = —Ed. (Answer)
This is the same result we obtained in (a), as it must be;
the potential difference between two points does not de-
pend on the path connecting them. Moral: When you
want to find the potential difference between two points
by moving a test charge between them, you can save time
and work by choosing a path that simplifies the use of
Eq. 24-18.

The field is perpendicular to this ic path,
so there is no change in the potential.

  
 

The field has a component
along this cf path, so there
is a change in the potential.

I |

()

Figure 24-8 (a) A test charge gy moves in a straight line from point i to point f, along the
direction of a uniform external electric field. (b) Charge qy moves along path icf in the same

electric field.

AWILEY

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 
