648 CHAPTER 22 ELECTRIC FIELDS

Positive side

   

Negative side

Figure 22-20 A molecule of H,O, showing the
three nuclei (represented by dots) and the
regions in which the electrons can be lo-
cated. The electric dipole moment jp’ points
from the (negative) oxygen side to the (pos-
itive) hydrogen side of the molecule.

A Dipole in an Electric Field

We have defined the electric dipole moment P of an electric dipole to be a vector that
points from the negative to the positive end of the dipole. As you will see, the behavior
of a dipole in a uniform external electric field E can be described completely in terms
of the two vectors E and P,with no need of any details about the dipole’s structure.

A molecule of water (H,O) is an electric dipole; Fig. 22-20 shows why. There
the black dots represent the oxygen nucleus (having eight protons) and the two
hydrogen nuclei (having one proton each). The colored enclosed areas represent
the regions in which electrons can be located around the nuclei.

In a water molecule, the two hydrogen atoms and the oxygen atom do not
lie on a straight line but form an angle of about 105°, as shown in Fig. 22-20. As
a result, the molecule has a definite “oxygen side” and “hydrogen side.”
Moreover, the 10 electrons of the molecule tend to remain closer to the oxygen
nucleus than to the hydrogen nuclei. This makes the oxygen side of the molecule
slightly more negative than the hydrogen side and creates an electric dipole
moment p that points along the symmetry axis of the molecule as shown.
If the water molecule is placed in an external electric field, it behaves as would be
expected of the more abstract electric dipole of Fig. 22-9.

To examine this behavior, we now consider such an abstract dipole in a uniform
external electric field E, as shown in Fig. 22-21a. We assume that the dipole is a rigid
structure that consists of two centers of opposite charge, each of magnitude q,sepa-
rated by a distance d. The dipole moment p' makes an angle @with field E.

Electrostatic forces act on the charged ends of the dipole. Because the
electric field is uniform, those forces act in opposite directions (as shown in
Fig. 22-21a) and with the same magnitude F = qE. Thus, because the field is
uniform, the net force on the dipole from the field is zero and the center of mass
of the dipole does not move. However, the forces on the charged ends do produce
a net torque 7 on the dipole about its center of mass. The center of mass lies on
the line connecting the charged ends, at some distance x from one end and thus
a distance d — x from the other end. From Eq. 10-39 (r= rF sin #), we can write
the magnitude of the net torque 7” as

7= Fxsin 0 + F(d — x) sin 0 = Fdsin 0. (22-32)
We can also write the magnitude of 7 in terms of the magnitudes of the elec-

tric field E and the dipole moment p = qd. To do so, we substitute gE for F and
piq for din Eq. 22-32, finding that the magnitude of 7 is

7= pEsin 0. (22-33)

We can generalize this equation to vector form as
7 =p XE (torque onadipole). (22-34)

Vectors f” and E are shown in Fig. 22-21. The torque acting on a dipole tends to
rotate p’ (hence the dipole) into the direction of field E, thereby reducing @. In
Fig. 22-21, such rotation is clockwise. As we discussed in Chapter 10, we can rep-
resent a torque that gives rise to a clockwise rotation by including a minus sign
with the magnitude of the torque. With that notation, the torque of Fig. 22-21 is

7= —pEsin 6. (22-35)
Potential Energy of an Electric Dipole

Potential energy can be associated with the orientation of an electric dipole in
an electric field. The dipole has its least potential energy when it is in its equi-
librium orientation, which is when its moment p’ is lined up with the field E
(then 7 = p X E = 0). It has greater potential energy in all other orientations.
Thus the dipole is like a pendulum, which has its least gravitational potential
