23-3 A CHARGED ISOLATED CONDUCTOR 669

An Isolated Conductor with a Cavity

Figure 23-11b shows the same hanging conductor, but now with a cavity that is
totally within the conductor. It is perhaps reasonable to suppose that when we
scoop out the electrically neutral material to form the cavity, we do not change the
distribution of charge or the pattern of the electric field that exists in Fig. 23-1la.
Again, we must turn to Gauss’ law for a quantitative proof.

‘We draw a Gaussian surface surrounding the cavity, close to its surface but in-
side the conducting body. Because E' = 0 inside the conductor, there can be no flux
through this new Gaussian surface. Therefore, from Gauss’ law, that surface can en-
close no net charge. We conclude that there is no net charge on the cavity walls; all
the excess charge remains on the outer surface of the conductor, as in Fig. 23-11a.

The Conductor Removed

Suppose that, by some magic, the excess charges could be “frozen” into position
on the conductor’s surface, perhaps by embedding them in a thin plastic coating,
and suppose that then the conductor could be removed completely. This is
equivalent to enlarging the cavity of Fig. 23-11b until it consumes the entire con-
ductor, leaving only the charges. The electric field would not change at all; it
would remain zero inside the thin shell of charge and would remain unchanged
for all external points. This shows us that the electric field is set up by the charges
and not by the conductor. The conductor simply provides an initial pathway for
the charges to take up their positions.

The External Electric Field

You have seen that the excess charge on an isolated conductor moves entirely to
the conductor’s surface. However, unless the conductor is spherical, the charge
does not distribute itself uniformly. Put another way, the surface charge density 7
(charge per unit area) varies over the surface of any nonspherical conductor.
Generally, this variation makes the determination of the electric field set up by
the surface charges very difficult.

However, the electric field just outside the surface of a conductor is easy to
determine using Gauss’ law. To do this, we consider a section of the surface that
is small enough to permit us to neglect any curvature and thus to take the section
to be flat. We then imagine a tiny cylindrical Gaussian surface to be partially em-
bedded in the section as shown in Fig. 23-12: One end cap is fully inside the con-
ductor, the other is fully outside, and the cylinder is perpendicular to the conduc-
tor’s surface.

The electric field E at and just outside the conductor’s surface must also be
perpendicular to that surface. If it were not, then it would have a component
along the conductor’s surface that would exert forces on the surface charges,
causing them to move. However, such motion would violate our implicit as-
sumption that we are dealing with electrostatic equilibrium. Therefore, Eis per-
pendicular to the conductor’s surface.

‘We now sum the flux through the Gaussian surface. There is no flux through
the internal end cap, because the electric field within the conductor is zero. There
is no flux through the curved surface of the cylinder, because internally (in the
conductor) there is no electric field and externally the electric field is parallel to
the curved portion of the Gaussian surface. The only flux through the Gaussian
surface is that through the external end cap, where E is perpendicular to the
plane of the cap. We assume that the cap area A is small enough that the field
magnitude E is constant over the cap. Then the flux through the cap is EA, and
that is the net flux © through the Gaussian surface.

The charge ¢.,, enclosed by the Gaussian surface lies on the conductor’s sur-
face in an area A. (Think of the cylinder as a cookie cutter.) If wis the charge per
unit area, then dep, is equal to aA. When we substitute aA for q.,, and EA for ®,

     

There is flux only
(a) through the
external end face.

 

(b)

Figure 23-12 (a) Perspective view and (b) side
view of a tiny portion of a large, isolated
conductor with excess positive charge on its
surface. A (closed) cylindrical Gaussian
surface, embedded perpendicularly in the
conductor, encloses some of the charge.
Electric field lines pierce the external end
cap of the cylinder, but not the internal end
cap. The external end cap has area A and
area vector A.
