24-2 EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES AND THE ELECTRIC FIELD

I and II is zero because each of these paths begins and ends on the same
equipotential surface and thus there is no net change in potential. The work
done as the charged particle moves from one end to the other of paths III and
IV is not zero but has the same value for both these paths because the initial
and final potentials are identical for the two paths; that is, paths III and IV
connect the same pair of equipotential surfaces.

From symmetry, the equipotential surfaces produced by a charged particle or
a spherically symmetrical charge distribution are a family of concentric spheres.
For a uniform electric field, the surfaces are a family of planes perpendicular to
the field lines. In fact, equipotential surfaces are always perpendicular to electric
field lines and thus to E, which is always tangent to these lines. If E were not per-
pendicular to an equipotential surface, it would have a component lying along
that surface. This component would then do work on a charged particle as it
moved along the surface. However, by Eq. 24-6 work cannot be done if the
surface is truly an equipotential surface; the only possible conclusion is that E
must be everywhere perpendicular to the surface. Figure 24-5 shows electric field
lines and cross sections of the equipotential surfaces for a uniform electric field
and for the field associated with a charged particle and with an electric dipole.

Calculating the Potential from the Field

We can calculate the potential difference between any two points i and fin an
electric field if we know the electric field vector E all along any path connecting
those points. To make the calculation, we find the work done on a positive test
charge by the field as the charge moves from i to f,and then use Eq. 24-6.

Consider an arbitrary electric field, represented by the field lines in Fig. 24-6,
and a positive test charge qo that moves along the path shown from point i to
point f At any point on the path, an electric force HE acts on the charge as it
moves through a differential displacement ds’. From Chapter 7, we know that the
differential work dW done on a particle by a force F during a displacement ds" is
given by the dot product of the force and the displacement:

dW = F-ds. (24-15)
For the situation of Fig. 24-6, F= HE and Eq. 24-15 becomes
dW = qE-ds. (24-16)

To find the total work W done on the particle by the field as the particle moves
from point i to point f, we sum —via integration—the differential works done on
the charge as it moves through all the displacements dS’ along the path:

i
W= wf Eds. (24-17)
i
If we substitute the total work W from Eq. 24-17 into Eq. 24-6, we find
a
=-| E-ds. (24-18)
i
Path Field line

Figure 24-6 A test charge gy moves from point i
to point falong the path shown in a nonuni-
form electric field. During a displacement 3",
an electric force qyE acts on the test charge.
This force points in the direction of the field
line at the location of the test charge.

 

(a)

(d)

(

691

Equipotential surface
J Field line
\ / '

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 24-5 Electric field lines (purple) and

cross sections of equipotential surfaces

(gold) for (a) a uniform electric field,
(b) the field due to a charged particle,
and (c) the field due to an electric dipole.
