 

618

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure here shows three arrangements of an electron e and two

CHAPTER 21 COULOMB’S LAW

 

protons p. (a) Rank the arrangements according to the magnitude of the ce a coe ae

net electrostatic force on the electron due to the protons,largestfirst(b)In © P PP © P

situation c, is the angle between the net force on the electron and the line Ee

labeled d less than or more than 45° @ © @
Sample Problem 21.02 Equilibrium of two forces on a particle Pushed away from qj,

ulled toward qo.
Figure 21-8a shows two particles fixed in place: a particle of } } P 42
charge gq, = +8q at the origin and a particle of charge g, = —2q rn ®
at x = L. At what point (other than infinitely far away) can a x
L—I

proton be placed so that it is in equilibrium (the net force on it is
zero)? Is that equilibrium stable or unstable? (That is, if the pro-
ton is displaced, do the forces drive it back to the point of equi-
librium or drive it farther away?)

KEY IDEA

 

If Fis the force on the proton due to charge q, and F) is the
force on the proton due to charge q>, then the point we seek is
where F, ae Fy = 0.Thus,

ie (21-8)
This tells us that at the point we seek, the forces acting on
the proton due to the other two particles must be of equal
magnitudes,

F, =F,

and that the forces must have opposite directions.

(21-9)

Reasoning: Because a proton has a positive charge, the pro-
ton and the particle of charge q, are of the same sign, and
force F, on the proton must point away from q. Also, the
proton and the particle of charge q> are of opposite signs, so
force F, on the proton must point toward q>. “Away from q,”
and “toward q,” can be in opposite directions only if the pro-
ton is located on the x axis.

If the proton is on the x axis at any point between q, and
q, Such as point P in Fig. 21-8), then F, and F, are in the
same direction and not in opposite directions as required.
If the proton is at any point on the x axis to the left of q,
such as point S in Fig. 21-8c, then F, and F, are in opposite
directions. However, Eq. 21-4 tells us that F, and F, can-
not have equal magnitudes there: F, must be greater than Fo,
because F; is produced by a closer charge (with lesser r) of
greater magnitude (8q versus 2q).

Finally, if the proton is at any point on the x axis to the
right of gp, such as point R in Fig, 21-8d, then F, and F, are
again in opposite directions. However, because now the
charge of greater magnitude (q;) is farther away from the pro-
ton than the charge of lesser magnitude, there is a point at
which F; is equal to F). Let x be the coordinate of this point,
and let , be the charge of the proton.

WILEY

 

 

(a) (2) The forces cannot cancel

(same direction).

    

BR

®

  

(0 The forces cannot cancel ‘”)
(one is definitely larger).

The forces can cancel,
at the right distance.

Figure 21-8 (a) Two particles of charges q, and qare fixed in place on
an x axis, with separation L.. (b)—(d) Three possible locations P, S,
and R for a proton. At each location, F, is the force on the proton
from particle 1 and F) is the force on the proton from particle 2.

Calculations: With Eq.21-4, we can now rewrite Eq.21-9:

1 8495 _ iil 244p

— Amey (x — LP"
(Note that only the charge magnitudes appear in Eq.
21-10. We already decided about the directions of the forces
in drawing Fig. 21-8d and do not want to include any posi-
tive or negative signs here.) Rearranging Eq. 21-10 gives us

(Aya

x 4
After taking the square roots of both sides, we find
teal 1

 

 

 

(21-10)

2
Ame) x

 

x 2

and ere (Answer)

The equilibrium at x = 2Z is unstable; that is, if the proton is
displaced leftward from point R, then F; and F, both increase
but F, increases more (because q) is closer than q;), and a net
force will drive the proton farther leftward. If the proton is dis-
placed rightward, both F, and F, decrease but F, decreases
more, and a net force will then drive the proton farther right-
ward. Ina stable equilibrium, if the proton is displaced slightly, it
returns to the equilibrium position.

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
