    

  

Water Stable

Unstable hydrogen bonds molecules hydrogen bonds
(a) Liquid water (b) Ice
FIGURE 2.16

The role of hydrogen bonds in an ice crystal. (a) In liquid
water, hydrogen bonds are not stable and constantly break and re-
form. (6) When water cools below 0°C, the hydrogen bonds are
more stable, and a regular crystalline structure forms in which the
four partial charges of one water molecule interact with the
opposite charges of other water molecules. Because water forms a
crystal latticework, ice is less dense than liquid water and floats. If
it did not, inland bodies of water far from the earth’s equator
might never fully thaw.

Water Is a Powerful Solvent

Water is an effective solvent because of its ability to form
hydrogen bonds. Water molecules gather closely around
any substance that bears an electrical charge, whether that
substance carries a full charge (ion) or a charge separation
(polar molecule). For example, sucrose (table sugar) is
composed of molecules that contain slightly polar hydroxyl
(OH) groups. A sugar crystal dissolves rapidly in water be-
cause water molecules can form hydrogen bonds with indi-
vidual hydroxyl groups of the sucrose molecules. There-
fore, sucrose is said to be soluble in water. Every time a
sucrose molecule dissociates or breaks away from the crys-
tal, water molecules surround it in a cloud, forming a hy-
dration shell and preventing it from associating with oth-
er sucrose molecules. Hydration shells also form around
ions such as Na* and Cl (figure 2.17).

Water Organizes Nonpolar Molecules

Water molecules always tend to form the maximum possi-
ble number of hydrogen bonds. When nonpolar molecules
such as oils, which do not form hydrogen bonds, are placed

Hydration shells

    

Water
molecules

FIGURE 2.17

Why salt dissolves in water. When a crystal of table salt dissolves
in water, individual Na* and Cl- ions break away from the salt
lattice and become surrounded by water molecules. Water
molecules orient around Cl- ions so that their partial positive poles
face toward the negative Cl ion; water molecules surrounding Na*
ions orient in the opposite way, with their partial negative poles
facing the positive Nat ion. Surrounded by hydration shells, Na*
and Cl- ions never reenter the salt lattice.

in water, the water molecules act to exclude them. The
nonpolar molecules are forced into association with one an-
other, thus minimizing their disruption of the hydrogen
bonding of water. In effect, they shrink from contact with
water and for this reason they are referred to as hydropho-
bic (Greek hydros, “water” and phobos, “fearing”). In con-
trast, polar molecules, which readily form hydrogen bonds
with water, are said to be hydrophilic (“water-loving”).

The tendency of nonpolar molecules to aggregate in wa-
ter is known as hydrophobic exclusion. By forcing the hy-
drophobic portions of molecules together, water causes
these molecules to assume particular shapes. Different mo-
lecular shapes have evolved by alteration of the location
and strength of nonpolar regions. As you will see, much of
the evolution of life reflects changes in molecular shape
that can be induced in just this way.

 

Water molecules, which are very polar, cling to one
another, so that it takes considerable energy to separate
them. Water also clings to other polar molecules,
causing them to be soluble in water solution, but water
tends to exclude nonpolar molecules.

 

Chapter 2. The Nature of Molecules 31
