REVIEW & SUMMARY 7O7

Figure 24-21b shows the variation of electric field with radial distance for the
same shell. Note that E = 0 everywhere inside the shell. The curves of Fig. 24-21b
can be derived from the curve of Fig. 24-21a by differentiating with respect to r,
using Eq. 24-40 (recall that the derivative of any constant is zero). The curve of
Fig. 24-21a can be derived from the curves of Fig. 24-21b by integrating with
respect to r, using Eq. 24-19.

Spark Discharge from a Charged Conductor

On nonspherical conductors, a surface charge does not distribute itself uniformly
over the surface of the conductor. At sharp points or sharp edges, the surface
charge density—and thus the external electric field, which is proportional to it—
may reach very high values. The air around such sharp points or edges may
become ionized, producing the corona discharge that golfers and mountaineers
see on the tips of bushes, golf clubs, and rock hammers when thunderstorms
threaten. Such corona discharges, like hair that stands on end, are often the
precursors of lightning strikes. In such circumstances, it is wise to enclose yourself
in a cavity inside a conducting shell, where the electric field is guaranteed to
be zero. A car (unless it is a convertible or made with a plastic body) is almost

 

Courtesy Westinghouse Electric Corporation

ideal (Fig. 24-22). <== s“Figure 24-22 A large spark jumps toa car’s
body and then exits by moving across the
Isolated Conductor in an External Electric Field insulating left front tire (note the flash

there), | the rson inside unharmed.
If an isolated conductor is placed in an external electric field, as in Fig. 24-23, all ere). leaving the person inside unharme

points of the conductor still come to a single potential regardless of whether the

conductor has an excess charge. The free conduction electrons distribute them-

selves on the surface in such a way that the electric field they produce at interior

points cancels the external electric field that would otherwise be there.

Furthermore, the electron distribution causes the net electric field at all points on SOO
the surface to be perpendicular to the surface. If the conductor in Fig.24-23 could ——
be somehow removed, leaving the surface charges frozen in place, the internal —————
and external electric field would remain absolutely unchanged.

 

Figure 24-23 An uncharged conductor is suspended in an external electric field. The free

electrons in the conductor distribute themselves on the surface as shown, so as to reduce =

the net electric field inside the conductor to zero and make the net field at the surface Se
=

perpendicular to the surface.

Review & Summary

Electric Potential The electric potential V at a point Pin the _If the particle moves through a potential difference AV, the change

 

 

electric field of a charged object is in the electric potential energy is
-w. _U = qAV=4q(V;-V)).
ve vu (042) AU=qAV=4q(V;-V) (24-4)
%

Mechanical Energy If a particle moves through a change AV

where W. is the work that would be done by the electric force ona _in electric potential without an applied force acting on it, applying,

positive test charge were it brought from an infinite distance to P, __ the conservation of mechanical energy gives the change in kinetic

i rs re i energy as

and Uis the potential energy that would then be stored in the test BY AK = —q AV. (24-9)

charge-object system.
If, instead, an applied force acts on the particle, doing work Wap»,

Electric Potential Energy If a particle with charge q is __ the change inkinetic energy is

placed at a point where the electric potential of a charged object is

V, the electric potential energy U of the particle-object system is AK= —qAV+W,

app"

(24-11)

U=q. (24-3) In the special case when AK = 0, the work of an applied force
