686 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

h h

Figure 24-1 Particle 1 is located at point P in
the electric field of particle 2.

 
  
  

Test charge 4
at point P

object
(a)
The rod sets up an
electric potential,
which determines
the potential energy.

 
 
 
 

Electric potential
Vat point P

(4)
Figure 24-2 (a) A test charge has been
brought in from infinity to point P in the
electric field of the rod. (b) We define an
electric potential V at P based on the

potential energy of the configuration in (a).

apply the principle of the conservation of mechanical energy to closed systems
involving the force. This extremely powerful principle allows us to calculate the
results of experiments for which force calculations alone would be very difficult.
Experimentally, physicists and engineers discovered that the electric force is
conservative and thus has an associated electric potential energy. In this chapter
we first define this type of potential energy and then putit to use.

For a quick taste, let’s return to the situation we considered in Chapter 22:
In Figure 24-1, particle 1 with positive charge qj, is located at point P near parti-
cle 2 with positive charge q). In Chapter 22 we explained how particle 2 is able
to push on particle 1 without any contact. To account for the force F (which is a
vector quantity), we defined an electric field E (also a vector quantity) that is
set up at P by particle 2. That field exists regardless of whether particle 1 is at P.
If we choose to place particle 1 there, the push on it is due to charge q; and that
pre-existing field E.

Here is a related problem. If we release particle 1 at P, it begins to move and
thus has kinetic energy. Energy cannot appear by magic, so from where does it
come? It comes from the electric potential energy U associated with the force be-
tween the two particles in the arrangement of Fig. 24-1.To account for the poten-
tial energy U (which is a scalar quantity), we define an electric potential V (also a
scalar quantity) that is set up at P by particle 2. The electric potential exists
regardless of whether particle | is at P. If we choose to place particle | there, the
potential energy of the two-particle system is then due to charge q, and that pre-
existing electric potential V.

Our goals in this chapter are to (1) define electric potential, (2) discuss how
to calculate it for various arrangements of charged particles and objects, and
(3) discuss how electric potential V is related to electric potential energy U.

Electric Potential and Electric Potential Energy

We are going to define the electric potential (or potential for short) in terms of
electric potential energy, so our first job is to figure out how to measure that po-
tential energy. Back in Chapter 8, we measured gravitational potential energy U
of an object by (1) assigning U = 0 for a reference configuration (such as the ob-
ject at table level) and (2) then calculating the work W the gravitational force
does if the object is moved up or down from that level. We then defined the po-
tential energy as being

U=—W (potential energy). (24-1)

Let’s follow the same procedure with our new conservative force, the electric
force. In Fig. 24-2a, we want to find the potential energy U associated with a posi-
tive test charge qo located at point P in the electric field of a charged rod. First, we
need a reference configuration for which U = 0. A reasonable choice is for the
test charge to be infinitely far from the rod, because then there is no interaction
with the rod. Next, we bring the test charge in from infinity to point P to form the
configuration of Fig. 24-2a. Along the way, we calculate the work done by the
electric force on the test charge. The potential energy of the final configuration is
then given by Eq. 24-1, where W is now the work done by the electric force. Let’s
use the notation W. to emphasize that the test charge is brought in from infinity.
The work and thus the potential energy can be positive or negative depending on
the sign of the rod’s charge.

Next, we define the electric potential V at P in terms of the work done by the
electric force and the resulting potential energy:

vu (electric potential). (24-2)
q

 
