Iv] Checkpoint 4

QUESTIONS 677

4 it
The figure shows two large, parallel, nonconducting sheets with identical (posi- el

tive) uniform surface charge densities, and a sphere with a uniform (positive)

volume charge density. Rank the four numbered points according to the magni- °2 33 @ “4

tude of the net electric field there, greatest first.

 

Review & Summary

Gauss’ Law Gauss’ law and Coulomb’s law are different ways
of describing the relation between charge and electric field in static
situations. Gauss’ law is

P= dene (Gauss’ law), (23-6)

in which qeqc is the net charge inside an imaginary closed surface (a

Gaussian surface) and © is the net flux of the electric field through
the surface:

o- $ Beda (clectric flux through a (23-4)

Gaussian surface).
Coulomb’s law can be derived from Gauss’ law.

Applications of Gauss’ Law Using Gauss’ law and, in some
cases, symmetry arguments, we can derive several important
results in electrostatic situations. Among these are:

1. An excess charge on an isolated conductor is located entirely on
the outer surface of the conductor.

2. The external electric field near the surface of a charged conductor
is perpendicular to the surface and has a magnitude that depends
on the surface charge density 7:

E=—2 (conducting surface). (23-11)
i)

Within the conductor, E = 0.
3. The electric field at any point due to an infinite line of charge

<Questions

1 A surface has the area vector A = (2i + 3j) m’. What is the
flux_of a uniform electric field through the area if the field is
(a) E = 4i N/Cand (b) E = 4k NIC?

2 Figure 23-22 shows, in cross section, three solid cylinders, each of
length L and uniform charge Q. Concentric with each cylinder is a
cylindrical Gaussian surface, with all three surfaces having the same
radius. Rank the Gaussian surfaces according to the electric field at
any point on the surface, greatest first.

Cylinder

Gaussian
surface

(a) (d) (o)
Figure 23-22 Question 2.

with uniform linear charge density A is perpendicular to the line
of charge and has magnitude

A
E = =— (line of charge), (23-12)
2mer
where ris the perpendicular distance from the line of charge to
the point.

4. The electric field due to an infinite nonconducting sheet with
uniform surface charge density o is perpendicular to the plane
of the sheet and has magnitude

=—2 (sheet of charge). (23-13)
2e

5. The electric field outside a spherical shell of charge with radius R
and total charge q is directed radially and has magnitude

1
E=——“ (pherical shell, forr = R). (23-15)
4m Pr

Here ris the distance from the center of the shell to the point at
which E is measured, (The charge behaves, for external points as if
it were all located at the center of the sphere.) The field inside a
uniform spherical shell of charge is exactly zero:
E=0 (spherical shell, for r < R). (23-16)
6. The electric field inside a uniform sphere of charge is directed
radially and has magnitude

_(_4 _
E= Ge )r (23-20)

 

3 Figure 23-23 shows, in cross section, a central metal ball, two
spherical metal shells, and three spherical Gaussian surfaces of radii
R, 2R, and 3R, all with the same center. The uniform charges on the
three objects are: ball, Q; smaller shell,3Q; larger shell, 5Q. Rank the
Gaussian surfaces according to the magnitude of the electric field at
any point on the surface, greatest first.

Figure 23-23 Question 3. surface

 

 
