692 CHAPTER 24 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

Iv] Checkpoint 2

The figure here shows a family of parallel equipotential surfaces (in cross section) and
five paths along which we shall move an electron from one surface to another. (a)
What is the direction of the electric field associated with the surfaces? (b) For each
path, is the work we do positive, negative, or zero? (c) Rank the paths according to the

work we do, greatest first.

i Path r
y fo iy x

—o————\> +1
Figure 24-7 We move between 4 | Field line
points i and f, between adja- Higher ' H

cent equipotential lines in a potential IN Lower

 

uniform electric field E,
parallel to a field line.

Ax =| > potential

 

Thus, the potential difference V; — V; between any two points i and fin an electric
field is equal to the negative of the line integral (meaning the integral along a
particular path) of E-d¥ from i to f. However, because the electric force is con-
servative, all paths (whether easy or difficult to use) yield the same result.

Equation 24-18 allows us to calculate the difference in potential between any
two points in the field. If we set potential V; = 0, then Eq. 24-18 becomes

V= -| Fas (24-19)

in which we have dropped the subscript f on V;. Equation 24-19 gives us the
potential V at any point fin the electric field relative to the zero potential at point i.
If we let point i be at infinity, then Eq. 24-19 gives us the potential V at any point f
relative to the zero potential at infinity.

Uniform Field. Let’s apply Eq. 24-18 for a uniform field as shown in
Fig. 24-7. We start at point i on an equipotential line with potential V; and move to
point fon an equipotential line with a lower potential Vj. The separation between
the two equipotential lines is Av. Let’s also move along a path that is parallel to the
electric field E (and thus perpendicular to the equipotential lines). The angle be-
tween E and d¥ in Eq. 24-18 is zero, and the dot product gives us

E- ds’ = E ds cos0 = Eds.

Because E is constant for a uniform field, Eq. 24-18 becomes
f
V,;-Vj=—-E [ ds. (24-20)
i

The integral is simply an instruction for us to add all the displacement elements
ds from i to f, but we already know that the sum is length Av. Thus we can write
the change in potential V; — V; in this uniform field as

AV =—E Ax (uniform field). (24-21)

This is the change in voltage AV between two equipotential lines in a uniform field
of magnitude E, separated by distance Ax. If we move in the direction of the field
by distance Ax, the potential decreases. In the opposite direction, it increases.

Ok) The electric field vector points from higher potential toward lower potential.

;
1.
' 2 fol
is
! a
