666 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

Gauss’ Law and Coulomb’s Law

One of the situations in which we can apply Gauss’ law is in finding the electric
field of a charged particle. That field has spherical symmetry (the field depends
on the distance r from the particle but not the direction). So, to make use of that
symmetry, we enclose the particle in a Gaussian sphere that is centered on the
particle, as shown in Fig. 23-9 for a particle with positive charge q. Then the elec-
tric field has the same magnitude E at any point on the sphere (all points are at
the same distance r). That feature will simplify the integration.

The drill here is the same as previously. Pick a patch element on the surface and
draw its area vector dA perpendicular to the patch and directed outward. From the
symmetry of the situation, we know that the electric field E at the patch is also radi-
ally outward and thus at angle @ = 0 with dA So, we rewrite Gauss’ law as

af Edi = af Baa = enc

Here dec = g- Because the field magnitude E is the same at every patch element, E
can be pulled outside the integral:

ath dA =4q.

The remaining integral is just an instruction to sum all the areas of the patch elements
on the sphere, but we already know that the total area is 47r”. Substituting this, we have

 

Figure 23-9 A spherical Gaussian surface
centered on a particle with charge q.

(23-8)

(23-9)

 

eoE(4ar) = q
14
E= => 23-10
er dae) PF (23-10)

This is exactly Eq. 22-3, which we found using Coulomb’s law.

lv] Checkpoint 3

There is a certain net flux ; through a Gaussian sphere of radius r enclosing an iso-
lated charged particle. Suppose the enclosing Gaussian surface is changed to (a) a
larger Gaussian sphere, (b) a Gaussian cube with edge length equal to rand (c) a
Gaussian cube with edge length equal to 2r. In each case, is the net flux through the
new Gaussian surface greater than, less than, or equal to ®,?

Sample Problem 23.03 Using Gauss’ law to find the electric field

Figure 23-10a shows, in cross section, a plastic, spherical shell
with uniform charge Q = —16e and radius R = 10 cm. A parti-
cle with charge q = +Se is at the center. Whatis the electric field
(magnitude and direction) at (a) point P; at radial distance r; =
6.00 cm and (b) point P, at radial distance r, = 12.0 cm?

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) Because the situation in Fig. 23-10a has spherical symmetry,
we can apply Gauss’ law (Eq. 23-7) to find the electric field at a
point if we use a Gaussian surface in the form of a sphere con-
centric with the particle and shell. (2) To find the electric field
at a point, we put that point on a Gaussian surface (so that the

we want is the E in the dot product inside the integral in
Gauss’ law). (3) Gauss’ law relates the net electric flux through
a closed surface to the net enclosed charge. Any external
charge is not included.

Calculations: To find the field at point P;, we construct a
Gaussian sphere with P, on its surface and thus with a radius
of r;. Because the charge enclosed by the Gaussian sphere is
positive, the electric flux through the surface must be positive
and thus outward. So, the electric field E pierces the surface
outward and, because of the spherical symmetry, must be radi-
ally outward, as drawn in Fig. 23-10b. That figure does not in-
clude the plastic shell because the shell is not enclosed by the
Gaussian sphere.

Consider a patch element on the sphere at P,. Its area vec-
tor dA is radially outward (it must always be outward from a
Gaussian surface). Thus the angle @ between E and dA iszero.
We can now rewrite the left side of Eq.23-7 (Gauss’ law) as

auf B-di = auf Ecos 0A = af Baa = EPA,
