24-1 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL

That is, the electric potential is the amount of electric potential energy per unit
charge when a positive test charge is brought in from infinity. The rod sets up this
potential V at P regardless of whether the test charge (or anything else) happens
to be there (Fig. 24-2b). From Eq. 24-2 we see that V is a scalar quantity (because
there is no direction associated with potential energy or charge) and can be posi-
tive or negative (because potential energy and charge have signs).

Repeating this procedure we find that an electric potential is set up at every
point in the rod’s electric field. In fact, every charged object sets up electric
potential V at points throughout its electric field. If we happen to place a particle
with, say, charge q at a point where we know the pre-existing V, we can immedi-
ately find the potential energy of the configuration:

lectric potential = (particle’s ch:
(electric potential energy) = (particle’s cl arse unit charge

or U=qV, (24-3)

where q can be positive or negative.

Two Cautions. (1) The (now very old) decision to call V a potential was un-
fortunate because the term is easily confused with potential energy. Yes, the two
quantities are related (that is the point here) but they are very different and not
interchangeable. (2) Electric potential is a scalar, not a vector. (When you come
to the homework problems, you will rejoice on this point.)

Language. A potential energy is a property of a system (or configuration) of
objects, but sometimes we can get away with assigning it to a single object. For ex-
ample, the gravitational potential energy of a baseball hit to outfield is actually a
potential energy of the baseball-Earth system (because it is associated with the
force between the baseball and Earth). However, because only the baseball no-
ticeably moves (its motion does not noticeably affect Earth), we might assign the
gravitational potential energy to it alone. In a similar way, if a charged particle is
placed in an electric field and has no noticeable effect on the field (or the charged
object that sets up the field), we usually assign the electric potential energy to the
particle alone.

Units. The SI unit for potential that follows from Eq. 24-2 is the joule per
coulomb. This combination occurs so often that a special unit, the volt (abbrevi-
ated V), is used to represent it. Thus,

1 volt = 1 joule per coulomb.

With two unit conversions, we can now switch the unit for electric field from new-
tons per coulomb to a more conventional unit:

N\(1v 1J
INIC= 03) e)Gea)

1 V/m.

The conversion factor in the second set of parentheses comes from our definition
of volt given above; that in the third set of parentheses is derived from the defini-
tion of the joule. From now on, we shall express values of the electric field in volts
per meter rather than in newtons per coulomb.

Motion Through an Electric Field

Change in Electric Potential. If we move from an initial point i to a second point f
in the electric field of a charged object, the electric potential changes by

AV=V,-V;.

687
