23-4 APPLYING GAUSS’ LAW: CYLINDRICAL SYMMETRY 671

23-4 APPLYING GAUSS’ LAW: CYLINDRICAL SYMMETRY

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

 

23.20 Explain how Gauss’ law is used to derive the electric on a cylindrical surface and the electric field magnitude E

field magnitude outside a line of charge or a cylindrical at radial distance r from the central axis.

surface (such as a plastic rod) with a uniform linear 23.22 Explain how Gauss’ law can be used to find the electric

charge density A. field magnitude inside a cylindrical nonconducting surface
23.21 Apply the relationship between linear charge density A (such as a plastic rod) with a uniform volume charge density p.
Key Idea
@ The electric field at a point near an infinite line of charge (or charged rod) with uniform linear charge density A is perpendicular
to the line and has magnitude A

E ==— (ine of charge),
27e0r

where r is the perpendicular distance from the line to the point.

 
   
 
 
 
   
 

Applying Gauss’ Law: Cylindrical Symmetry

Figure 23-14 shows a section of an infinitely long cylindrical plastic rod with a uni-

2mr

form charge density A. We want to find an expression for the electric field magni- |
tude E at radius r from the central axis of the rod, outside the rod. We could do Gaussian
that using the approach of Chapter 22 (charge element dq, field vector dE, etc.). h °

However, Gauss’ law gives a much faster and easier (and prettier) approach.
The charge distribution and the field have cylindrical symmetry. To find the |

field at radius r, we enclose a section of the rod with a concentric Gaussian ——

cylinder of radius r and height h. (If you want the field at a certain point, put a

Gaussian surface through that point.) We can now apply Gauss’ law to relate the

charge enclosed by the cylinder and the net flux through the cylinder’s surface.
First note that because of the symmetry, the electric field at any point must

be radially outward (the charge is positive). That means that at any point on the Figure 23-14 A Gaussian surface in the form

end caps, the field only skims the surface and does not pierce it. So, the flux of a closed cylinder surrounds a section

through each end cap is zero. of a very long, uniformly charged, cylindri-
To find the flux through the cylinder’s curved surface, first note that for any al plastic rod.

patch element on the surface, the area vector dA is radially outward (away from

the interior of the Gaussian surface) and thus in the same direction as the field

piercing the patch. The dot product in Gauss’ law is then simply E dA cos0 = E dA,

and we can pull E out of the integral. The remaining integral is just the instruction

to sum the areas of all patch elements on the cylinder’s curved surface, but we al-

ready know that the total area is the product of the cylinder’s height h and cir-

cumference 277. The net flux through the cylinder is then

® = EA cos 0 = E(2arh)cos 0 = E(2arh).

E

There is flux only
through the
curved surface.

On the other side of Gauss’s law we have the charge g.9. enclosed by the
cylinder. Because the linear charge density (charge per unit length, remember) is
uniform, the enclosed charge is Ah. Thus, Gauss’ law,

 

BP = ene:
reduces to eE(2arh) = Ah,
yielding E= mer (line of charge). (23-12)

This is the electric field due to an infinitely long, straight line of charge, at a point
that is a radial distance r from the line. The direction of E is radially outward
