in the second, attractive. After a great many investigations, scientists figured out
that the forces in these types of demonstrations are due to the electric charge that
we set up on the rods when they are in contact with silk or fur. Electric charge is
an intrinsic property of the fundamental particles that make up objects such as
the rods, silk, and fur. That is, charge is a property that comes automatically with
those particles wherever they exist.

Two Types. There are two types of electric charge, named by the American
scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin as positive charge and negative
charge. He could have called them anything (such as cherry and walnut), but us-
ing algebraic signs as names comes in handy when we add up charges to find the
net charge. In most everyday objects, such as a mug, there are about equal num-
bers of negatively charged particles and positively charged particles, and so the
net charge is zero, the charge is said to be balanced, and the object is said to be
electrically neutral (or just neutral for short).

Excess Charge. Normally you are approximately neutral. However, if you live in
regions where the humidity is low, you know that the charge on your body can be-
come slightly unbalanced when you walk across certain carpets. Either you gain neg-
ative charge from the carpet (at the points of contact between your shoes with the
carpet) and become negatively charged, or you lose negative charge and become pos-
itively charged. Either way, the extra charge is said to be an excess charge. You proba-
bly don’t notice it until you reach for a door handle or another person. Then, if your
excess charge is enough, a spark leaps between you and the other object, eliminating
your excess charge. Such sparking can be annoying and even somewhat painful. Such
charging and discharging does not happen in humid conditions because the water in
the air neutralizes your excess charge about as fast as you acquire it.

Two of the grand mysteries in physics are (1) why does the universe have par-
ticles with electric charge (what is it, really?) and (2) why does electric charge
come in two types (and not, say, one type or three types). We just do not know.
Nevertheless, with lots of experiments similar to our two demonstrations scien-
tists discovered that

Oo Particles with the same sign of electrical charge repel each other, and particles
with opposite signs attract each other.

In a moment we shall put this rule into quantitative form as Coulomb’s law of
electrostatic force (or electric force) between charged particles. The term electro-
static is used to emphasize that, relative to each other, the charges are either sta-
tionary or moving only very slowly.

Demos. Now let’s get back to the demonstrations to understand the motions
of the rod as being something other than just magic. When we rub the glass rod
with a silk cloth, a small amount of negative charge moves from the rod to the silk
(a transfer like that between you and a carpet), leaving the rod with a small
amount of excess positive charge. (Which way the negative charge moves is not
obvious and requires a lot of experimentation.) We rub the silk over the rod to in-
crease the number of contact points and thus the amount, still tiny, of transferred
charge. We hang the rod from the thread so as to electrically isolate it from its sur-
roundings (so that the surroundings cannot neutralize the rod by giving it enough
negative charge to rebalance its charge). When we rub the second rod with the
silk cloth, it too becomes positively charged. So when we bring it near the first
rod, the two rods repel each other (Fig. 21-2a).

Next, when we rub the plastic rod with fur, it gains excess negative charge
from the fur. (Again, the transfer direction is learned through many experiments.)
When we bring the plastic rod (with negative charge) near the hanging glass rod
(with positive charge), the rods are attracted to each other (Fig. 21-2). All this is
subtle. You cannot see the charge or its transfer, only the results.

21-1 COULOMB’S LAW 611

\
J

=

3

F

(a)

== Plastic

(d)

Figure 21-2 (a) Two charged rods of the same
sign repel each other. (b) Two charged rods
of opposite signs attract each other. Plus
signs indicate a positive net charge, and mi-
nus signs indicate a negative net charge.
