676 CHAPTER 23 GAUSS’ LAW

 

Figure 23-20 A thin, uniformly charged,
spherical shell with total charge g, in cross
section. Two Gaussian surfaces S; and S)
are also shown in cross section. Surface S>
encloses the shell, and S, encloses only the
empty interior of the shell.

Enclosed

charge is q— Gaussian

surface

   

(a)

Enclosed

charge is Gaussian
surface

SS

(The flux through the
surface depends on
only the enclosed
charge.

Figure 23-21 The dots represent a spherically
symmetric distribution of charge of radius
R, whose volume charge density p is a
function only of distance from the center.
The charged object is not a conductor, and
therefore the charge is assumed to be
fixed in position. A concentric spherical
Gaussian surface with r > R is shown in (a).
A similar Gaussian surface with r < Ris
shown in (b).

Figure 23-20 shows a charged spherical shell of total charge q and radius R and two
concentric spherical Gaussian surfaces, S; and S5. If we followed the procedure of
Module 23-2 as we applied Gauss’ law to surface S,,for which r = R,we would find that

= 4 (spherical shell, field at r= R). (23-15)
4m)
This field is the same as one set up by a particle with charge q at the center of the
shell of charge. Thus, the force produced by a shell of charge g on a charged parti-
cle placed outside the shell is the same as if all the shell’s charge is concentrated
asa particle at the shell’s center. This proves the first shell theorem.
Applying Gauss’ law to surface S$), for which r < R, leads directly to

E=0 (spherical shell, field at r < R), (23-16)

because this Gaussian surface encloses no charge. Thus, if a charged particle were
enclosed by the shell, the shell would exert no net electrostatic force on the parti-
cle. This proves the second shell theorem.

Ok) Ifa charged particle is located inside a shell of uniform charge, there is no electro-
static force on the particle from the shell.

Any spherically symmetric charge distribution, such as that of Fig. 23-21, can
be constructed with a nest of concentric spherical shells. For purposes of applying
the two shell theorems, the volume charge density p should have a single value
for each shell but need not be the same from shell to shell. Thus, for the charge
distribution as a whole, p can vary, but only with r, the radial distance from the
center. We can then examine the effect of the charge distribution “shell by shell.”

In Fig. 23-21a, the entire charge lies within a Gaussian surface with r > R.
The charge produces an electric field on the Gaussian surface as if the charge
were that of a particle located at the center, and Eq. 23-15 holds.

Figure 23-21b shows a Gaussian surface with r < R. To find the electric
field at points on this Gaussian surface, we separately consider the charge in-
side it and the charge outside it. From Eq. 23-16, the outside charge does not
set up a field on the Gaussian surface. From Eq. 23-15, the inside charge sets
up a field as though it is concentrated at the center. Letting g' represent that
enclosed charge, we can then rewrite Eq. 23-15 as

-t@
~ Amey P

If the full charge q enclosed within radius R is uniform, then q' enclosed

within radius r in Fig. 23-21b is proportional to q:

(spherical distribution, field at r= R). (23-17)

charge enclosed by
sphere of radius r full charge

volume enclosed by ~~ full volume
sphere of radius r

 

or Ta (23-18)
This gives us :
B
a = 4a (23-19)
Substituting this into Eq. 23-17 yields
=(—“_ 5 . ry
E= ic )y (uniform charge, field at r= R). (23-20)
