The Avery and Hershey-Chase
Experiments: The Active Principle
Is DNA

The Avery Experiments

The agent responsible for transforming Streptococcus went
undiscovered until 1944. In a classic series of experiments,
Oswald Avery and his coworkers Colin MacLeod and
Maclyn McCarty characterized what they referred to as the
“transforming principle.” They first prepared the mixture
of dead S Streptococcus and live R Streptococcus that Griffith
had used. Then Avery and his colleagues removed as much
of the protein as they could from their preparation, eventu-
ally achieving 99.98% purity. Despite the removal of nearly
all protein, the transforming activity was not reduced.
Moreover, the properties of the transforming principle re-
sembled those of DNA in several ways:

1. When the purified principle was analyzed chemically,
the array of elements agreed closely with DNA.

2. When spun at high speeds in an ultracentrifuge, the
transforming principle migrated to the same level
(density) as DNA.

3. Extracting the lipid and protein from the purified
transforming principle did not reduce its activity.

4. Protein-digesting enzymes did not affect the princi-
ple’s activity; nor did RNA-digesting enzymes.

5. The DNA-digesting enzyme DNase destroyed all
transforming activity.

The evidence was overwhelming. They concluded that
“a nucleic acid of the deoxyribose type is the fundamental
unit of the transforming principle of Pneumococcus Type
TII’”—in essence, that DNA is the hereditary material.

The Hershey—Chase Experiment

Avery’s results were not widely accepted at first, as many
biologists preferred to believe that proteins were the repos-
itory of hereditary information. Additional evidence sup-
porting Avery’s conclusion was provided in 1952 by Alfred
Hershey and Martha Chase, who experimented with bacte-
riophages, viruses that attack bacteria. Viruses, described
in more detail in chapter 33, consist of either DNA or
RNA (ribonucleic acid) surrounded by a protein coat.
When a /ytic (potentially cell-rupturing) bacteriophage in-
fects a bacterial cell, it first binds to the cell’s outer surface
and then injects its hereditary information into the cell.
There, the hereditary information directs the production of
thousands of new viruses within the bacterium. The bacter-
ial cell eventually ruptures, or lyses, releasing the newly
made viruses.

To identify the hereditary material injected into bacter-
ial cells at the start of an infection, Hershey and Chase used
the bacteriophage T2, which contains DNA rather than
RNA. They labeled the two parts of the viruses, the DNA
and the protein coat, with different radioactive isotopes

Protein coat DNA labeled
labeled with 5S with 9P

 

T2 bacteriophages
are labeled with
radioactive isotopes.

 

 

 

 

 

Bacterioy hages infect
bacterial cells.

 

 

sells sell, ap lt all .
: Spb tag

Bacterial cells are
agitated to remove
protein coats.

 

 

 

 

355 radioactivity

%P radioactivity found
found in the medium

in the bacterial cells

FIGURE 14.5

‘The Hershey and Chase experiment. Hershey and Chase found
that *°S radioactivity did not enter infected bacterial cells and>?P
radioactivity did. They concluded that viral DNA, not protein, was
responsible for directing the production of new viruses.

that would serve as tracers. In some experiments, the
viruses were grown on a medium containing an isotope of
phosphorus, *2P, and the isotope was incorporated into the
phosphate groups of newly synthesized DNA molecules.
In other experiments, the viruses were grown on a medium
containing *5S, an isotope of sulfur, which is incorporated
into the amino acids of newly synthesized protein coats.
The >*P and *5S isotopes are easily distinguished from each
other because they emit particles with different energies
when they decay.

After the labeled viruses were permitted to infect bacte-
ria, the bacterial cells were agitated violently to remove the
protein coats of the infecting viruses from the surfaces of
the bacteria. This procedure removed nearly all of the 35S
label (and thus nearly all of the viral protein) from the bac-
teria. However, the *2P label (and thus the viral DNA) had
transferred to the interior of the bacteria (figure 14.5) and
was found in viruses subsequently released from the in-
fected bacteria. Hence, the hereditary information injected
into the bacteria that specified the new generation of
viruses was DNA and not protein.

 

Avery’s experiments demonstrate conclusively that
DNA is Griffith’s transforming material. The hereditary
material of bacteriophages is DNA and not protein.

 

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 283
