 

1. Bacteria were grown in
amedium containing a
heavy isotope of nitrogen.

 

 

 

 

2, Bacteria were then
allowed to grow ina
medium containing a

ww light isotope of
nitrogen.

 

 

 

 

Sa
“4N medium
Xo }
eS

S}
S13)
—_—

2 Sampleat 3 => Sample at 4 Ss Sample at

O minutes 20 minutes 40 minutes

~~ Om

3. At various times, the
DNA from bacterial cells

Ww was extracted.

  

 

 

 

 

4, The DNA was suspended
ina cesium chloride solution.

 

 

 

)) Centrifugation

 

 

 

 

AYA

 

 

Control group Labeled parent F, generation __F, generation DNA
(unlabeled DNA) DNA(both strands DNA(one heavy/ (one unlabeled molecule,
heavy) light hybrid one heavyllight hybrid
molecule) molecule)

FIGURE 14.12

The Meselson and Stahl experiment: evidence demonstrating semiconservative replication. Bacterial cells were grown for several
generations in a medium containing a heavy isotope of nitrogen (!°N) and then were transferred to a new medium containing the normal
lighter isotope (!4N). At various times thereafter, samples of the bacteria were collected, and their DNA was dissolved in a solution of
cesium chloride, which was spun rapidly in a centrifuge. Because the cesium ion is so massive, it tends to settle toward the bottom of the
spinning tube, establishing a gradient of cesium density. DNA molecules sink in the gradient until they reach a place where their density
equals that of the cesium; they then “float” at that position. DNA containing !5N is denser than that containing '4N, so it sinks to a lower
position in the cesium gradient. After one generation in '4N medium, the bacteria yielded a single band of DNA with a density between
that of '4N-DNA and !5N-DNA, indicating that only one strand of each duplex contained !5N. After two generations in N medium, two
bands were obtained; one of intermediate density (in which one of the strands contained !5N) and one of low density (in which neither
strand contained '°N). Meselson and Stahl concluded that replication of the DNA duplex involves building new molecules by separating
strands and assembling new partners on each of these templates.

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 289
