612 CHAPTER 21 COULOMB'S LAW

   

Neutral copper
Figure 21-3 A neutral copper rod is electri-
cally isolated from its surroundings by be-
ing suspended on a nonconducting thread.
Either end of the copper rod will be at-
tracted by a charged rod. Here, conduction
electrons in the copper rod are repelled to
the far end of that rod by the negative
charge on the plastic rod. Then that nega-
tive charge attracts the remaining positive
charge on the near end of the copper rod,
rotating the copper rod to bring that near
end closer to the plastic rod.

Conductors and Insulators

We can classify materials generally according to the ability of charge to move
through them. Conductors are materials through which charge can move rather
freely; examples include metals (such as copper in common lamp wire), the human
body, and tap water. Nonconductors—also called insulators—are materials
through which charge cannot move freely; examples include rubber (such as the
insulation on common lamp wire), plastic, glass, and chemically pure water.
Semiconductors are materials that are intermediate between conductors and
insulators; examples include silicon and germanium in computer chips. Super-
conductors are materials that are perfect conductors, allowing charge to move with-
out any hindrance. In these chapters we discuss only conductors and insulators.

Conducting Path. Here is an example of how conduction can eliminate excess
charge on an object. If you rub a copper rod with wool, charge is transferred from the
wool to the rod. However, if you are holding the rod while also touching a faucet, you
cannot charge the rod in spite of the transfer. The reason is that you, the rod, and the
faucet are all conductors connected, via the plumbing, to Earth’s surface, which is a
huge conductor. Because the excess charges put on the rod by the wool repel one an-
other, they move away from one another by moving first through the rod, then
through you, and then through the faucet and plumbing to reach Earth’s surface,
where they can spread out.The process leaves the rod electrically neutral.

In thus setting up a pathway of conductors between an object and Earth’s
surface, we are said to ground the object, and in neutralizing the object (by elimi-
nating an unbalanced positive or negative charge), we are said to discharge the
object. If instead of holding the copper rod in your hand, you hold it by an
insulating handle, you eliminate the conducting path to Earth, and the rod can
then be charged by rubbing (the charge remains on the rod), as long as you do
not touch it directly with your hand.

Charged Particles. The properties of conductors and insulators are due to
the structure and electrical nature of atoms. Atoms consist of positively charged
protons, negatively charged electrons, and electrically neutral neutrons. The pro-
tons and neutrons are packed tightly together in a central nucleus.

The charge of a single electron and that of a single proton have the same
magnitude but are opposite in sign. Hence, an electrically neutral atom contains
equal numbers of electrons and protons. Electrons are held near the nucleus
because they have the electrical sign opposite that of the protons in the nucleus
and thus are attracted to the nucleus. Were this not true, there would be no
atoms and thus no you.

When atoms of a conductor like copper come together to form the solid,
some of their outermost (and so most loosely held) electrons become free to
wander about within the solid, leaving behind positively charged atoms ( positive
ions). We call the mobile electrons conduction electrons. There are few (if any)
free electrons in a nonconductor.

Induced Charge. The experiment of Fig. 21-3 demonstrates the mobility of
charge in a conductor. A negatively charged plastic rod will attract either end of
an isolated neutral copper rod. What happens is that many of the conduction
electrons in the closer end of the copper rod are repelled by the negative charge
on the plastic rod. Some of the conduction electrons move to the far end of the
copper rod, leaving the near end depleted in electrons and thus with an unbal-
anced positive charge. This positive charge is attracted to the negative charge in
the plastic rod. Although the copper rod is still neutral, it is said to have an
induced charge, which means that some of its positive and negative charges have
been separated due to the presence of a nearby charge.

Similarly, if a positively charged glass rod is brought near one end of a
neutral copper rod, induced charge is again set up in the neutral copper rod but
now the near end gains conduction electrons, becomes negatively charged, and is
attracted to the glass rod, while the far end is positively charged.
