23-5 APPLYING GAUSS’ LAW: PLANAR SYMMETRY

673

23-5 APPLYING GAUSS’ LAW: PLANAR SYMMETRY

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

23.23 Apply Gauss' law to derive the electric field magnitude
Enear a large, flat, nonconducting surface with a uniform
surface charge density a.

23.24 For points near a large, flat nonconducting surface
with a uniform charge density a, apply the relationship be-

Key Ideas

@ The electric field due to an infinite nonconducting sheet
with uniform surface charge density ois perpendicular to the
plane of the sheet and has magnitude

tween the charge density and the electric field magnitude
E and also specify the direction of the field.

23.25 For points near two large, flat, parallel, conducting sur-
faces with a uniform charge density a, apply the relation-
ship between the charge density and the electric field
magnitude E and also specify the direction of the field.

@ The external electric field just outside the surface of an iso-
lated charged conductor with surface charge density wis per-
pendicular to the surface and has magnitude

o
. E = — (external, charged conductor).
(nonconducting sheet of charge). £0

Inside the conductor, the electric field is zero.

~ 2e9

Applying Gauss’ Law: Planar Symmetry

Nonconducting Sheet

Figure 23-17 shows a portion of a thin, infinite, nonconducting sheet with a uni-
form (positive) surface charge density o. A sheet of thin plastic wrap, uniformly
charged on one side, can serve as a simple model. Let us find the electric field E
a distance r in front of the sheet.

A useful Gaussian surface is a closed cylinder with end caps of area A,
arranged to pierce the sheet perpendicularly as shown. From symmetry, E must
be perpendicular to the sheet and hence to the end caps. Furthermore, since the
charge is positive, E is directed away from the sheet, and thus the electric field
lines pierce the two Gaussian end caps in an outward direction. Because the field
lines do not pierce the curved surface, there is no flux through this portion of the
Gaussian surface. Thus E : dA is simply E dA; then Gauss’ law,

af Ev dA = dese,

becomes e9(EA + EA) = oA,

where @A is the charge enclosed by the Gaussian surface. This gives

pe

a (23-13)

(sheet of charge).
Since we are considering an infinite sheet with uniform charge density, this result
holds for any point at a finite distance from the sheet. Equation 23-13 agrees with
Eg. 22-27, which we found by integration of electric field components.

+

 

  

 

 

   
   

 

 

 

 

 

4-0
“ +
+ a

+ G —= $$ —_>_
Figure 23-17 (a) Perspective view an 2 i
and (6) side view of a portion of a + A caussian = =
very large, thin plastic sheet, uni- 4/4 surface a a
formly charged on one side to sur- RE EL E
face charge density A closed There is flux only = >
cylindrical Gaussian surface passes through the Sa
through the sheet and is perpendi- two end faces. ()

cular to it.
