 

sos CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

Sample Problem 28.01

A uniform magnetic field B, with magnitude 1.2 mT, is
directed vertically upward throughout the volume of a labo-
ratory chamber. A proton with kinetic energy 5.3 MeV enters
the chamber, moving horizontally from south to north. What
magnetic deflecting force acts on the proton as it enters the
chamber? The proton mass is 1.67 x 10-7’kg. (Neglect
Earth’s magnetic field.)

KEY IDEAS

 

Because the proton is charged and moving through a mag-
netic field, a magnetic force Fy can act on it. Because the ini-
tial direction of the proton’s velocity is not along a magnetic
field line, Fy is not simply zero.

Magnitude: To find the magnitude of F;,,we can use Eq. 28-3
(Fz =|q|vB sin ¢) provided we first find the proton’s speed v.
‘We can find v from the given kinetic energy because
K= zmv?. Solving for v, we obtain

2K (2)(5.3 MeV)(1.60 x 107" J/MeV)
a a ~y 1.67 X 107 kg
= 3.2 x 107 mis.

Equation 28-3 then yields
Fz = |q\vB sind

= (1.60 x 10° C)(3.2 x 107 m/s)

x (1.2 x 103 T)(sin 90°)
=61 xX 1075N. (Answer)
This may seem like a small force, but it acts on a particle of

small mass, producing a large acceleration; namely,

AILEY

Magnetic force on a moving charged particle

Fy 6.1 X10-5N

SS = = 3.7 X 12, 2
Fee IC E10

a=
Direction: To find the direction of ae we use the fact that
F;, has the direction of the cross product gv x B. Because
the charge q is positive, F;, must have the same direction as
vx B, which can be determined with the right-hand rule
for cross products (as in Fig. 28-2d). We know that Vv’ is di-
rected horizontally from south to north and B is directed
vertically up. The right-hand rule shows us that the deflect-
ing force F,, must be directed horizontally from west to east,
as Fig. 28-6 shows. (The array of dots in the figure represents
a magnetic field directed out of the plane of the figure. An
array of Xs would have represented a magnetic field di-
rected into that plane.)

If the charge of the particle were negative, the magnetic
deflecting force would be directed in the opposite direction —
that is, horizontally from east to west. This is predicted auto-
matically by Eq. 28-2 if we substitute a negative value for q.

 

Figure 28-6 An overhead view of a proton moving from south to
north with velocity V in a chamber. A magnetic field is directed
vertically upward in the chamber, as represented by the array of
dots (which resemble the tips of arrows). The proton is deflected
toward the east.

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

28-2 cROSSED FIELDS: DISCOVERY OF THE ELECTRON

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.12 Describe the experiment of J. J. Thomson.

28.13 For a charged particle moving through a magnetic field
and an electric field, determine the net force on the particle
in both magnitude-angle notation and unit-vector notation.

Key Ideas

@ If a charged particle moves through a region containing
both an electric field and a magnetic field, it can be
affected by both an electric force and a magnetic

force.

28.14 In situations where the magnetic force and electric
force on a particle are in opposite directions, determine
the speeds at which the forces cancel, the magnetic force
dominates, and the electric force dominates.

@ If the fields are perpendicular to each other, they are said to
be crossed fields.

@ If the forces are in opposite directions, a particular speed
will result in no deflection of the particle.

 
