Gene
cluster 2

4

Gene
cluster 1

—]

Chromosome

Encoded enzyme.

Substrate in
biochemical
pathway

Gene
cluster 3

—

 

 

Glutamate Ornithine

 

 

 

Citruline —

RD a [seine]

 

 

 

FIGURE 14.21

Evidence for the “one-gene/one-polypeptide” hypothesis. The chromosomal locations of the many arginine mutants isolated by
Beadle and Tatum cluster around three locations. These locations correspond to the locations of the genes encoding the enzymes that

carry out arginine biosynthesis.

A Defined System. One of the reasons Beadle and
Tatum’s experiments produced clear-cut results is that the
researchers made an excellent choice of experimental organ-
ism. They chose the bread mold Neurospora, a fungus that
can be grown readily in the laboratory on a defined medium
(a medium that contains only known substances such as glu-
cose and sodium chloride, rather than some uncharacterized
mixture of substances such as ground-up yeasts). Beadle and
Tatum exposed Neurospora spores to X rays, expecting that
the DNA in some of the spores would experience damage in
regions encoding the ability to make compounds needed for
normal growth (see figure 14.20). DNA changes of this kind
are called mutations, and organisms that have undergone
such changes (in this case losing the ability to synthesize one
or more compounds) are called mutants. Initially, they al-
lowed the progeny of the irradiated spores to grow on a de-
fined medium containing all of the nutrients necessary for
growth, so that any growth-deficient mutants resulting from
the irradiation would be kept alive.

Isolating Growth-Deficient Mutants. To determine
whether any of the progeny of the irradiated spores had
mutations causing metabolic deficiencies, Beadle and
Tatum placed subcultures of individual fungal cells on a
“minimal” medium that contained only sugar, ammonia,
salts, a few vitamins, and water. Cells that had lost the abil-
ity to make other compounds necessary for growth would
not survive on such a medium. Using this approach, Beadle
and Tatum succeeded in identifying and isolating many
growth-deficient mutants.

Identifying the Deficiencies. Next the researchers
added various chemicals to the minimal medium in an at-
tempt to find one that would enable a given mutant strain

296 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

to grow. This procedure allowed them to pinpoint the na-
ture of the biochemical deficiency that strain had. The ad-
dition of arginine, for example, permitted several mutant
strains, dubbed arg mutants, to grow. When their chromo-
somal positions were located, the arg mutations were found
to cluster in three areas (figure 14.21).

One-Gene/One-Polypeptide

For each enzyme in the arginine biosynthetic pathway,
Beadle and Tatum were able to isolate a mutant strain with
a defective form of that enzyme, and the mutation was al-
ways located at one of a few specific chromosomal sites.
Most importantly, they found there was a different site for
each enzyme. Thus, each of the mutants they examined had
a defect in a single enzyme, caused by a mutation at a single
site on one chromosome. Beadle and Tatum concluded
that genes produce their effects by specifying the structure
of enzymes and that each gene encodes the structure of one
enzyme. They called this relationship the one-gene/one-
enzyme hypothesis. Because many enzymes contain mul-
tiple protein or polypeptide subunits, each encoded by a
separate gene, the relationship is today more commonly re-
ferred to as “one-gene/one-polypeptide.”

Enzymes are responsible for catalyzing the synthesis of
all the parts of an organism. They mediate the assembly of
nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. There-
fore, by encoding the structure of enzymes and other pro-
teins, DNA specifies the structure of the organism itself.

 

Genetic traits are expressed largely as a result of the
activities of enzymes. Organisms store hereditary
information by encoding the structures of enzymes and
other proteins in their DNA.

 
