Capacitance

25-1 CAPACITANCE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

25.01 Sketch a schematic diagram of a circuit with a parallel- 25.03 For a capacitor, apply the relationship between the
plate capacitor, a battery, and an open or closed switch. magnitude of charge q on either plate (“the charge on the

25.02 In a circuit with a battery, an open switch, and an un- capacitor’), the potential difference V between the plates
charged capacitor, explain what happens to the conduc- (‘the potential across the capacitor”), and the capacitance
tion electrons when the switch is closed. C of the capacitor.

Key Ideas

@ A capacitor consists of two isolated conductors (the plates) @ When a circuit with a battery, an open switch, and an

with charges +q and —q. Its capacitance C is defined from uncharged capacitor is completed by closing the switch,

q=CVv, conduction electrons shift, leaving the capacitor plates with

where V is the potential difference between the plates. oppaeite aargess

What Is Physics?

One goal of physics is to provide the basic science for practical devices designed
by engineers. The focus of this chapter is on one extremely common
example—the capacitor, a device in which electrical energy can be stored. For ex-
ample, the batteries in a camera store energy in the photoflash unit by charging a
capacitor. The batteries can supply energy at only a modest rate, too slowly for
the photoflash unit to emit a flash of light. However, once the capacitor is
charged, it can supply energy at a much greater rate when the photoflash unit is
triggered—enough energy to allow the unit to emit a burst of bright light.

The physics of capacitors can be generalized to other devices and to any situ-
ation involving electric fields. For example, Earth’s atmospheric electric field is
modeled by meteorologists as being produced by a huge spherical capacitor that
partially discharges via lightning. The charge that skis collect as they slide along
snow can be modeled as being stored in a capacitor that frequently discharges as
sparks (which can be seen by nighttime skiers on dry snow).

The first step in our discussion of capacitors is to determine how much
charge can be stored. This “how much” is called capacitance.

Capacitance

Figure 25-1 shows some of the many sizes and shapes of capacitors. Figure 25-2
shows the basic elements of any capacitor—two isolated conductors of any

 

Figure 25-2 Two conductors, isolated electrically from each other and from their surroundings,
form a capacitor. When the capacitor is charged, the charges on the conductors, or plates as
they are called, have the same magnitude q but opposite signs.

 

Paul Silvermann/Fundamental Photographs
Figure 25-1 An assortment of capacitors.
