265 POWER, SEMICONDUCTORS, SUPERCONDUCTORS

The unit of power that follows from Eq. 26-26 is the volt-ampere (V- A).

We can write it as
ww-a=(12)(1£)- it- 1W.
Cc s s

As an electron moves through a resistor at constant drift speed, its average
kinetic energy remains constant and its lost electric potential energy appears as
thermal energy in the resistor and the surroundings. On a microscopic scale this
energy transfer is due to collisions between the electron and the molecules of the
resistor, which leads to an increase in the temperature of the resistor lattice.
The mechanical energy thus transferred to thermal energy is dissipated (lost)
because the transfer cannot be reversed.

For a resistor or some other device with resistance R, we can combine
Eggs. 26-8 (R = V/i) and 26-26 to obtain, for the rate of electrical energy dissipa-
tion due toa resistance, either

P=?R (resistive dissipation) (26-27)

y
“RK

 

or (resistive dissipation). (26-28)

Caution: We must be careful to distinguish these two equations from Eq. 26-26:
P = iV applies to electrical energy transfers of all kinds; P= ?R and P= V7/R
apply only to the transfer of electric potential energy to thermal energy in a

761

device with resistance.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

A potential difference Vis connected across a device with resistance R, causing cur-
rent through the device. Rank the following variations according to the change in the
rate at which electrical energy is converted to thermal energy due to the resistance,
greatest change first: (a) Vis doubled with R unchanged, (b) iis doubled with R
unchanged, (c) R is doubled with V unchanged, (d) R is doubled with i unchanged.

Sample Problem 26.06 Rate of energy dissipation in a wire carrying current

‘You are given a length of uniform heating wire made of a
nickel—chromium-—iron alloy called Nichrome; it has a re-
sistance R of 72 ©. At what rate is energy dissipated in each
of the following situations? (1) A potential difference of
120 V is applied across the full length of the wire. (2) The
wire is cut in half, and a potential difference of 120 V is
applied across the length of each half.

KEY IDEA

 

Current in a resistive material produces a transfer of
mechanical energy to thermal energy; the rate of transfer
(dissipation) is given by Eqs. 26-26 to 26-28.

Calculations: Because we know the potential V and resis-
tance R, we use Eq. 26-28, which yields, for situation 1,

p—¥2 _ (20vy
RR Ra

In situation 2, the resistance of each half of the wire is
(72 Q)/2, or 36 ©. Thus, the dissipation rate for each half is

, (120 VP
y= 360

= 200 W. (Answer)

= 400 W,

and that for the two halves is

P=2P' = 800W. (Answer)
This is four times the dissipation rate of the full length of
wire. Thus, you might conclude that you could buy a heating
coil, cut it in half, and reconnect it to obtain four times the
heat output. Why is this unwise? (What would happen to the
amount of current in the coil?)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
