Transcription: An Overview

The first step of the Central Dogma is the transfer of infor-
mation from DNA to RNA, which occurs when an mRNA
copy of the gene is produced. Like all classes of RNA,
mRNA is formed on a DNA template. Because the DNA
sequence in the gene is transcribed into an RNA sequence,
this stage is called transcription. Transcription is initiated
when the enzyme RNA polymerase binds to a particular
binding site called a promoter located at the beginning of a
gene. Starting there, the RNA polymerase moves along the
strand into the gene. As it encounters each DNA nucleotide,
it adds the corresponding complementary RNA nucleotide
to a growing mRNA strand. Thus, guanine (G), cytosine
(©), thymine (T), and adenine (A) in the DNA would signal
the addition of C, G, A, and uracil (U), respectively, to the
mRNA.

When the RNA polymerase arrives at a transcriptional
“stop” signal at the opposite end of the gene, it disengages
from the DNA and releases the newly assembled RNA
chain. This chain is a complementary transcript of the gene
from which it was copied.

Translation: An Overview

The second step of the Central Dogma is the transfer of
information from RNA to protein, which occurs when
the information contained in the mRNA transcript is
used to direct the sequence of amino acids during the
synthesis of polypeptides by ribosomes. This process is
called translation because the nucleotide sequence of the
mRNA transcript is translated into an amino acid se-
quence in the polypeptide. Translation begins when an
rRNA molecule within the ribosome recognizes and
binds to a “start” sequence on the mRNA. The ribosome
then moves along the mRNA molecule, three nucleotides
at a time. Each group of three nucleotides is a codeword
that specifies which amino acid will be added to the
growing polypeptide chain. The ribosome continues in
this fashion until it encounters a translational “stop” sig-
nal; then it disengages from the mRNA and releases the
completed polypeptide.

The two steps of the Central Dogma, taken together,
are a concise summary of the events involved in the expres-
sion of an active gene. Biologists refer to this process as
gene expression.

 

The information encoded in genes is expressed in two
phases: transcription, in which an RNA polymerase
enzyme assembles an mRNA molecule whose
nucleotide sequence is complementary to the DNA
nucleotide sequence of the gene; and translation, in
which a ribosome assembles a polypeptide, whose
amino acid sequence is specified by the nucleotide
sequence in the mRNA.

 

—  -——__ ‘Amino acid

attaches here

   
   
 

(a)

FIGURE 15.4

The structure of tRNA. («) In the two-dimensional schematic,
the three loops of tRNA are unfolded. Two of the loops bind to
the ribosome during polypeptide synthesis, and the third loop
contains the anticodon sequence, which is complementary to a
three-base sequence on messenger RNA. Amino acids attach to
the free, single-stranded —OH end. (0) In the three-dimensional
structure, the loops of tRNA are folded.

 

 

 

Transcription

 

Translation

 

 

 

 

   

Protein
FIGURE 15.5

The Central Dogma of gene expression. DNA is transcribed
to make mRNA, which is translated to make a protein.

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 301
