25-6 DIELECTRICS AND GAUSS’ LAW

Learning Objectives

25-6 DIELECTRICS AND GAUSS’ LAW 735

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

25.28 In a capacitor with a dielectric, distinguish free charge
from induced charge.
25.29 When a dielectric partially or fully fills the space in a

Key Ideas

capacitor, find the free charge, the induced charge, the elec-
tric field between the plates (if there is a gap, there is more
than one field value), and the potential between the plates.

 

e@ Inserting a dielectric into a capacitor causes induced
charge to appear on the faces of the dielectric and weakens
the electric field between the plates.

@ The induced charge is less than the free charge on the
plates.

@ When a dielectric is present, Gauss’ law may be

Dielectrics and Gauss’ Law

generalized to
af «E-da 4,
where q is the free charge. Any induced surface charge is

accounted for by including the dielectric constant « inside
the integral.

In our discussion of Gauss’ law in Chapter 23, we assumed that the charges
existed in a vacuum. Here we shall see how to modify and generalize that law if
dielectric materials, such as those listed in Table 25-1, are present. Figure 25-16
shows a parallel-plate capacitor of plate area A, both with and without a
dielectric. We assume that the charge qg on the plates is the same in both situa-
tions. Note that the field between the plates induces charges on the faces of the

dielectric by one of the methods described in Module 25-5.

For the situation of Fig. 25-16a, without a dielectric, we can find the electric
field Ey between the plates as we did in Fig. 25-5: We enclose the charge +g on
the top plate with a Gaussian surface and then apply Gauss’ law. Letting Ey rep-

resent the magnitude of the field, we find

a Edi = eEA = q,
q

 

or Ey=

“AS

 

(25-30)

(25-31)

In Fig. 25-165, with the dielectric in place, we can find the electric field
between the plates (and within the dielectric) by using the same Gaussian sur-
face. However, now the surface encloses two types of charge: It still encloses
charge +q on the top plate, but it now also encloses the induced charge —q' on
the top face of the dielectric. The charge on the conducting plate is said to be free
charge because it can move if we change the electric potential of the plate; the
induced charge on the surface of the dielectric is not free charge because it

cannot move from that surface.

Gaussian surface Gaussian surface

 

Figure 25-16 A parallel-plate capacitor (a) without and (b) with a dielectric slab inserted.

The charge g on the plates is assumed to be the same in both cases.
