734 CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

%

Go
oy

“0 a”

‘o 6

(a)

——e—_ 3

ee

(b)

Figure 25-14 (a) Molecules with a permanent
electric dipole moment, showing their

random orientation in the absence of an
external electric field. (b) An electric field is
applied, producing partial alignment of the
dipoles. Thermal agitation prevents complete
alignment.

electric dipoles tend to line up with an external electric field as in Fig. 25-14.
Because the molecules are continuously jostling each other as a result of their
random thermal motion, this alignment is not complete, but it becomes more
complete as the magnitude of the applied field is increased (or as the temper-
ature, and thus the jostling, are decreased). The alignment of the electric
dipoles produces an electric field that is directed opposite the applied field
and is smaller in magnitude.

2. Nonpolar dielectrics. Regardless of whether they have permanent electric
dipole moments, molecules acquire dipole moments by induction when
placed in an external electric field. In Module 24-4 (see Fig. 24-14), we saw
that this occurs because the external field tends to “stretch” the molecules,
slightly separating the centers of negative and positive charge.

Figure 25-15a shows a nonpolar dielectric slab with no external electric field
applied. In Fig, 25-15, an electric field E, is applied via a capacitor, whose plates
are charged as shown. The result is a slight separation of the centers of the posi-
tive and negative charge distributions within the slab, producing positive charge
on one face of the slab (due to the positive ends of dipoles there) and negative
charge on the opposite face (due to the negative ends of dipoles there). The slab
as a whole remains electrically neutral and— within the slab—there is no excess
charge in any volume element.

Figure 25-15c shows that the induced surface charges on the faces produce an
electric field E” in the direction opposite that of the applied electric field Ey. The
resultant field E inside the dielectric (the vector sum of fields Ey and E’) has the
direction of Ey but is smaller in magnitude.

Both the field E’ produced by the surface charges in Fig. 25-15c¢ and the
electric field produced by the permanent electric dipoles in Fig. 25-14 act in the
same way—they oppose the applied field E. Thus, the effect of both polar and
nonpolar dielectrics is to weaken any applied field within them, as between the
plates of a capacitor.

The initial electric field The applied field
inside this nonpolar aligns the atomic
dielectric slab is zero. dipole moments.

  

(a) (b)

Figure 25-15 (a) A nonpolar dielectric slab. The field of the aligned
The circles represent the electrically neu- atoms is opposite the
tral atoms within the slab. (b) An electric peerecael

field is applied via charged capacitor
plates; the field slightly stretches the atoms,
separating the centers of positive and neg-
ative charge. (c) The separation produces
surface charges on the slab faces. These
charges set upa field Z', which opposes the
applied field £),The resultant field E in-
side the dielectric (the vector sum of Ey
and E’) has the same direction as Ey but a
smaller magnitude.

 
