718

Figure 25-3 (a) A parallel-plate capacitor,
made up of two plates of area A separated
by a distance d. The charges on the facing
plate surfaces have the same magnitude q
but opposite signs. (b) As the field lines
show, the electric field due to the charged
plates is uniform in the central region be-
tween the plates. The field is not uniform at
the edges of the plates, as indicated by the
“fringing” of the field lines there.

(a)

Terminal c
mT

tL y

Terminal 7 s

(d)
Figure 25-4 (a) Battery B, switch S, and plates
A and / of capacitor C,connected ina
circuit. (b) A schematic diagram with the
circuit elements represented by their
symbols.

   

 

CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

Electric field lines

  
   

7
- Top side of A
Bottom side of bottom
top plate has plate has 7
charge + charge -q
(@) °

shape. No matter what their geometry, flat or not, we call these conductors
plates.

Figure 25-3a shows a less general but more conventional arrangement, called
a parallel-plate capacitor, consisting of two parallel conducting plates of area
A separated by a distance d. The symbol we use to represent a capacitor (4) is
based on the structure of a parallel-plate capacitor but is used for capacitors of all
geometries. We assume for the time being that no material medium (such as glass
or plastic) is present in the region between the plates. In Module 25-5, we shall
remove this restriction.

When a capacitor is charged, its plates have charges of equal magnitudes but
opposite signs: +g and —q. However, we refer to the charge of a capacitor as
being q, the absolute value of these charges on the plates. (Note that g is not the
net charge on the capacitor, which is zero.)

Because the plates are conductors, they are equipotential surfaces; all points on a
plate are at the same electric potential. Moreover, there is a potential difference be-
tween the two plates. For historical reasons, we represent the absolute value of this
potential difference with V rather than with the AV we used in previous notation.

The charge q and the potential difference V for a capacitor are proportional
to each other; that is,

q= CV. (25-1)

The proportionality constant C is called the capacitance of the capacitor. Its
value depends only on the geometry of the plates and not on their charge or
potential difference. The capacitance is a measure of how much charge must be
put on the plates to produce a certain potential difference between them: The
greater the capacitance, the more charge is required.

The SI unit of capacitance that follows from Eq. 25-1 is the coulomb per volt.
This unit occurs so often that it is given a special name, the farad (F):

1 farad = 1 F = 1 coulomb per volt = 1 C/V. (25-2)

As you will see, the farad is a very large unit. Submultiples of the farad, such as
the microfarad (1 uF = 10~° F) and the picofarad (1 pF = 10-” F), are more
convenient units in practice.

Charging a Capacitor

One way to charge a capacitor is to place it in an electric circuit with a battery.
An electric circuit is a path through which charge can flow. A battery is a device
that maintains a certain potential difference between its terminals (points at
which charge can enter or leave the battery) by means of internal electrochemi-
cal reactions in which electric forces can move internal charge.

In Fig. 25-4a, a battery B, a switch S, an uncharged capacitor C, and inter-
connecting wires form a circuit. The same circuit is shown in the schematic dia-
gram of Fig. 25-4b, in which the symbols for a battery, a switch, and a capacitor
represent those devices. The battery maintains potential difference V between its
terminals. The terminal of higher potential is labeled + and is often called the
positive terminal; the terminal of lower potential is labeled — and is often called
the negative terminal.
