720 CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

We use Gauss’ law to relate
qand E. Then we integrate the
E to get the potential difference.

Gaussian
surface

 

Path of
integration

Figure 25-5 A charged parallel-plate capaci-
tor. A Gaussian surface encloses the charge
on the positive plate. The integration of

Eq. 25-6 is taken along a path extending
directly from the negative plate to the
positive plate.

Calculating the Capacitance

Our goal here is to calculate the capacitance of a capacitor once we know its
geometry. Because we shall consider a number of different geometries, it seems
wise to develop a general plan to simplify the work. In brief our plan is as follows:
(1) Assume a charge q on the plates; (2) calculate the electric field E between
the plates in terms of this charge, using Gauss’ law; (3) knowing E, calculate the
potential difference V between the plates from Eq. 24-18; (4) calculate C from
Eq. 25-1.

Before we start, we can simplify the calculation of both the electric field
and the potential difference by making certain assumptions. We discuss each in
turn.

Calculating the Electric Field

To relate the electric field E’ between the plates of a capacitor to the charge q on
either plate, we shall use Gauss’ law:

af E-dA=q. (25-3)

Here q is the charge enclosed by a Gaussian surface and $E-dA is the net
electric flux through that surface. In all cases that we shall consider, the Gaussian
surface will be such that whenever there is an electric flux through it, E will have
a uniform magnitude E and the vectors E and dA will be parallel. Equation 25-3
then reduces to

q = EA (special case of Eq. 25-3), (25-4)

in which A is the area of that part of the Gaussian surface through which there is
a flux. For convenience, we shall always draw the Gaussian surface in such a way
that it completely encloses the charge on the positive plate; see Fig. 25-5 for an
example.

Calculating the Potential Difference

In the notation of Chapter 24 (Eq. 24-18), the potential difference between
the plates of a capacitor is related to the field E by

f_,
y-v=-[ E-ds, (25-5)
1

in which the integral is to be evaluated along any path that starts on one plate
and ends on the other. We shall always choose a path that follows an electric
field line, from the negative plate to the positive plate. For this path, the vectors
E and ds will have opposite directions; so the dot product E-ds will be equal
to —E ds. Thus, the right side of Eq. 25-5 will then be positive. Letting V represent
the difference V; — V;,we can then recast Eq. 25-5 as

7
v=[ Eds (special case of Eq.25-5), (25-6)

in which the — and + remind us that our path of integration starts on the nega-
tive plate and ends on the positive plate.
We are now ready to apply Eqs. 25-4 and 25-6 to some particular cases.

A Parallel-Plate Capacitor

‘We assume, as Fig. 25-5 suggests, that the plates of our parallel-plate capacitor are
so large and so close together that we can neglect the fringing of the electric field
