810

CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

Canceling Forces. When the two fields in Fig. 28-7 are adjusted so that the
two deflecting forces cancel (step 3), we have from Eqs. 28-1 and 28-3

\glE = |q|vB sin(90°) = IqivB

IB
or vay (opposite forces canceling). (28-7)
Thus, the crossed fields allow us to measure the speed of the charged particles
passing through them. Substituting Eq. 28-7 for v in Eq. 28-6 and rearranging yield

m _ BL?

Ta = WE: + (28-8)

in which all quantities on the right can be measured. Thus, the crossed fields allow us
to measure the ratio m/|q| of the particles moving through Thomson’s apparatus.
(Caution: Equation 28-7 applies only when the electric and magnetic forces are in
opposite directions. You might see other situations in the homework problems.)
Thomson claimed that these particles are found in all matter. He also claimed that
they are lighter than the lightest known atom (hydrogen) by a factor of more than
1000. (The exact ratio proved later to be 1836.15.) His m/|q| measurement, coupled
with the boldness of his two claims, is considered to be the “discovery of the electron.”

Iv] Checkpoint 2

The figure shows four directions for the velocity
vector V of a positively charged particle moving
through a uniform electric field F (directed out

of the page and represented with an encircled dot)
anda uniform magnetic field B. (a) Rank directions
1,2,and 3 according to the magnitude of the net
force on the particle, greatest first. (b) Of all four
directions, which might result in a net force of zero?

 

28-3 cROSSED FIELDS: THE HALL EFFECT

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.15 Describe the Hall effect for a metal strip carrying
current, explaining how the electric field is set up and
what limits its magnitude.

28.16 For a conducting strip in a Hall-effect situation, draw the
vectors for the magnetic field and electric field. For the con-
duction electrons, draw the vectors for the velocity, mag-
netic force, and electric force.

28.17 Apply the relationship between the Hall potential

Key Ideas

difference V, the electric field magnitude E, and the width of
the strip d.

28.18 Apply the relationship between charge-carrier number
density n, magnetic field magnitude B, current i, and
Hall-effect potential difference V.

28.19 Apply the Hall-effect results to a conducting object mov-
ing through a uniform magnetic field, identifying the width
across which a Hall-effect potential difference Vis set up
and calculating V.

 

@ When a uniform magnetic field B is applied to a conducting
strip carrying current i, with the field perpendicular to the
direction of the current, a Hall-effect potential difference V is
set up across the strip.

@ The electric force Fon the charge carriers is then balanced
by the magnetic force Fz on them.

@ The number density n of the charge carriers can then be de-
termined from

_ Bi
Vile”
where /is the thickness of the strip (parallel to B).

@ When a conductor moves through a uniform magnetic field
B at speed v, the Hall-effect potential difference V across itis

V = vBa,
where dis the width perpendicular to both velocity 7 and field B.

 
