a

Circuits

A P T

27-1 siNGLE-LooP ciRcUITS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

27.01 Identify the action of an emf source in terms of the work
it does.

27.02 For an ideal battery, apply the relationship between
the emf, the current, and the power (rate of energy transfer).

27.03 Draw a schematic diagram for a single-loop circuit
containing a battery and three resistors.

27.04 Apply the loop rule to write a loop equation that relates
the potential differences of the circuit elements arounda
(complete) loop.

27.05 Apply the resistance rule in crossing through a resistor.

27.06 Apply the emf rule in crossing through an emf.

27.07 Identify that resistors in series have the same cur-
rent, which is the same value that their equivalent
resistor has.

27.08 Calculate the equivalent of series resistors.

27.09 Identify that a potential applied to resistors wired in

Key Ideas
@ Anemf device does work on charges to maintain a potential dif-
ference between its output terminals. If dW is the work the device
does to force positive charge dq from the negative to the positive
terminal, then the emf (work per unit charge) of the device is
dw
ef
dq
@ An ideal emf device is one that lacks any internal resistance.
The potential difference between its terminals is equal to the emf.

(definition of 8).

@ A real emf device has internal resistance. The potential
difference between its terminals is equal to the emf only if there
is no current through the device.

@ The change in potential in traversing a resistance R in the di-
rection of the current is —iR; in the opposite direction it is +iR
(resistance rule).

@ The change in potential in traversing an ideal emf device in
the direction of the emf arrow is +@; in the opposite direction it
is —€ (emf rule).

@ Conservation of energy leads to the loop rule:

Loop Rule. The algebraic sum of the changes in potential encoun-

series is equal to the sum of the potentials across the
individual resistors.

27.10 Calculate the potential difference between any two.
points in a circuit.

27.11 Distinguish a real battery from an ideal battery and, in a
circuit diagram, replace a real battery with an ideal battery
and an explicitly shown resistance.

27.12 With a real battery in a circuit, calculate the potential dif-
ference between its terminals for current in the direction of
the emf and in the opposite direction.

27.13 Identify what is meant by grounding a circuit, and draw a
schematic diagram for such a connection.

27.14 Identify that grounding a circuit does not affect the
current in a circuit.

27.15 Calculate the dissipation rate of energy in a real battery.

27.16 Calculate the net rate of energy transfer in a real battery for
current in the direction of the emf and in the opposite direction.

tered in a complete traversal of any loop of a circuit must be zero.
Conservation of charge leads to the junction rule (Chapter 26):

Junction Rule. The sum of the currents entering any junction
must be equal to the sum of the currents leaving that junction.

@ When a real battery of emf @ and internal resistance r does
work on the charge carriers in a current i through the battery,
the rate P of energy transfer to the charge carriers is

P=iV,
where V is the potential across the terminals of the battery.
@ The rate P, at which energy is dissipated as thermal energy
in the battery is P.=?r.
@ The rate P..¢ at which the chemical energy in the battery
changes is Peg = 08.

@ When resistances are in series, they have the same current. The
equivalent resistance that can replace a series combination of re-
sistances is

n
Reg = > Rj (nresistances in series).
j=l

 

771
