26-1 ELECTRIC CURRENT 747

Current, as defined by Eq. 26-1, is a scalar because both charge and time in
that equation are scalars. Yet, as in Fig. 26-1b, we often represent a current with junction must equal
an arrow to indicate that charge is moving. Such arrows are not vectors, however, Pent
and they do not require vector addition. Figure 26-3a shows a conductor with (charge is conserved). i
current ig splitting at a junction into two branches. Because charge is conserved, iY
the magnitudes of the currents in the branches must add to yield the magnitude to
of the current in the original conductor, so that @

ip = iy + i. (26-3) N

As Fig. 26-3b suggests, bending or reorienting the wires in space does not change
the validity of Eq. 26-3. Current arrows show only a direction (or sense) of flow (a)
along a conductor, not a direction in space.

The current into the

    

The Directions of Currents

In Fig. 26-1b we drew the current arrows in the direction in which positively
charged particles would be forced to move through the loop by the electric field.
Such positive charge carriers, as they are often called, would move away from the
positive battery terminal and toward the negative terminal. Actually, the charge
carriers in the copper loop of Fig. 26-1b are electrons and thus are negatively
charged. The electric field forces them to move in the direction opposite the current
arrows, from the negative terminal to the positive terminal. For historical reasons, (b)
however, we use the following convention:

 

Figure 26-3 The relation i) = i, + i,is true at
junction a no matter what the orientation
in space of the three wires. Currents are

oO A current arrow is drawn in the direction in which positive charge carriers would
scalars, not vectors.

move, even if the actual charge carriers are negative and move in the opposite
direction.

We can use this convention because in most situations, the assumed motion
of positive charge carriers in one direction has the same effect as the actual
motion of negative charge carriers in the opposite direction. (When the effect is
not the same, we shall drop the convention and describe the actual motion.)

Vv] Checkpoint 1

The figure here shows a portion of a circuit.
What are the magnitude and direction of the
current i in the lower right-hand wire?

 

Sample Problem 26.01 Current is the rate at which charge passes a point

Water flows through a garden hose at a volume flow rate Calculations: We can write the current in terms of the num-
dV/dt of 450 cms. What is the current of negative charge? _ ber of molecules that pass through such a plane per second as

KEY IDEAS charge electrons \ / molecules
ee i= per per per
The current i of negative charge is due to the electrons in electron / \molecule second
the water molecules moving through the hose. The current is

the rate at which that negative charge passes through any — or i = (e)(10) a“

plane that cuts completely across the hose.
