Water Ionizes

The covalent bonds within a water molecule sometimes
break spontaneously. In pure water at 25°C, only 1 out of
every 550 million water molecules undergoes this process.
When it happens, one of the protons (hydrogen atom nu-
clei) dissociates from the molecule. Because the dissociated
proton lacks the negatively charged electron it was sharing
in the covalent bond with oxygen, its own positive charge is
no longer counterbalanced, and it becomes a positively
charged ion, H+. The rest of the dissociated water molecule,
which has retained the shared electron from the covalent
bond, is negatively charged and forms a hydroxide ion
(OH). This process of spontaneous ion formation is called
ionization:

mo > OH + Ht

water hydroxide ion hydrogenion (proton)

At 25°C, a liter of water contains q99gq000 (or
10-7) mole of H* ions. (A mole is defined as the weight in
grams that corresponds to the summed atomic masses of all
of the atoms in a molecule. In the case ofH*, the atomic
mass is 1, and a mole of H* ions would weigh 1 gram. One
mole of any substance always contains 6.02 x 1023 mole-
cules of the substance.) Therefore, the molar concentra-
tion of hydrogen ions (represented as [H*]) in pure water is
107 mole/liter. Actually, the hydrogen ion usually associ-
ates with another water molecule to form a hydronium

(H30*) ion.

pH

Amore convenient way to express the hydrogen ion concen-
tration of a solution is to use the pH scale (figure 2.18).
This scale defines pH as the negative logarithm of the hy-
drogen ion concentration in the solution:

pH =—log [H]

Because the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration is
simply the exponent of the molar concentration of H’*, the
pH equals the exponent times —1. Thus, pure water, with an
[H*] of 107 mole/liter, has a pH of 7. Recall that for every
H* ion formed when water dissociates, an OH™ ion is also
formed, meaning that the dissociation of water produces H*
and OH- in equal amounts. Therefore, a pH value of 7 indi-
cates neutrality—a balance between H* and OH—on the
pH scale.

Note that the pH scale is Jogarithmic, which means that a
difference of 1 on the scale represents a tenfold change in
hydrogen ion concentration. This means that a solution
with a pH of 4 has 10 times the concentration of H* than is
present in one with a pH of 5.

Acids. Any substance that dissociates in water to increase
the concentration of H* ions is called an acid. Acidic solu-

32 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

H* lon Examples of
Concentration DD. solutions
pH Value

10-1—— —— 1 —— Hydrochloric acid

Stomach acid
10°? 2 Lemon juice
10-3 —3 Vinegar, cola, beer
10-4 —— 4 —— Tomatoes
10° — 5 —— Black coffee

Normal rainwater
10-% — 6 —— Urine

Saliva
10°77 — 7 —— Pure water

Blood
10% — 8 —— Seawater
10-9 — 9 —— Baking soda
0-0 — 10 —— Great Salt Lake
10-11 —— — 11 —— Household ammonia
10-72 — 12 —

Household bleach
os — 13 ——

Oven cleaner
10-4 —— 14 —— Sodium hydroxide

FIGURE 2.18

The pH scale. The pH value of a solution indicates its
concentration of hydrogen ions. Solutions with a pH less than 7
are acidic, while those with a pH greater than 7 are basic. The
scale is logarithmic, so that a pH change of 1 means a tenfold
change in the concentration of hydrogen ions. Thus, lemon juice
is 100 times more acidic than tomato juice, and seawater is 10
times more basic than pure water, which has a pH of 7.

tions have pH values below 7. The stronger an acid is, the
more H* ions it produces and the lower its pH. For exam-
ple, hydrochloric acid (HCI), which is abundant in your
stomach, ionizes completely in water. This means that 107!
mole per liter of HCI will dissociate to form 107! mole per
liter of H* ions, giving the solution a pH of 1. The pH of
champagne, which bubbles because of the carbonic acid
dissolved in it, is about 2.

Bases. A substance that combines with H* ions when dis-
solved in water is called a base. By combining with Ht ions,
a base lowers the H* ion concentration in the solution.
Basic (or alkaline) solutions, therefore, have pH values
above 7. Very strong bases, such as sodium hydroxide
(NaOH), have pH values of 12 or more.
