28-1 MAGNETIC FIELDS AND THE DEFINITION OF B 805

¥ is along a particular axis through the point, force Fy is zero. For all other direc-
tions of v7, the magnitude of F’; is always proportional to v sin ¢, where ¢ is the
angle between the zero-force axis and the direction of ¥ . Furthermore, the direc-
tion of Fy is always perpendicular to the direction of 7. (These results suggest
that a cross product is involved.)

The Field. We can then define a magnetic field B to be a vector quantity that
is directed along the zero-force axis. We can next measure the magnitude of
F when @ is directed perpendicular to that axis and then define the magnitude
of B in terms of that force magnitude:

_ Fs
aly’
where q is the charge of the particle.
‘We can summarize all these results with the following vector equation:

F, = qv x B; (28-2)

that is, the force Fy on the particle is equal to the charge q times the cross product
of its velocity 7 and the field B (all measured in the same reference frame).
Using Eq. 3-24 for the cross product, we can write the magnitude of Fz as

Fz = |q\vB sin 4, (28-3)
where ¢ is the angle between the directions of velocity V and magnetic field B.

Finding the Magnetic Force on a Particle

Equation 28-3 tells us that the magnitude of the force F; acting on a particle in
a magnetic field is proportional to the charge g and speed v of the particle. Thus,
the force is equal to zero if the charge is zero or if the particle is stationary.
Equation 28-3 also tells us that the magnitude of the force is zero if ¥ and B are
either parallel (@ = 0°) or antiparallel (¢@ = 180°), and the force is at its maximum
when V and B are perpendicular to each other.

Directions. Equation 28-2 tells us all this plus the direction of F,. From
Module 3-3, we know that the cross product ¥ x B in Eq. 28-2 is a vector that is
perpendicular to the two vectors v and B. The right-hand rule (Figs. 28-2a
through c) tells us that the thumb of the right hand points in the direction
of ¥ x B when the fingers sweep V into B. If q is positive, then (by Eq. 28-2) the
force F’, has the same sign as  X B and thus must be in the same direction; that
is, for positive q, F, is directed along the thumb (Fig. 28-2d). If q is negative, then

Force on positive Force on negative
Cross 7 into # to get the new vector ¥ x B. Particle Particle

 

(a)

Figure 28-2 (a)-(c) The right-hand rule (in which Vis swept into B through the smaller an-
gle ¢ between them) gives the direction of ¥ X B as the direction of the thumb. (d) Ifqis
positive, then the direction of Fy = qv X Bis in the direction of ¥ x B. (e) If q is negative,
then the direction of F, is opposite that of ¥ x B.
