Review & Summary

Emf An emf device does work on charges to maintain a potential
difference between its output terminals. If dW is the work the device
does to force positive charge dq from the negative to the positive ter-
minal, then the emf (work per unit charge) of the device is

¢ a.

dq

The volt is the SI unit of emf as well as of potential difference. An ideal
emf device is one that lacks any internal resistance. The potential dif-
ference between its terminals is equal to the emf. A real emf device
has internal resistance. The potential difference between its terminals
is equal to the emf only if there is no current through the device.

(definition of €). (27-1)

Analyzing Circuits The change in potential in traversing a
resistance R in the direction of the current is —iR; in the opposite
direction it is +iR (resistance rule). The change in potential in tra-
versing an ideal emf device in the direction of the emf arrow is +€;
in the opposite direction it is —€ (emf rule). Conservation of
energy leads to the loop rule:

Loop Rule. The algebraic sum of the changes in potential encountered
ina complete traversal of any loop of a circuit must be zero.
Conservation of charge gives us the junction rule:

Junction Rule. The sum of the currents entering any junction
must be equal to the sum of the currents leaving that junction.

Single-Loop Circuits The current in a single-loop circuit con-
taining a single resistance R and an emf device with emf and in-
ternal resistance r is
é
Rt+r’
which reduces toi = €/R for an ideal emf device with r = 0.

i (27-4)

 

Power When a real battery of emf € and internal resistance r
does work on the charge carriers in a current i through the battery,
the rate P of energy transfer to the charge carriers is

P=iV,
<Questions

1 (a) In Fig. 27-182, with R; > Rp, is the potential difference

(27-14)

 

 

 

Ry
Figure 27-18 Questions 1 and 2.

QUESTIONS 793

where V is the potential across the terminals of the battery. The rate
P, at which energy is dissipated as thermal energy in the battery is

P= ir. (27-16)
The rate P.,,, at which the chemical energy in the battery changes is
Peme = 16. (27-17)

Series Resistances When resistances are in series, they have
the same current. The equivalent resistance that can replace a se-
ries combination of resistances is

Rg = 2 R,_(nresistances in series). (27-7)

-

Parallel Resistances When resistances are in parallel,
they have the same potential difference. The equivalent resistance
that can replace a parallel combination of resistances is given by
(27-24)

(n resistances in parallel).

 

RC Circuits When an emf is applied to a resistance R and ca-
pacitance Cin series, as in Fig. 27-15 with the switch at a,the charge
on the capacitor increases according to

q = CE(1—e*®C) (charging a capacitor), (27-33)

in which C€ = qq is the equilibrium (final) charge and RC = ris the ca-
pacitive time constant of the circuit. During the charging, the current is
de é i
i= 4 7 (= Jere (charging a capacitor). (27-34)
When a capacitor discharges through a resistance R, the charge on
the capacitor decays according to

= qet®C (discharging a capacitor). (27-39)

During the discharging, the current is

d ,
i= a = -(B eee (discharging a capacitor). (27-40)

across R; more than, less than, or equal to that across R,? (b) Is the
current through resistor R, more than, less than, or equal to that
through resistor R,?

2 (a) In Fig. 27-18a, are resistors R; and R; in series? (b) Are
resistors R, and R; in parallel? (c) Rank the equivalent resistances
of the four circuits shown in Fig. 27-18, greatest first.

3 You are to connect resistors R; and R>, with R; > R», to a bat-
tery, first individually, then in series, and then in parallel. Rank
those arrangements according to the amount of current through the
battery, greatest first.

4 In Fig. 27-19, a circuit consists of
a battery and two uniform resistors,
and the section lying along an x axis
is divided into five segments of equal
lengths. (a) Assume that R; = R, and
rank the segments according to the
magnitude of the average electric

 

cldle

a

 

 

 

 

Figure 27-19 Question 4.
