738 CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

Review & Summary

Capacitor; Capacitance A capacitor consists of two isolated
conductors (the plates) with charges +q and —q. Its capacitance C
is defined from

q=CV,

where V is the potential difference between the plates.

(25-1)

 

Deter ig Capacitance We generally determine the
capacitance of a particular capacitor configuration by (1) assuming a
charge q to have been placed on the plates (2) finding the electric field
E due to this charge, (3) evaluating the potential difference V, and (4)
calculating C from Eq. 25-1.Some specific results are the following:

A parallel-plate capacitor with flat parallel plates of area A
and spacing d has capacitance

eA

c= (25-9)

A cylindrical capacitor (two long coaxial cylinders) of length
L and radii a and b has capacitance

 

c (25-14)

L
= 2m bia)”
A spherical capacitor with concentric spherical plates of radii
a and b has capacitance
ab

 

C= Are) 7 (25-17)
An isolated sphere of radius R has capacitance
C= 4reR. (25-18)

Capacitors in Parallel and in Series The equivalent
capacitances C,, of combinations of individual capacitors con-
nected in parallel and in series can be found from

C= 2G (n capacitors in parallel) (25-19)
i

yt a
and = DFS _ (ncapacitorsin series). (25-20)

 

<Questions

1 Figure 25-18 shows plots of 47

charge versus potential difference a
for three parallel-plate capacitors
that have the plate areas and sepa-
rations given in the table. Which v

plot goes with which capacitor? Figure 25-18 Question 1.

Capacitor Area Separation
1 A d
2A d
3 A 2d

2 What is C,, of three capacitors, each of capacitance C, if they
are connected to a battery (a) in series with one another and (b) in
parallel? (c) In which arrangement is there more charge on the
equivalent capacitance?

Equivalent capacitances can be used to calculate the capacitances
of more complicated series—parallel combinations.

Potential Energy and Energy Density The electric poten-
tial energy U of a charged capacitor,

2
u=L=tev,

5-21, 25+
a (25-21, 25-22)

is equal to the work required to charge the capacitor. This energy
can be associated with the capacitor’s electric field E. By extension
we can associate stored energy with any electric field. In vacuum,
the energy density wv, or potential energy per unit volume, within an
electric field of magnitude EF is given by

U = 36) E. (25-25)
Capacitance with a Dielectric If the space between the
plates of a capacitor is completely filled with a dielectric material,
the capacitance C is increased by a factor «, called the dielectric
constant, which is characteristic of the material. In a region that
is completely filled by a dielectric, all electrostatic equations con-
taining ¢) must be modified by replacing e with Keo.

The effects of adding a dielectric can be understood physically
in terms of the action of an electric field on the permanent or
induced electric dipoles in the dielectric slab. The result is the for-
mation of induced charges on the surfaces of the dielectric, which
results in a weakening of the field within the dielectric for a given
amount of free charge on the plates.

Gauss’ Law with a Dielectric When a dielectric is present,
Gauss’ law may be generalized to

ef xB oda = 4

Here q is the free charge; any induced surface charge is accounted
for by including the dielectric constant « inside the integral.

(25-36)

3. (a) In Fig. 25-194, are capacitors 1 and 3 in series? (b) In the same

 

 

Gq

 

ee
Es.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) | I (b)

 

 

Gq

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 25-19 Question 3.
