732 CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

Table 25-1 Some Properties of Dielectrics’

Material

Air (1atm)
Polystyrene
Paper
Transformer
oil
Pyrex
Ruby mica
Porcelain
Silicon
Germanium
Ethanol
Water (20°C)
Water (25°C)
Titania
ceramic
Strontium
titanate

Dielectric Dielectric
Constant Strength
K (kV/mm)

1.00054 3
2.6 24
3.5 16

45
47 14
5.4
65
12
16
25
80.4
78.5

130

310 8

Fora vacuum, « = unity.

“Measured at room temperature, except for the

water.

the dielectric constant of the insulating material. Table 25-1 shows some dielec-
tric materials and their dielectric constants. The dielectric constant of a vacuum
is unity by definition. Because air is mostly empty space, its measured dielectric
constant is only slightly greater than unity. Even common paper can signifi-
cantly increase the capacitance of a capacitor, and some materials, such as
strontium titanate, can increase the capacitance by more than two orders of
magnitude.

Another effect of the introduction of a dielectric is to limit the potential
difference that can be applied between the plates to a certain value Vinay, called
the breakdown potential. If this value is substantially exceeded, the dielectric
material will break down and form a conducting path between the plates. Every
dielectric material has a characteristic dielectric strength, which is the maximum
value of the electric field that it can tolerate without breakdown. A few such
values are listed in Table 25-1.

As we discussed just after Eq. 25-18, the capacitance of any capacitor can be
written in the form

C= ef, (25-26)

in which & has the dimension of length. For example, £ = A/d for a parallel-plate
capacitor. Faraday’s discovery was that, with a dielectric completely filling the
space between the plates, Eq. 25-26 becomes

C= Kel = KCiie, (25-27)

where C,,, is the value of the capacitance with only air between the plates. For ex-
ample, if we fill a capacitor with strontium titanate, with a dielectric constant of
310, we multiply the capacitance by 310.

Figure 25-13 provides some insight into Faraday’s experiments. In
Fig. 25-13a the battery ensures that the potential difference V between the plates
will remain constant. When a dielectric slab is inserted between the plates, the
charge q on the plates increases by a factor of «; the additional charge is delivered
to the capacitor plates by the battery. In Fig. 25-13b there is no battery, and there-
fore the charge q must remain constant when the dielectric slab is inserted; then
the potential difference V between the plates decreases by a factor of x.
Both these observations are consistent (through the relation g = CV) with the
increase in capacitance caused by the dielectric.

Comparison of Eqs. 25-26 and 25-27 suggests that the effect of a dielectric
can be summed up in more general terms:

Ok) Ina region completely filled by a dielectric material of dielectric constant «, all
electrostatic equations containing the permittivity constant ey are to be modified
by replacing ey with xe,

 

 

 

q=aconstant

(b)

Figure 25-13 (a) If the potential difference between the plates of a capacitor is maintained, as by battery B, the effect of a
dielectric is to increase the charge on the plates. (b) If the charge on the capacitor plates is maintained, as in this case,
the effect of a dielectric is to reduce the potential difference between the plates. The scale shown is that of a potentiometer,
a device used to measure potential difference (here, between the plates). A capacitor cannot discharge through a

potentiometer.
