776 CHAPTER 27 CIRCUITS

 

Real battery

 

 

 

 

 

Rs
WWW
a
i
(a) . pi
Series resistors
and their
equivalent have
the same

current (“ser-i”).

 

(5)
Figure 27-5 (a) Three resistors are connected
in series between points a and b. (b) An
equivalent circuit, with the three resistors
replaced with their equivalent resistance R,,.

Other Single-Loop Circuits

Next we extend the simple circuit of Fig. 27-3 in two ways.

Internal Resistance

Figure 27-4a shows a real battery, with internal resistance r, wired to an external
resistor of resistance R. The internal resistance of the battery is the electrical
resistance of the conducting materials of the battery and thus is an unremoy-
able feature of the battery. In Fig. 27-4a, however, the battery is drawn as if it
could be separated into an ideal battery with emf € and a resistor of resistance
r.The order in which the symbols for these separated parts are drawn does not
matter.

i
—

Potential (V)

 

(a) (b)

Figure 27-4 (a) A single-loop circuit containing a real battery having internal resistance
rand emf €. (b) The same circuit, now spread out in a line. The potentials encountered
in traversing the circuit clockwise from a are also shown. The potential V, is arbitrarily
assigned a value of zero, and other potentials in the circuit are graphed relative to V,,.

If we apply the loop rule clockwise beginning at point a, the changes in
potential give us

 

€—ir-iR=0. (27-3)
Solving for the current, we find
é
= . 27-4
‘Retr ( )

Note that this equation reduces to Eq. 27-2 if the battery is ideal—that is, ifr = 0.

Figure 27-4b shows graphically the changes in electric potential around the
circuit. (To better link Fig. 27-4b with the closed circuit in Fig. 27-4a, imagine
curling the graph into a cylinder with point a at the left overlapping point a at
the right.) Note how traversing the circuit is like walking around a (potential)
mountain back to your starting point— you return to the starting elevation.

In this book, when a battery is not described as real or if no internal resist-
ance is indicated, you can generally assume that it is ideal—but, of course, in the
real world batteries are always real and have internal resistance.

Resistances in Series

Figure 27-5a shows three resistances connected in series to an ideal battery with
emf ©. This description has little to do with how the resistances are drawn.
Rather, “in series” means that the resistances are wired one after another and
that a potential difference V is applied across the two ends of the series. In
Fig. 27-5a, the resistances are connected one after another between a and b, anda
potential difference is maintained across a and b by the battery. The potential
differences that then exist across the resistances in the series produce identical
currents jin them. In general,
