25-4 ENERGY STORED IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD 729

Suppose that, at a given instant, a charge q’ has been transferred from one
plate of a capacitor to the other. The potential difference V’ between the plates at
that instant will be q'/C. If an extra increment of charge dq’ is then transferred,
the increment of work required will be, from Eq. 24-6,
qd
Cc
The work required to bring the total capacitor charge up to a final value q is

w Jaw [aay £
~ “Ch 1 36

This work is stored as potential energy U in the capacitor, so that

 

dw = V'dq' = “Lhagq’.

2
ue a (potential energy). (25-21)

From Eg. 25-1, we can also write this as
U = $CV? (potential energy). (25-22)

Equations 25-21 and 25-22 hold no matter what the geometry of the capacitor is.

To gain some physical insight into energy storage, consider two parallel-
plate capacitors that are identical except that capacitor 1 has twice the plate
separation of capacitor 2. Then capacitor | has twice the volume between its
plates and also, from Eq. 25-9, half the capacitance of capacitor 2. Equation 25-
4 tells us that if both capacitors have the same charge q, the electric fields be-
tween their plates are identical. And Eq. 25-21 tells us that capacitor 1 has twice
the stored potential energy of capacitor 2. Thus, of two otherwise identical ca-
pacitors with the same charge and same electric field, the one with twice the
volume between its plates has twice the stored potential energy. Arguments like
this tend to verify our earlier assumption:

Oo The potential energy of a charged capacitor may be viewed as being stored in the
electric field between its plates.

Explosions in Airborne Dust

As we discussed in Module 24-8, making contact with certain materials, such as
clothing, carpets, and even playground slides, can leave you with a significant
electrical potential. You might become painfully aware of that potential if a
spark leaps between you and a grounded object, such as a faucet. In many in-
dustries involving the production and transport of powder, such as in the cos-
metic and food industries, such a spark can be disastrous. Although the powder
in bulk may not burn at all, when individual powder grains are airborne and
thus surrounded by oxygen, they can burn so fiercely that a cloud of the grains
burns as an explosion. Safety engineers cannot eliminate all possible sources of
sparks in the powder industries. Instead, they attempt to keep the amount of
energy available in the sparks below the threshold value U, (~ 150 mJ) typi-
cally required to ignite airborne grains.

Suppose a person becomes charged by contact with various surfaces as he walks
through an airborne powder. We can roughly model the person as a spherical capaci-
tor of radius R = 1.8 m. From Eq. 25-18 (C = 4zeqR) and Eq. 25-22 (U = $CV), we
see that the energy of the capacitor is

U = $(4re9R)V?.
