DNA polymerase Ill

 

FIGURE 14.17

How DNA polymerase III works. This diagram presents a current view of how DNA polymerase II works. Note that the DNA on the
lagging strand is folded to allow the dimeric DNA polymerase III molecule to replicate both strands of the parental DNA duplex
simultaneously. This brings the 3’ end of each completed Okazaki fragment close to the start site for the next fragment.

1. Opening up the DNA double helix. The very sta-
ble DNA double helix must be opened up and its
strands separated from each other for semiconserva-
tive replication to occur.

Stage one: Initiating replication. The binding of ini-
tiator proteins to the replication origin starts an in-
tricate series of interactions that opens the helix.
Stage two: Unwinding the duplex. After initiation,
“unwinding” enzymes called helicases bind to and
move along one strand, shouldering aside the other
strand as they go.

Stage three: Stabilizing the single strands. The un-
wound portion of the DNA double helix is stabilized
by single-strand binding protein, which binds to
the exposed single strands, protecting them from
cleavage and preventing them from rewinding.

Stage four: Relieving the torque generated by unwinding.
For replication to proceed at 1000 nucleotides per
second, the parental helix ahead of the replication
fork must rotate 100 revolutions per second! To re-
lieve the resulting twisting, called torque, enzymes
known as topisomerases—or, more informally, gy-
rases—cleave a strand of the helix, allow it to swivel
around the intact strand, and then reseal the broken
strand.

2. Building a primer. New DNA cannot be synthe-
sized on the exposed templates until a primer is con-
structed, as DNA polymerases require 3’ primers to
initiate replication. The necessary primer is a short
stretch of RNA, added by a specialized RNA poly-
merase called primase in a multisubunit complex in-

formally called a primosome. Why an RNA primer,
rather than DNA? Starting chains on exposed tem-
plates introduces many errors; RNA marks this initial
stretch as “temporary,” making this error-prone
stretch easy to excise later.

3. Assembling complementary strands. Next, the
dimeric DNA polymerase IIT then binds to the repli-
cation fork. While the leading strand complexes with
one half of the polymerase dimer, the lagging strand
is thought to loop around and complex with the other
half of the polymerase dimer (figure 14.17). Moving
in concert down the parental double helix, DNA
polymerase III catalyzes the formation of comple-
mentary sequences on each of the two single strands
at the same time.

4. Removing the primer. The enzyme DNA poly-
merase I now removes the RNA primer and fills in
the gap, as well as any gaps between Okazaki frag-
ments.

5. Joining the Okazaki fragments. After any gaps
between Okazaki fragments are filled in, the enzyme
DNA ligase joins the fragments to the lagging
strand.

 

DNA replication involves many different proteins that
open and unwind the DNA double helix, stabilize the
single strands, synthesize RNA primers, assemble new
complementary strands on each exposed parental
strand—one of them discontinuously—remove the RNA.
primer, and join new discontinuous segments on the
lagging strand.

 

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 293
