15.1
Cells Use RNA to Make Protein

To find out how a eukaryotic cell uses its DNA to direct the
production of particular proteins, you must first ask where
in the cell the proteins are made. We can answer this ques-
tion by placing cells in a medium containing radioactively
labeled amino acids for a short time. The cells will take up
the labeled amino acids and incorporate them into proteins.
If we then look to see where in the cells radioactive proteins
first appear, we will find that it is not in the nucleus, where
the DNA is, but rather in the cytoplasm, on large RNA-
protein aggregates called ribosomes (figure 15.2). These
polypeptide-making factories are very complex, composed
of several RNA molecules and over 50 different proteins
(figure 15.3). Protein synthesis involves three different sites
on the ribosome surface, called the P, A, and E sites, dis-
cussed later in this chapter.

Kinds of RNA

The class of RNA found in ribosomes is called ribosomal
RNA (FRNA). During polypeptide synthesis, rRNA pro-
vides the site where polypeptides are assembled. In addition
to rRNA, there are two other major classes of RNA in cells.
Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules both transport the
amino acids to the ribosome for use in building the polypep-
tides and position each amino acid at the correct place on
the elongating polypeptide chain (figure 15.4). Human cells
contain about 45 different kinds of tRNA molecules. Mes-
senger RNA (mRNA) molecules are long strands of RNA
that are transcribed from DNA and that travel to the ribo-
somes to direct precisely which amino acids are assembled
into polypeptides.

Large Large ribosomal
subunit

subunit

Small
subunit

 

Small ribosomal
subunit

FIGURE 15.2

A ribosome is composed of two subunits. The smaller subunit
fits into a depression on the surface of the larger one. The A, P,
and E sites on the ribosome, discussed later in this chapter, play
key roles in protein synthesis.

300 = Part V Molecular Genetics

The Central Dogma traces the flow of gene-encoded information.

These RNA molecules, together with ribosomal proteins
and certain enzymes, constitute a system that reads the ge-
netic messages encoded by nucleotide sequences in the
DNA and produces the polypeptides that those sequences
specify. As we will see, biologists have also learned to read
these messages. In so doing, they have learned a great deal
about what genes are and how they are able to dictate what a
protein will be like and when it will be made.

The Central Dogma

All organisms, from the simplest bacteria to ourselves, use
the same basic mechanism of reading and expressing genes,
so fundamental to life as we know it that it is often referred
to as the “Central Dogma”: Information passes from the
genes (DNA) to an RNA copy of the gene, and the RNA
copy directs the sequential assembly of a chain of amino

acids (figure 15.5). Said briefly,
DNA RNA 3 protein

 

FIGURE 15.3

Ribosomes are very complex machines. The complete atomic
structure of a bacterial large ribosomal subunit has been
determined at 2.4 A resolution. The RNA of the subunit is shown
in gray and the proteins in gold. The subunit’s RNA is twisted
into irregular shapes that fit together like a three-dimensional
jigsaw puzzle. Proteins are abundant everywhere on its surface
except where peptide bonds form and where it contacts the small
subunit. The proteins stabilize the structure by interacting with
adjacent RNA strands, often with folded extensions that reach
into the subunit’s interior.
