804 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

   

igital Vision/Getty Images, Inc.
Figure 28-1 Using an electromagnet to collect
and transport scrap metal at a steel mill.

magnetic recording, the industry still depends on the magnets that control CD
and DVD players and computer hard drives; magnets also drive the speaker
cones in headphones, TVs, computers, and telephones. A modern car comes
equipped with dozens of magnets because they are required in the motors for
engine ignition, automatic window control, sunroof control, and windshield wiper
control. Most security alarm systems, doorbells, and automatic door latches
employ magnets. In short, you are surrounded by magnets.

The science of magnetic fields is physics; the application of magnetic fields is
engineering. Both the science and the application begin with the question “What
produces a magnetic field?”

What Produces a Magnetic Field?

Because an electric field E is produced by an electric charge, we might reason-
ably expect that a magnetic field Bis produced by a magnetic charge. Although
individual magnetic charges (called magnetic monopoles) are predicted by cer-
tain theories, their existence has not been confirmed. How then are magnetic
fields produced? There are two ways.

One way is to use moving electrically charged particles, such as a current in
a wire, to make an electromagnet. The current produces a magnetic field that can
be used, for example, to control a computer hard drive or to sort scrap metal
(Fig. 28-1). In Chapter 29, we discuss the magnetic field due to a current.

The other way to produce a magnetic field is by means of elementary parti-
cles such as electrons because these particles have an intrinsic magnetic field
around them. That is, the magnetic field is a basic characteristic of each particle
just as mass and electric charge (or lack of charge) are basic characteristics. As we
discuss in Chapter 32, the magnetic fields of the electrons in certain materials add
together to give a net magnetic field around the material. Such addition is the
reason why a permanent magnet, the type used to hang refrigerator notes, has a
permanent magnetic field. In other materials, the magnetic fields of the electrons
cancel out, giving no net magnetic field surrounding the material. Such cancella-
tion is the reason you do not have a permanent field around your body, which is
good because otherwise you might be slammed up against a refrigerator door
every time you passed one.

Our first job in this chapter is to define the magnetic field B. We do so by
using the experimental fact that when a charged particle moves through a
magnetic field, a magnetic force Fy acts on the particle.

The Definition of B

We determined the electric field EF at a point by putting a test particle of charge
q at rest at that point and measuring the electric force F;; acting on the particle.
We then defined E' as

pate, (28-1)
q
If a magnetic monopole were available, we could define B in a similar way.
Because such particles have not | been found, we must define B in another way,
in terms of the magnetic force F,, exerted on a moving electrically charged test
particle.

Moving Charged Particle. In principle, we do this by firing a charged parti-
cle through the point at which B is to be defined, , using various directions and
speeds for the particle and determining the force F;, that acts on the particle at
that point. After many such trials we would find that when the particle’s velocity
