746 CHAPTER 26 CURRENT AND RESISTANCE

(a)

 

(b)

Figure 26-1. (a) A loop of copper in electro-
static equilibrium. The entire loop is at a
single potential, and the electric field is zero
at all points inside the copper. (b) Adding a
battery imposes an electric potential differ-
ence between the ends of the loop that are
connected to the terminals of the battery.
The battery thus produces an electric field
within the loop, from terminal to terminal,
and the field causes charges to move

around the loop. This movement of charges
is a current i.

The current is the same in
any cross section.

 

a
1
1
1
1
1

+ mim ==

I 1
I I c
I I
a’ by
Figure 26-2 The current i through the con-
ductor has the same value at planes aa’,
bb',and cc’.

Electric Current

Although an electric current is a stream of moving charges, not all moving
charges constitute an electric current. If there is to be an electric current through
a given surface, there must be a net flow of charge through that surface. Two
examples clarify our meaning.

1. The free electrons (conduction electrons) in an isolated length of copper wire are
in random motion at speeds of the order of 10° m/s If you pass a hypothetical
plane through such a wire, conduction electrons pass through it in both directions
at the rate of many billions per second—but there is no net transport of charge
and thus no current through the wire. However, if you connect the ends of the wire
to a battery, you slightly bias the flow in one direction, with the result that there
nowis a net transport of charge and thus an electric current through the wire.

2. The flow of water through a garden hose represents the directed flow of
positive charge (the protons in the water molecules) at a rate of perhaps sev-
eral million coulombs per second. There is no net transport of charge, however,
because there is a parallel flow of negative charge (the electrons in the water
molecules) of exactly the same amount moving in exactly the same direction.

In this chapter we restrict ourselves largely to the study —within the frame-
work of classical physics—of steady currents of conduction electrons moving
through metallic conductors such as copper wires.

As Fig. 26-la reminds us, any isolated conducting loop—regardless of
whether it has an excess charge —is all at the same potential. No electric field can
exist within it or along its surface. Although conduction electrons are available,
no net electric force acts on them and thus there is no current.

If, as in Fig. 26-1b, we insert a battery in the loop, the conducting loop is no
longer at a single potential. Electric fields act inside the material making up the
loop, exerting forces on the conduction electrons, causing them to move and thus
establishing a current. After a very short time, the electron flow reaches a con-
stant value and the current is in its steady state (it does not vary with time).

Figure 26-2 shows a section of a conductor, part of a conducting loop in which
current has been established. If charge dq passes through a hypothetical plane
(such as aa’) in time dt, then the current i through that plane is defined as

i= a (definition of current). (26-1)

We can find the charge that passes through the plane in a time interval

extending from 0 to f by integration:

q= Ja = [ia (26-2)

in which the current i may vary with time.

Under steady-state conditions, the current is the same for planes aa’, bb’, and
cc' and indeed for all planes that pass completely through the conductor, no
matter what their location or orientation. This follows from the fact that charge is
conserved. Under the steady-state conditions assumed here, an electron must
pass through plane aa’ for every electron that passes through plane cc’. In the
same way, if we have a steady flow of water through a garden hose, a drop of
water must leave the nozzle for every drop that enters the hose at the other end.
The amount of water in the hose is a conserved quantity.

The SI unit for current is the coulomb per second, or the ampere (A), which
is an SI base unit:

1 ampere = 1A = | coulomb per second = 1 Cis.

The formal definition of the ampere is discussed in Chapter 29.
