806 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

 

Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory/Photo
Research:

Figure 28-3 The tracks of two electrons (e~)

and a positron (e*) ina bubble chamber

that is immersed in a uniform magnetic field

that is directed out of the plane of the page.

 

Table 28-1 Some Approximate
Magnetic Fields

At surface of neutron star 10° T
Near big electromagnet 15T
Near small bar magnet 10°T
At Earth’s surface 10*T
In interstellar space 10° T

Smallest value in
magnetically
shielded room 10-4 T

the force F; and cross product ¥ x B have opposite signs and thus must be in

opposite directions. For negative q, Fy is directed opposite the thumb (Fig, 28-2e).

Heads up: Neglect of this effect of negative qg is a very common error on exams.
Regardless of the sign of the charge, however,

ah
NaI the force F;, acting on a charged particle moving with velocity ¥ through a
magnetic field B is always perpendicular to v’ and B.

Thus, F; never has a component parallel to 7. This means that Fs cannot change
the particle’s speed v (and thus it cannot change the particle’s kinetic energy).
The force can change only the direction of ¥ (and thus the direction of travel);
only in this sense can Fy accelerate the particle.

To develop a feeling for Eq. 28-2, consider Fig. 28-3, which shows some tracks
left by charged particles moving rapidly through a bubble chamber. The chamber,
which is filled with liquid hydrogen, is immersed in a strong uniform magnetic
field that is directed out of the plane of the figure. An incoming gamma ray
particle—which leaves no track because it is uncharged—transforms into an
electron (spiral track marked e~) and a positron (track marked e*) while it
knocks an electron out of a hydrogen atom (long track marked e~). Check with
Eg. 28-2 and Fig. 28-2 that the three tracks made by these two negative particles
and one positive particle curve in the proper directions.

Unit. The SI unit for B that follows from Egs. 28-2 and 28-3 is the newton
per coulomb-meter per second. For convenience, this is called the tesla (T):

newton

Ttesla=1T= 1 (coulomb)(meter/second) *

Recalling that a coulomb per second is an ampere, we have

newton N

iT=1 (coulomb/second)(meter) ! A-m’

(28-4)

An earlier (non-SI) unit for B still in common use, is the gauss (G),and
1 tesla = 10* gauss. (28-5)

Table 28-1 lists the magnetic fields that occur in a few situations. Note that Earth’s
magnetic field near the planet’s surface is about 10~* T (= 100 «xT or 1 G).

Iv] Checkpoint 1

The figure shows three sit- y
uations in which a charged
particle with velocity 7
travels through a uniform

 

 

 

magnetic field B.In each

Se eet e et aaa | -
rection of the magnetic B
force Fz on the particle? (a)

Magnetic Field Lines

We can represent magnetic fields with field lines, as we did for electric fields.
Similar rules apply: (1) the direction of the tangent to a magnetic field line at
any point gives the direction of B at that point, and (2) the spacing of the lines
represents the magnitude of B—the magnetic field is stronger where the lines
are closer together, and conversely.
