794 CHAPTER 27 CIRCUITS

field in them, greatest first. (b) Now assume that R; > R, and then
again rank the segments. (c) What is the direction of the electric
field along the x axis?

5 For each circuit in Fig. 27-20, are the resistors connected in se-
ries, in parallel, or neither?

=y+

(a) (d) (O
Figure 27-20 Question 5.

6 Res-monster maze. In Fig. 27-21, all the resistors have a resis-
tance of 4.0 © and all the (ideal) batteries have an emf of 4.0 V.
What is the current through resistor R? (If you can find the proper
loop through this maze, you can answer the question with a few
seconds of mental calculation.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 27-21 Question 6.

7 A resistor R; is wired to a battery, then resistor R; is added
in series. Are (a) the potential difference across R; and (b) the
current i; through R; now more than, less than, or the same as pre-
viously? (c) Is the equivalent resistance Rj, of R; and R, more
than, less than, or equal to R,?

8 What is the equivalent resistance of three resistors, each of
resistance R, if they are connected to an ideal battery (a) in se-
ries with one another and (b) in parallel with one another? (c)
Is the potential difference across the series arrangement
greater than, less than, or equal to that across the parallel
arrangement?

9 Two resistors are wired to a battery. (a) In which arrangement,
parallel or series, are the potential differences across each resistor
and across the equivalent resistance all equal? (b) In which
arrangement are the currents through each resistor and through
the equivalent resistance all equal?

10 Cap-monster maze. In Fig. 27-22, all the capacitors have a
capacitance of 6.0 wF, and all the batteries have an emf of 10 V.
What is the charge on capacitor C? (If you can find the proper loop
through this maze, you can answer the question with a few seconds
of mental calculation.)

1
al

4dHHH
i
-—|
HHHH

Lr

4H

dh
a +

 

at c

1 I 1F4I L,,

Figure 27-22 Question 10.

 

 

 

 

11 Initially, a single resistor R, is wired to a battery. Then resistor
Ry is added in parallel. Are (a) the potential difference across R;
and (b) the current i, through R; now more than, less than, or the
same as previously? (c) Is the equivalent resistance Rj of Rj and
R, more than, less than, or equal to R,? (d) Is the total current
through R; and R, together more than, less than, or equal to the
current through R; previously?

12 After the switch in Fig. 27-15 is closed on point a, there is cur-
rent i through resistance R. Figure 27-23 gives that current for four
sets of values of R and capacitance C: (1) Ro and Co, (2) 2Ry and Cy,
(3) Ry and 2C,, (4) 2Ry and 2Cy. Which set goes with which curve?

i

\
b
Figure 27-23 Question 12. t

13 Figure 27-24 shows three sections of circuit that are to be con-
nected in turn to the same battery via a switch as in Fig. 27-15. The
resistors are all identical, as are the capacitors. Rank the sections
according to (a) the final (equilibrium) charge on the capacitor and
(b) the time required for the capacitor to reach 50% of its final
charge, greatest first.

af ll
T

(3)
Figure 27-24 Question 13.
