27-1

ke) LOOP RULE: The algebraic sum of the changes in potential encountered in a
complete traversal of any loop of a circuit must be zero.

This is often referred to as Kirchhoff's loop rule (or Kirchhoff's voltage law), after
German physicist Gustav Robert Kirchhoff. This rule is equivalent to saying that
each point on a mountain has only one elevation above sea level. If you start
from any point and return to it after walking around the mountain, the algebraic
sum of the changes in elevation that you encounter must be zero.

In Fig. 27-3, let us start at point a, whose potential is V,, and mentally walk
clockwise around the circuit until we are back at a, keeping track of potential
changes as we move. Our starting point is at the low-potential terminal of the bat-
tery. Because the battery is ideal, the potential difference between its terminals is
equal to 6. When we pass through the battery to the high-potential terminal, the
change in potential is +6.

As we walk along the top wire to the top end of the resistor, there is no
potential change because the wire has negligible resistance; it is at the same
potential as the high-potential terminal of the battery. So too is the top end of the
resistor. When we pass through the resistor, however, the potential changes
according to Eq. 26-8 (which we can rewrite as V = iR). Moreover, the potential
must decrease because we are moving from the higher potential side of the resis-
tor. Thus, the change in potential is —iR.

We return to point a by moving along the bottom wire. Because this wire also has
negligible resistance, we again find no potential change. Back at point a, the potential
is again V,. Because we traversed a complete loop, our initial potential, as modified
for potential changes along the way, must be equal to our final potential; that is,

V,+ €—iR=V,.
The value of V, cancels from this equation, which becomes
€—iR=0.
Solving this equation for i gives us the same result, i = ‘€/R, as the energy method
(Eq. 27-2).
If we apply the loop rule to a complete counterclockwise walk around the

circuit, the rule gives us
—€+iR=0

and we again find that i = ¢/R. Thus, you may mentally circle a loop in either
direction to apply the loop rule.

To prepare for circuits more complex than that of Fig. 27-3, let us set down
two rules for finding potential differences as we move around a loop:

Oo RESISTANCE RULE: For a move through a resistance in the direction of the
current, the change in potential is in the opposite direction it is +iR.

 

o EMF RULE: For a move through an ideal emf device in the direction of the emf
arrow, the change in potential is +€; in the opposite direction it is —€.

Iv] Checkpoint 1 ——i

The figure shows the current fina single-loop circuit
with a battery B and a resistance R (and wires of neg-

ligible resistance). (a) Should the emfarrowatBbe NY
drawn pointing leftward or rightward? At points a,b, B

and c,rank (b) the magnitude of the current, (c) the electric potential, and (d) the
electric potential energy of the charge carriers, greatest first.

SINGLE-LOOP CIRCUITS

775
