15.2 Genes encode information in three-nucleotide code words.

The Genetic Code

The essential question of gene expression is, “How does
the order of nucleotides ina DNA molecule encode the in-
formation that specifies the order of amino acids in a
polypeptide?” The answer came in 1961, through an exper-
iment led by Francis Crick. That experiment was so elegant
and the result so critical to understanding the genetic code
that we will describe it in detail.

Proving Code Words Have Only Three Letters

Crick and his colleagues reasoned that the genetic code
most likely consisted of a series of blocks of information
called codons, each corresponding to an amino acid in the
encoded protein. They further hypothesized that the infor-
mation within one codon was probably a sequence of three
nucleotides specifying a particular amino acid. They ar-
rived at the number three, because a two-nucleotide codon
would not yield enough combinations to code for the 20
different amino acids that commonly occur in proteins.
With four DNA nucleotides (G, C, T, and A), only ?, or
16, different pairs of nucleotides could be formed. How-
ever, these same nucleotides can be arranged in 4°, or 64,
different combinations of three, more than enough to code
for the 20 amino acids.

In theory, the codons in a gene could lie immediately
adjacent to each other, forming a continuous sequence of
transcribed nucleotides. Alternatively, the sequence could
be punctuated with untranscribed nucleotides between the
codons, like the spaces that separate the words in this sen-
tence. It was important to determine which method cells
employ because these two ways of transcribing DNA imply
different translating processes.

To choose between these alternative mechanisms, Crick
and his colleagues used a chemical to delete one, two, or
three nucleotides from a viral DNA molecule and then
asked whether a gene downstream of the deletions was
transcribed correctly. When they made a single deletion or
two deletions near each other, the reading frame of the
genetic message shifted, and the downstream gene was
transcribed as nonsense. However, when they made three
deletions, the correct reading frame was restored, and the
sequences downstream were transcribed correctly. They
obtained the same results when they made additions to the
DNA consisting of one, two, or three nucleotides. As
shown in figure 15.6, these results could not have been ob-
tained if the codons were punctuated by untranscribed nu-
cleotides. Thus, Crick and his colleagues concluded that
the genetic code is read in increments consisting of three
nucleotides (in other words, it is a triplet code) and that
reading occurs continuously without punctuation between
the three-nucleotide units.

302 =PartV Molecular Genetics

Delete 1 base
WHYDIDTHEREDBATEATTHEFATRAT?

 

Hypothesis A : Delete T

unpunctuated WHY DID HER EDB ATE ATT HEF ATR AT?
(Nonsense) ————>

 

WHYODIDOTHEOREDOBATOEATOTHEOFATORAT?
Hypothesis B : Delete T

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

punctuated OoOoORBEMAR
WHY DID HEO EDO ATO ATO HEO ATO AT?
—— (Nonsense)

 

Delete 3 bases

 

Hypothesis A; WHYDIDTHEREDBATEATTHEFATRAT?
unpunetuated DoeteTRand A

WHY DID HEE DBT EAT THE FAT RAT?
— (Sense) ——>

(Nonsense)

WHYODIDOTHEOREDOBATOEATOTHEOFATORAT?
Hypothesis B : Delete T,R,andA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

punctuated OoDOBRHREAE
WHY DID HEO DOB OEA OTH OFA ORA?
—— (Nonsense)
FIGURE 15.6

Using frame-shift alterations of DNA to determine if the
genetic code is punctuated. The hypothetical genetic message
presented here is “Why did the red bat eat the fat rat?” Under
hypothesis B, which proposes that the message is punctuated, the
three-letter words are separated by nucleotides that are not read
(indicated by the letter “O”).

Breaking the Genetic Code

Within a year of Crick’s experiment, other researchers suc-
ceeded in determining the amino acids specified by particular
three-nucleotide units. Marshall Nirenberg discovered in
1961 that adding the synthetic mRNA molecule polyU (an
RNA molecule consisting of a string of uracil nucleotides) to
cell-free systems resulted in the production of the polypep-
tide polyphenylalanine (a string of phenylalanine amino
acids). Therefore, one of the three-nucleotide sequences
specifying phenylalanine is UUU. In 1964, Nirenberg and
Philip Leder developed a powerful triplet binding assay in
which a specific triplet was tested to see which radioactive
amino acid (complexed to tRNA) it would bind. Some 47 of
the 64 possible triplets gave unambiguous results. Har Gob-
ind Khorana decoded the remaining 17 triplets by construct-
ing artificial mRNA molecules of defined sequence and ex-
amining what polypeptides they directed. In these ways, all
64 possible three-nucleotide sequences were tested, and the
full genetic code was determined (table 15.1).
