Magnetic Fields

28-1 MAGNETIC FIELDS AND THE DEFINITION OF B

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.01 Distinguish an electromagnet from a permanent
magnet.

28.02 Identify that a magnetic field is a vector quantity and
thus has both magnitude and direction.

28.03 Explain how a magnetic field can be defined in terms
of what happens to a charged particle moving through
the field.

28.04 For a charged particle moving through a uniform mag-
netic field, apply the relationship between force magnitude
Fz, charge q, speed v, field magnitude B, and the angle &
between the directions of the velocity vector V and the
magnetic field vector B.

28.05 For a charged particle sent through a uniform
magnetic field, find the direction of the magnetic force
Fz by (1) applying the right-hand rule to find the direction

of the cross product 7 x B’ and (2) determining what
effect the charge gq has on the direction.

28.06 Find the magnetic force Fy acting on a moving charged
particle by evaluating the cross product q(¥ x B) in
unit-vector notation and magnitude-angle notation.

28.07 Identify that the magnetic force vector F, must always
be perpendicular to both the velocity vector ¥ and the
magnetic field vector B.

28.08 Identify the effect of the magnetic force on the
particle's speed and kinetic energy.

28.09 Identify a magnet as being a magnetic dipole.

28.10 Identify that opposite magnetic poles attract each
other and like magnetic poles repel each other.

28.11 Explain magnetic field lines, including where they origi-
nate and terminate and what their spacing represents.

 

Key Ideas
@ When a charged particle moves through a magnetic field B,
a magnetic force acts on the particle as given by

Fy = q(v x B),
where q is the particle's charge (sign included) and Vv’ is the
particle's velocity.
@ The right-hand rule for cross products gives the direction

of ¥ x B. The sign of q then determines whether F’, is
in the same direction as ¥ x B or in the opposite
direction.

@ The magnitude of Fris given by
Fy =|q\vB sin

where is the angle between ¥ and B.

 

What Is Physics?

As we have discussed, one major goal of physics is the study of how an electric
field can produce an electric force on a charged object. A closely related goal is
the study of how a magnetic field can produce a magnetic force on a (moving)
charged particle or on a magnetic object such as a magnet. You may already have
a hint of what a magnetic field is if you have ever attached a note to a refrigerator
door with a small magnet or accidentally erased a credit card by moving it near
a magnet. The magnet acts on the door or credit card via its magnetic field.

The applications of magnetic fields and magnetic forces are countless and
changing rapidly every year. Here are just a few examples. For decades, the
entertainment industry depended on the magnetic recording of music and images
on audiotape and videotape. Although digital technology has largely replaced

803
