728 CHAPTER 25 CAPACITANCE

is no electric field within the connecting wires to move con-
duction electrons. The initial charge on capacitor 1 is then
shared between the two capacitors.

Calculations: Initially, when capacitor 1 is connected to the
battery, the charge it acquires is, from Eq. 25-1,
qo = CyVo = (3.55 X 10-° F)(6.30 V)
= 22.365 x 10°C.
‘When switch S in Fig. 25-11 is closed and capacitor 1 begins

to charge capacitor 2, the electric potential and charge on
capacitor 1 decrease and those on capacitor 2 increase until

V, = V2 (equilibrium).
From Eq. 25-1, we can rewrite this as
fh _ 2 (equilibrium).
a G

WILY

Because the total charge cannot magically change, the total
after the transfer must be

G1 + G2 =o (charge conservation);
thus p= -n
‘We can now rewrite the second equilibrium equation as
fh _ Wh
q G
Solving this for q, and substituting given data, we find
GH = 6.35 pC. (Answer)

The rest of the initial charge (qo = 22.365 wC) must be on
capacitor 2:

GQ = 16.0 nC. (Answer)

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

25-4 ENERGY STORED IN AN ELECTRIC FIELD

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

25.16 Explain how the work required to charge a capacitor
results in the potential energy of the capacitor.

25.17 For a capacitor, apply the relationship between the
potential energy U, the capacitance C, and the potential
difference V.

25.18 For a capacitor, apply the relationship between the

Key Ideas

potential energy, the internal volume, and the internal
energy density.

25.19 For any electric field, apply the relationship between
the potential energy density u in the field and the field's
magnitude E.

25.20 Explain the danger of sparks in airborne dust.

 

@ The electric potential energy U of a charged capacitor,
= £ =!cy2
U= 6 3CV",

is equal to the work required to charge the capacitor. This en-
ergy can be associated with the capacitor's electric field E.

@ Every electric field, in a capacitor or from any other source,
has an associated stored energy. In vacuum, the energy den-
sity u (potential energy per unit volume) ina field of magni-
tude Eis

=}
U = 589E.

Energy Stored in an Electric Field

Work must be done by an external agent to charge a capacitor. We can imagine
doing the work ourselves by transferring electrons from one plate to the other,
one by one. As the charges build, so does the electric field between the plates,
which opposes the continued transfer. So, greater amounts of work are required.
Actually, a battery does all this for us, at the expense of its stored chemical en-
ergy. We visualize the work as being stored as electric potential energy in the
electric field between the plates.
