788 CHAPTER 27 CIRCUITS

27-3 THE AMMETER AND THE VOLTMETER

Learning Objective
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

27.26 Explain the use of an ammeter and a voltmeter, includ- ing the resistance required of each in order not to affect the
measured quantities.
Key Idea

@ Here are three measurement instruments used with cir-
cuits: An ammeter measures current. A voltmeter measures

voltage (potential differences). A multimeter can be used to
measure current, voltage, or resistance.

 

The Ammeter and the Voltmeter

An instrument used to measure currents is called an ammeter. To measure the
current in a wire, you usually have to break or cut the wire and insert the ammeter
so that the current to be measured passes through the meter. (In Fig. 27-14, amme-
ter A is set up to measure current i.) It is essential that the resistance R, of the am-
meter be very much smaller than other resistances in the circuit. Otherwise, the
very presence of the meter will change the current to be measured.

A meter used to measure potential differences is called a voltmeter. To find
the potential difference between any two points in the circuit, the voltmeter ter-
minals are connected between those points without breaking or cutting the wire.
(In Fig. 27-14, voltmeter V is set up to measure the voltage across Rj.) It is essen-
tial that the resistance Ry of a voltmeter be very much larger than the resistance
of any circuit element across which the voltmeter is connected. Otherwise, the
meter alters the potential difference that is to be measured.

Often a single meter is packaged so that, by means of a switch, it can be made
to serve as either an ammeter or a voltmeter —and usually also as an ohmmeter,
designed to measure the resistance of any element connected between its termi-
nals. Such a versatile unit is called a multimeter.

 

Figure 27-14 A single-loop circuit, showing
how to connect an ammeter (A) and a
voltmeter (V).

27-4 recircuits

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

27.27 Draw schematic diagrams of charging and discharging
RC circuits.

27.28 Write the loop equation (a differential equation) for a
charging RC circuit.

27.29 Write the loop equation (a differential equation) for a
discharging RC circuit.

27.30 For a capacitor in a charging or discharging RC circuit,
apply the relationship giving the charge as a function of time.

Key Ideas

27.31 From the function giving the charge as a function of
time in a charging or discharging RC circuit, find the ca-
pacitor's potential difference as a function of time.

27.32 In a charging or discharging RC circuit, find the resis-
tor's current and potential difference as functions of time.

27.33 Calculate the capacitive time constant 7.

27.34 For a charging RC circuit and a discharging RC circuit,
determine the capacitor's charge and potential difference
at the start of the process and then a long time later.

 

@ When an enf € is applied to a resistance R and capacitance C
in series, the charge on the capacitor increases according to

q= CEL eR)

in which C% = qo is the equilibrium (final) charge and RC = +
is the capacitive time constant of the circuit.

(charging acapacitor),

@ During the charging, the current is

de €
j= -(%

at R Jee (charging a capacitor).

@ When a capacitor discharges through a resistance R, the
charge on the capacitor decays according to

IRC

q =e (discharging a capacitor).
@ During the discharging, the currentis
d
i= a = (ferme (discharging a capacitor).
