How DNA Encodes Protein
Structure

What kind of information must a gene encode to specify a
protein? For some time, the answer to that question was
not clear, as protein structure seemed impossibly complex.

Sanger: Proteins Consist of Defined Sequences of
Amino Acids

The picture changed in 1953, the same year in which Wat-
son and Crick unraveled the structure of DNA. That year,
the English biochemist Frederick Sanger, after many years
of work, announced the complete sequence of amino acids
in the protein insulin. Insulin, a small protein hormone,
was the first protein for which the amino acid sequence was
determined. Sanger’s achievement was extremely signifi-
cant because it demonstrated for the first time that proteins
consisted of definable sequences of amino acids—for any
given form of insulin, every molecule has the same amino
acid sequence. Sanger’s work soon led to the sequencing of
many other proteins, and it became clear that all enzymes
and other proteins are strings of amino acids arranged in a
certain definite order. The information needed to specify a
protein such as an enzyme, therefore, is an ordered list of
amino acids.

Ingram: Single Amino Acid Changes in a Protein
Can Have Profound Effects

Following Sanger’s pioneering work, Vernon Ingram in
1956 discovered the molecular basis of sickle cell anemia, a

Normal hemoglobin @ chain

protein defect inherited as a Mendelian disorder. By ana-
lyzing the structures of normal and sickle cell hemoglobin,
Ingram, working at Cambridge University, showed that
sickle cell anemia is caused by a change from glutamic acid
to valine at a single position in the protein (figure 14.22).
The alleles of the gene encoding hemoglobin differed only
in their specification of this one amino acid in the hemo-
globin amino acid chain.

These experiments and other related ones have finally
brought us to a clear understanding of the unit of heredity.
The characteristics of sickle cell anemia and most other
hereditary traits are defined by changes in protein structure
brought about by an alteration in the sequence of amino
acids that make up the protein. This sequence in turn is
dictated by the order of nucleotides in a particular region
of the chromosome. For example, the critical change lead-
ing to sickle cell disease is a mutation that replaces a single
thymine with an adenine at the position that codes for glu-
tamic acid, converting the position to valine. The sequence
of nucleotides that determines the amino acid sequence of a
protein is called a gene. Although most genes encode pro-
teins or subunits of proteins, some genes are devoted to the
production of special forms of RNA, many of which play
important roles in protein synthesis themselves.

 

A half-century of experimentation has made clear that
DNA is the molecule responsible for the inheritance of
traits, and that this molecule is divided into functional
units called genes.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Valine 4 Histidine |} Leucine [—4 Threonine —{ Proline 4 Gittamic [| | Glutamic | __
acid acid
Sickle cell anemia hemoglobin f chain
Valine Histidine Leucine Threonine Proline Se
FIGURE 14.22

The molecular basis of a hereditary disease. Sickle cell anemia is

produced by a recessive allele of the gene that encodes the hemoglobin

B chains. It represents a change in a single amino acid, from glutamic
acid to valine at the sixth position in the chains, which consequently
alters the tertiary structure of the hemoglobin molecule, reducing its
ability to carry oxygen.

 

Chapter 14 DNA: The Genetic Material 297
