H A P T R

Current and Resistance

26-1 ELectRIC CURRENT

Learning Objectives

 

Atter reading this module, you should be able to...

26.01 Apply the definition of current as the rate at which
charge moves through a point, including solving for the
amount of charge that passes the point in a given time
interval.

26.02 Identify that current is normally due to the motion of
conduction electrons that are driven by electric fields
(such as those set up in a wire by a battery).

Key Ideas
@ Anelectric current i in a conductor is defined by
_ 4
—

where dq is the amount of positive charge that passes in
time dt.

What Is Physics?

26.03 Identify a junction in a circuit and apply the fact
that (due to conservation of charge) the total current
into a junction must equal the total current out of the
junction.

26.04 Explain how current arrows are drawn in a schematic
diagram of a circuit, and identify that the arrows are not
vectors.

@ By convention, the direction of electric current is taken
as the direction in which positive charge carriers would
move even though (normally) only conduction electrons
can move.

In the last five chapters we discussed electrostatics—the physics of stationary
charges. In this and the next chapter, we discuss the physics of electric currents —

that is, charges in motion.

Examples of electric currents abound and involve many professions. Mete-
orologists are concerned with lightning and with the less dramatic slow flow of
charge through the atmosphere. Biologists, physiologists, and engineers work-
ing in medical technology are concerned with the nerve currents that control
muscles and especially with how those currents can be reestablished after
spinal cord injuries. Electrical engineers are concerned with countless electri-
cal systems, such as power systems, lightning protection systems, information
storage systems, and music systems. Space engineers monitor and study the
flow of charged particles from our Sun because that flow can wipe out telecom-
munication systems in orbit and even power transmission systems on the
ground. In addition to such scholarly work, almost every aspect of daily life
now depends on information carried by electric currents, from stock trades to
ATM transfers and from video entertainment to social networking.

In this chapter we discuss the basic physics of electric currents and why they
can be established in some materials but not in others. We begin with the mean-

ing of electric current.

745
