25-5 CAPACITOR WITH A DIELECTRIC

Learning Objectives

25-5 CAPACITOR WITH A DIELECTRIC 731

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

25.21 Identify that capacitance is increased if the space
between the plates is filled with a dielectric material.
25.22 For a capacitor, calculate the capacitance with and

without a dielectric.

25.23 For a region filled with a dielectric material with a
given dielectric constant x, identify that all electrostatic
equations containing the permittivity constant eo are
modified by multiplying that constant by the dielectric
constant to get Keo.

Key Ideas

@ If the space between the plates of a capacitor is completely
filled with a dielectric material, the capacitance C in vacuum
(or, effectively, in air) is multiplied by the material's dielectric
constant «, which is a number greater than 1.

@ In aregion that is completely filled by a dielectric, all
electrostatic equations containing the permittivity constant
£9 must be modified by replacing e9 with Keo.

Capacitor with a Dielectric

25.24 Name some of the common dielectrics.

25.25 In adding a dielectric to a charged capacitor, distin-
guish the results for a capacitor (a) connected to a battery
and (b) not connected to a battery.

25.26 Distinguish polar dielectrics from nonpolar dielectrics.

25.27 In adding a dielectric to a charged capacitor,
explain what happens to the electric field between the
plates in terms of what happens to the atoms in the
dielectric.

@ When a dielectric material is placed in an external electric
field, it develops an internal electric field that is oriented
opposite the external field, thus reducing the magnitude of
the electric field inside the material.

@ When a dielectric material is placed in a capacitor with a
fixed amount of charge on the surface, the net electric field
between the plates is decreased.

If you fill the space between the plates of a capacitor with a dielectric, which is
an insulating material such as mineral oil or plastic, what happens to the capaci-
tance? Michael Faraday—to whom the whole concept of capacitance is largely
due and for whom the SI unit of capacitance is named —first looked into this
matter in 1837. Using simple equipment much like that shown in Fig. 25-12, he
found that the capacitance increased by a numerical factor «, which he called

 

‘The Royal Institute, England/Bridgeman Art Library/NY

Figure 25-12 The simple electrostatic apparatus used by Faraday. An assembled apparatus
(second from left) forms a spherical capacitor consisting of a central brass ball and a
concentric brass shell. Faraday placed dielectric materials in the space between the ball

and the shell.
