Genes and How They Work

Concept Outline

15.1 The Central Dogma traces the flow of gene-
encoded information.

Cells Use RNA to Make Protein. The information in
genes is expressed in two steps, first being transcribed into
RNA, and the RNA then being translated into protein.

15.2 Genes encode information in three-nucleotide
code words.

‘The Genetic Code. The sequence of amino acids in a
protein is encoded in the sequence of nucleotides in DNA,
three nucleotides encoding an amino acid.

15.3 Genes are first transcribed, then translated.
‘Transcription. ‘The enzyme RNA polymerase unwinds
the DNA helix and synthesizes an RNA copy of one strand.
‘Translation. mRNA is translated by activating enzymes
that select tRNAs to match amino acids. Proteins are
synthesized on ribosomes, which provide a framework for
the interaction of tRNA and mRNA.

15.4 Eukaryotic gene transcripts are spliced.
The Discovery of Introns. Eukaryotic genes contain
extensive material that is not translated.
Differences between Bacterial and Eukaryotic Gene
Expression. Gene expression is broadly similar in
bacteria and eukaryotes, although it differs in some
respects.

 

FIGURE 15.1

The unraveled chromosome of an E. coli bacterium. This com-
plex tangle of DNA represents the full set of assembly instructions
for the living organism E. coli.

Ex cell in your body contains the hereditary instruc-
tions specifying that you will have arms rather than
fins, hair rather than feathers, and two eyes rather than one.
The color of your eyes, the texture of your fingernails, and
all of the other traits you receive from your parents are
recorded in the cells of your body. As we have seen, this in-
formation is contained in long molecules of DNA (figure
15.1). The essence of heredity is the ability of cells to use
the information in their DNA to produce particular pro-
teins, thereby affecting what the cells will be like. In that
sense, proteins are the tools of heredity. In this chapter, we
will examine how proteins are synthesized from the infor-
mation in DNA, using both prokaryotes and eukaryotes as
models.

299
