Current Density

Sometimes we are interested in the current i in a particular conductor. At other
times we take a localized view and study the flow of charge through a cross sec-
tion of the conductor at a particular point. To describe this flow, we can use the
current density J, which has the same direction as the velocity of the moving
charges if they are positive and the opposite direction if they are negative. For
each element of the cross section, the magnitude J is equal to the current per unit
area through that element. We can write the amount of current through the ele-
mentasJ- dA, where dA is the area vector of the element, perpendicular to the
element. The total current through the surface is then

i= | J-dA. (26-4)

If the current is uniform across the surface and parallel to dA, then J is also uni-
form and parallel to dA. Then Eq. 26-4 becomes

i= [raaas [aaa

i
so J a (26-5)
where A is the total area of the surface. From Eq. 26-4 or 26-5 we see that the ST
unit for current density is the ampere per square meter (A/m’).

In Chapter 22 we saw that we can represent an electric field with electric
field lines. Figure 26-4 shows how current density can be represented with a
similar set of lines, which we can call streamlines. The current, which is toward the
right in Fig. 26-4, makes a transition from the wider conductor at the left to the
narrower conductor at the right. Because charge is conserved during the transition,
the amount of charge and thus the amount of current cannot change. However,
the current density does change—it is greater in the narrower conductor. The
spacing of the streamlines suggests this increase in current density; streamlines
that are closer together imply greater current density.

Drift Speed

‘When a conductor does not have a current through it, its conduction electrons
move randomly, with no net motion in any direction. When the conductor does
have a current through it, these electrons actually still move randomly, but now
they tend to drift with a drift speed v, in the direction opposite that of the applied
electric field that causes the current. The drift speed is tiny compared with the
speeds in the random motion. For example, in the copper conductors of house-
hold wiring, electron drift speeds are perhaps 10~> or 10~* m/s, whereas the
random-motion speeds are around 10° m/s.

‘We can use Fig. 26-5 to relate the drift speed v, of the conduction electrons in
a current through a wire to the magnitude J of the current density in the wire. For

Figure 26-5 Positive charge carriers Current is said to be due to positive charges that

drift at speed v, in the direction are propelled by the electric field.
of the applied electric field E. By

convention, the direction of the <!

current density J and the sense |/-——— _——-|

of the current arrow are drawn in To
that same direction. cD may

26-2 CURRENT DENSITY 749

Figure 26-4 Streamlines representing current
density in the flow of charge through a con-
stricted conductor.
