28-2 CROSSED FIELDS: DISCOVERY OF THE ELECTRON 809

Crossed Fields: Discovery of the Electron

Both an electric field E anda magnetic field B can produce a force on a charged
particle. When the two fields are perpendicular to each other, they are said to be
crossed fields. Here we shall examine what happens to charged particles—
namely, electrons —as they move through crossed fields. We use as our example
the experiment that led to the discovery of the electron in 1897 by J. J. Thomson
at Cambridge University.

Two Forces. Figure 28-7 shows a modern, simplified version of Thomson’s
experimental apparatus—a cathode ray tube (which is like the picture tube in an
old-type television set). Charged particles (which we now know as electrons) are
emitted by a hot filament at the rear of the evacuated tube and are accelerated by
an applied potential difference V. After they pass through a slit in screen C, they
form a narrow beam. They then pass through a region of crossed E and B fields,
headed toward a fluorescent screen S, where they produce a spot of light (on a
television screen the spot is part of the picture). The forces on the charged parti-
cles in the crossed-fields region can deflect them from the center of the screen.
By controlling the magnitudes and directions of the fields, Thomson could thus
control where the spot of light appeared on the screen. Recall that the force on a
negatively charged particle due to an electric field is directed opposite the field.
Thus, for the arrangement of Fig. 28-7, electrons are forced up the page by electric
field E’ and down the page by magnetic field B; that is, the forces are in opposi-
tion. Thomson’s procedure was equivalent to the following series of steps.

1. Set E = 0 and B = 0 and note the position of the spot on screen S due to the
undeflected beam.

2. Turn on E and measure the resulting beam deflection.

3. Maintaining E’, now turn on B and adjust its value until the beam returns to the
undeflected position. (With the forces in opposition, they can be made to cancel.)

We discussed the deflection of a charged particle moving through an electric
field E between two plates (step 2 here) in Sample Problem 22.04. We found that
the deflection of the particle at the far end of the plates is

— IQ EL?

yo i. (286)

 

where v is the particle’s speed, m its mass, and q its charge, and L is the length of
the plates. We can apply this same equation to the beam of electrons in Fig. 28-7;
if need be, we can calculate the deflection by measuring the deflection of the
beam on screen S and then working back to calculate the deflection y at the end
of the plates. (Because the direction of the deflection is set by the sign of the
particle’s charge, Thomson was able to show that the particles that were lighting
up his screen were negatively charged.)

Figure 28-7 A modern version of J. J.
Thomson’s apparatus for measuring the ra-
tio of mass to charge for the electron. An
electric field £ is established by connecting

a battery across the deflecting-plate termi-
nals. The magnetic field B is set up by means
of a current ina system of coils (not shown).
The magnetic field shown is into the plane
of the figure, as represented by the array of
Xs (which resemble the feathered ends of
arrows).

 

 
