28-1 MAGNETIC FIELDS AND THE DEFINITION OF B 807

Figure 28-4a shows how the magnetic field near a bar magnet (a permanent
magnet in the shape of a bar) can be represented by magnetic field lines. The lines
all pass through the magnet, and they all form closed loops (even those that are not
shown closed in the figure). The external magnetic effects of a bar magnet are
strongest near its ends, where the field lines are most closely spaced. Thus, the
magnetic field of the bar magnet in Fig. 28-4b collects the iron filings mainly near
the two ends of the magnet.

Two Poles. The (closed) field lines enter one end of a magnet and exit the
other end. The end of a magnet from which the field lines emerge is called the
north pole of the magnet; the other end, where field lines enter the magnet, is
called the south pole. Because a magnet has two poles, it is said to be a magnetic
dipole. The magnets we use to fix notes on refrigerators are short bar magnets.
Figure 28-5 shows two other common shapes for magnets: a horseshoe magnet
and a magnet that has been bent around into the shape of a C so that the pole
faces are facing each other. (The magnetic field between the pole faces can then
be approximately uniform.) Regardless of the shape of the magnets, if we place
two of them near each other we find:

oO Opposite magnetic poles attract each other, and like magnetic poles repel
each other.

‘When you hold two magnets near each other with your hands, this attraction or
repulsion seems almost magical because there is no contact between the two to
visibly justify the pulling or pushing. As we did with the electrostatic force be-
tween two charged particles, we explain this noncontact force in terms of a field
that you cannot see, here the magnetic field.

Earth has a magnetic field that is produced in its core by still unknown
mechanisms. On Earth’s surface, we can detect this magnetic field with a com-
pass, which is essentially a slender bar magnet on a low-friction pivot. This bar
magnet, or this needle, turns because its north-pole end is attracted toward the
Arctic region of Earth. Thus, the south pole of Earth’s magnetic field must be lo-
cated toward the Arctic. Logically, we then should call the pole there a south
pole. However, because we call that direction north, we are trapped into the
statement that Earth has a geomagnetic north pole in that direction.

With more careful measurement we would find that in the Northern Hemi-
sphere, the magnetic field lines of Earth generally point down into Earth and
toward the Arctic. In the Southern Hemisphere, they generally point up out of
Earth and away from the Antarctic—that is, away from Earth’s geomagnetic
south pole.

 

The field lines run from
the north pole to the
south pole.

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 28-5 (a) A horseshoe magnet and (b) a C-shaped magnet. (Only some of the external
field lines are shown.)

(a)

 

10)

Courtesy Dr. Richard Cannon,

Southeast Missouri State

University, Cape Girardeau
Figure 28-4 (a) The magnetic field lines fora
bar magnet. (b) A “cow magnet”—a bar
magnet that is intended to be slipped down.
into the rumen of a cow to prevent acciden-
tally ingested bits of scrap iron from reach-
ing the cow’s intestines. The iron filings at
its ends reveal the magnetic field lines.
