8338

bl

Figure 29-4 The magnetic field vector B is
perpendicular to the radial line extending
from a long straight wire with current, but
which of the two perpendicular vectors is it?

Figure 29-5 A right-hand rule gives the direc-
tion of the magnetic field due to acurrent in
a wire. (a) The situation of Fig. 29-2, seen

from the side. The magnetic field B at any
point to the left of the wire is perpendicular
to the dashed radial line and directed into
the page, in the direction of the fingertips, as
indicated by the x. (b) If the current is re-
versed, B at any point to the leftis still per-
pendicular to the dashed radial line but now
is directed out of the page, as indicated by
the dot.

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

 

Courtesy Education Development Center

Figure 28-3 Iron filings that have been sprinkled onto cardboard collect in concentric circles
when current is sent through the central wire. The alignment, which is along magnetic field
lines, is caused by the magnetic field produced by the current.

and as the iron filings in Fig. 29-3 suggest. The increase in the spacing of the lines
in Fig. 29-2 with increasing distance from the wire represents the 1/R decrease in
the magnitude of B predicted by Eq. 29-4. The lengths of the two vectors Bin the
figure also show the 1/R decrease.

Directions. Plugging values into Eq. 29-4 to find the field magnitude B at a
given radius is easy. What is difficult for many students is finding the direction of
a field vector B at a given point. The field lines form circles around a long straight
wire, and the field vector at any point on a circle must be tangent to the circle.
That means it must be perpendicular to a radial line extending to the point from
the wire. But there are two possible directions for that perpendicular vector, as
shown in Fig. 29-4. One is correct for current into the figure, and the other is cor-
rect for current out of the figure. How can you tell which is which? Here is a sim-
ple right-hand rule for telling which vector is correct:

) Curled-straight right-hand rule: Grasp the element in your right hand with your ex-
tended thumb pointing in the direction of the current. Your fingers will then natu-
rally curl around in the direction of the magnetic field lines due to that element.

The result of applying this right-hand rule to the current in the straight wire
of Fig. 29-2 is shown in a side view in Fig. 29-5a. To determine the direction of the
magnetic field B set up at any particular point by this current, mentally wrap your
right hand around the wire with your thumb in the direction of the current. Let
your fingertips pass through the point; their direction is then the direction of the
magnetic field at that point. In the view of Fig. 29-2, Bat any point is tangent to
a magnetic field line; in the view of Fig. 29-5, it is perpendicular to a dashed radial
line connecting the point and the current.

The thumb is in the
current's direction.
x The fingers reveal
the field vector's
direction, which is
tangent to a circle.

lx
mh

(a) (b)
