816 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

The velocity component

perpendicular to the field
causes circling, which is
stretched upward by the
parallel component.

v

bol

  

(a) (b) (c)
Figure 28-11 (a) A charged particle moves in

a uniform magnetic field B, the particle’s .

velocity 7 makingan angle swith the field Helical Paths

direction. (b) The particle follows a helical If the velocity of a charged particle has a component parallel to the (uniform) mag-
path of radius r and pitch p.(c) A charged netic field, the particle will move in a helical path about the direction of the field

particle spiraling in anonuniform magnetic _ vector. Figure 28-11a, for example, shows the velocity vector ¥ of such a particle

field. (The particle can become trapped in resolved into two components, one parallel to B and one perpendicular to it:
this magnetic bottle, spiraling back and

forth between the strong field regions at vy =veos@ and v,=vsin gd. (28-20)

either end.) Note that the magnetic force . : . .
vectors at the left and right sides have a The parallel component determines the pitch p of the helix— that is, the distance

component pointing toward the center of between adjacent turns (Fig. 28-11b). The perpendicular component determines
the figure. the radius of the helix and is the quantity to be substituted for v in Eq. 28-16.
Figure 28-11c shows a charged particle spiraling in a nonuniform magnetic
field. The more closely spaced field lines at the left and right sides indicate that
the magnetic field is stronger there. When the field at an end is strong enough, the
particle “reflects” from that end.

Vv] Checkpoint 3

The figure here shows the circular paths of two particles that travel
at the same speed in a uniform magnetic field B, which is directed

into the page. One particle is a proton; the other is an electron 2
(which is less massive). (a) Which particle follows the smaller circle, B
and (b) does that particle travel clockwise or counterclockwise?

Sample Problem 28.03 Helical motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field

An electron with a kinetic energy of 22.5eV moves into a Calculations: Using Eqs.28-20 and 28-17, we find

region of uniform magnetic field B of magnitude 4.55 nm
10+ T. The angle between the directions of B and the elec- Pp = v,\T = (vcos ¢) ——. (28-21)
orient oc som GSomy na ethers nto ea elee lq|B
path taken by the electron? Calculating the electron’s speed v from its kinetic energy, we

find that v = 2.81 x 10° m/s, and so Eq. 28-21 gives us

p = (2.81 X 10° m/s)(cos 65.5°)
(1) The pitch p is the distance the electron travels parallel to (9.11 X 102 ky
the magnetic field B during one period T of circulation. ee
(2) The period T is given by Eq. 28-17 for any nonzero angle ce ye )
between Vand B. = 9.16 cm. (Answer)

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

KEY IDEAS

 
