Review & Summary

Magnetic Field B A magnetic field B is defined in terms of the
force F, acting on a test particle with charge g moving through the
field with velocity 7:

Fy = qv x B. (28-2)

The SI unit for B is the tesla (T):1 T = 1 N(A-m) = 10" gauss.

The Hall Effect When a conducting strip carrying a current i is
placed in a uniform magnetic field B, some charge carriers (with
charge e) build up on one side of the conductor, creating a poten-
tial difference V across the strip. The polarities of the sides indicate
the sign of the charge carriers.

A Charged Particle Circulating in a Magnetic Field A
charged particle with mass m and charge magnitude |g| moving with
velocity ¥ perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field B will travel in a
circle. Applying Newton’s second law to the circular motion yields

 

2
ve =, (28-15)
from which we find the radius r of the circle to be
mv
rao (28-16)
\q\B

The frequency of revolution f, the angular frequency w, and the
period of the motion T are given by

o _1_ |\qB

Poe TT lam

<Questions

1 Figure 28-22 shows three situations in which a positively charged
particle moves at velocity 7 through a uniform magnetic field B
and experiences a magnetic force F,. In each situation, determine
whether the orientations of the vectors are physically reasonable.

vy v B
Nae? XB ONXK
— ——
5 B

(28-19, 28-18, 28-17)

—

B Fy

(@) (4) (9)
Figure 28-22 Question 1.

Wire
ll
— 1 63
+—2 O84
Choices for B

Figure 28-23 Question 2.

  

2 Figure 28-23 shows a wire that car-
ries current to the right through a uni-
form magnetic field. It also shows four
choices for the direction of that field.
(a) Rank the choices according to the
magnitude of the electric potential
difference that would be set up across
the width of the wire, greatest first. (b) For which choice is the top
side of the wire at higher potential than the bottom side of the wire?

3 Figure 28-24 shows a metallic, rectangular solid that is to move
at a certain speed v through the uniform magnetic field B. The
dimensions of the solid are multiples of d, as shown. You have six
choices for the direction of the velocity: parallel to x, y, or z in ei-

QUESTIONS 827

Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire A straight
wire carrying a current i in a uniform magnetic field experiences a
sideways force

Fy =iL x B. (28-26)
The force acting on a current element i dZ’ ina magnetic field is

dF, =idL x B. (28-28)

The direction of the length vector Z or dL is that of the current i.

Torque ona Current-Carrying Coil A coil (of area A and N
turns, carrying current i) in a uniform magnetic field B will
experience a torque 7 given by

F=RxB. (28-37)
Here / is the magnetic dipole moment of the coil, with magnitude
= NiAand direction given by the right-hand rule.

Orientation Energy of a Magnetic Dipole The orienta-
tion energy of a magnetic dipole in a magnetic field is

U(0) =~ B. (28-38)

If an external agent rotates a magnetic dipole from an initial orien-
tation 6; to some other orientation 6, and the dipole is stationary
both initially and finally, the work W, done on the dipole by the
agent is

W, = AU=U,-U, (28-39)

ther the positive or negative direction. y
(a) Rank the six choices according to the
potential difference set up across the
solid, greatest first. (b) For which choice 2a
is the front face at lower potential? x

 

bl

 

 

 

4 Figure 28-25 shows the path of a, 3d
particle through six regions of uniform

magnetic field, where the path is either Figure2824 Question 3.
a half-circle or a quarter-circle. Upon leaving the last region, the
particle travels between two charged, parallel plates and is
deflected toward the plate of higher potential. What is the
direction of the magnetic field in each of the six regions?

 

Figure 28-25 Question 4.
