906 CHAPTER 31 ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT

VO

Figure 31-2 (a) The potential difference

across the capacitor in the circuit of Fig. 31-1 as a
function of time. This quantity is proportional to (a)
the charge on the capacitor. (b) A potential pro-

portional to the current in the circuit of Fig. 31-1. S
The letters refer to the correspondingly labeled a bpp '
oscillation stages in Fig. 31-1. () =

To determine the charge q on the capacitor as a function of time, we can put
in a voltmeter to measure the time-varying potential difference (or voltage) vc
that exists across the capacitor C. From Eq. 25-1 we can write

-(e)a

which allows us to find g. To measure the current, we can connect a small resis-
tance R in series with the capacitor and inductor and measure the time-varying
potential difference vg across it; Vp is proportional to i through the relation

 

 

Va =iR.
We assume here that R is so small that its effect on the behavior of the circuit is
negligible. The variations in time of vc and vg, and thus of g and i, are shown in
Fig. 31-2. All four quantities vary sinusoidally.
In an actual LC circuit, the oscillations will not continue indefinitely because

 

Courtesy Agilent Technologies there is always some resistance present that will drain energy from the elec-
Figure 31-3 An oscilloscope trace showing tric and magnetic fields and dissipate it as thermal energy (the circuit may
how the oscillations in an RLC circuit actu- become warmer). The oscillations, once started, will die away as Fig. 31-3 sug-
ally die away because energy is dissipated in gests. Compare this figure with Fig. 15-17, which shows the decay of mechanical
the resistor as thermal energy. oscillations caused by frictional damping in a block—spring system.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

A charged capacitor and an inductor are connected in series at time ¢ = 0. In terms
of the period T of the resulting oscillations, determine how much later the following
reach their maximum value: (a) the charge on the capacitor; (b) the voltage across
the capacitor, with its original polarity; (c) the energy stored in the electric field; and
(d) the current.

The Electrical-Mechanical Analogy

Let us look a little closer at the analogy between the oscillating LC system of
Fig. 31-1 and an oscillating block—spring system. Two kinds of energy are
involved in the block—spring system. One is potential energy of the compressed
or extended spring; the other is kinetic energy of the moving block. These two
energies are given by the formulas in the first energy column in Table 31-1.

Table 31-1 Comparison of the Energy in Two Oscillating Systems

 

Block—Spring System LC Oscillator

Element Energy Element Energy
Spring Potential, $kx? Capacitor Electrical, $(1/C)q”
Block Kinetic, smv? Inductor Magnetic, 3Li?

v = dxidt i= dqidt
