Translation

In prokaryotes, translation begins when the initial portion
of an mRNA molecule binds to an rRNA molecule in a ri-
bosome. The mRNA lies on the ribosome in such a way
that only one of its codons is exposed at the polypeptide-
making site at any time. A tRNA molecule possessing the
complementary three-nucleotide sequence, or anticodon,
binds to the exposed codon on the mRNA.

Because this tRNA molecule carries a particular amino
acid, that amino acid and no other is added to the polypep-
tide in that position. As the mRNA molecule moves
through the ribosome, successive codons on the mRNA are
exposed, and a series of tRNA molecules bind one after an-
other to the exposed codons. Each of these tRNA mole-
cules carries an attached amino acid, which it adds to the
end of the growing polypeptide chain (figure 15.10).

There are about 45 different kinds of tRNA molecules.
Why are there 45 and not 64 tRNAs (one for each codon)?
Because the third base-pair of a tRNA anticodon allows
some “wobble,” some tRNAs recognize more than one
codon.

How do particular amino acids become associated with
particular tRNA molecules? The key translation step,
which pairs the three-nucleotide sequences with appropri-
ate amino acids, is carried out by a remarkable set of en-
zymes called activating enzymes.

Activating Enzymes

Particular tRNA molecules become attached to specific
amino acids through the action of activating enzymes
called aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, one of which exists
for each of the 20 common amino acids (figure 15.11).
Therefore, these enzymes must correspond to specific an-
ticodon sequences on a tRNA molecule as well as particu-
lar amino acids. Some activating enzymes correspond to
only one anticodon and thus only one tRNA molecule.
Others recognize two, three, four, or six different tRNA
molecules, each with a different anticodon but coding for
the same amino acid (see table 15.1). If one considers the
nucleotide sequence of mRNA a coded message, then the
20 activating enzymes are responsible for decoding that
message.

“Start” and “Stop” Signals

There is no tRNA with an anticodon complementary to
three of the 64 codons: UAA, UAG, and UGA. These
codons, called nonsense codons, serve as “stop” signals in
the mRNA message, marking the end of a polypeptide.
The “start” signal that marks the beginning of a polypep-
tide within an mRNA message is the codon AUG, which
also encodes the amino acid methionine. The ribosome will
usually use the first AUG that it encounters in the mRNA
to signal the start of translation.

306 =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

 

 

RNA polymerase DNA

    

Polyribosome

a

Ribosomes

 

 

 

FIGURE 15.10

Translation in action. Bacteria have no nucleus and hence no
membrane barrier between the DNA and the cytoplasm. In this
electron micrograph of genes being transcribed in the bacterium
Escherichia coli, you can see every stage of the process. The arrows
point to RNA polymerase enzymes. From each mRNA molecule
dangling from the DNA, a series of ribosomes is assembling
polypeptides. These clumps of ribosomes are sometimes called
“polyribosomes.”

Initiation

In prokaryotes, polypeptide synthesis begins with the for-
mation of an initiation complex. First, a tRNA molecule
carrying a chemically modified methionine called N-
formylmethionine (t(RNA™*) binds to the small ribosomal
subunit. Proteins called initiation factors position the
tRNAM€et on the ribosomal surface at the P site (for pep-
tidyl), where peptide bonds will form. Nearby, two other
sites will form: the A site (for aminoacyl), where successive
amino acid-bearing tRNAs will bind, and the E site (for
exit), where empty tRNAs will exit the ribosome (figure
15.12). This initiation complex, guided by another initia-
tion factor, then binds to the anticodon AUG on the
mRNA. Proper positioning of the mRNA is critical because
it determines the reading frame—that is, which groups of
three nucleotides will be read as codons. Moreover, the
complex must bind to the beginning of the mRNA mole-
cule, so that all of the transcribed gene will be translated.
In bacteria, the beginning of each mRNA molecule is
marked by a /eader sequence complementary to one of the
rRNA molecules on the ribosome. This complementarity
ensures that the mRNA is read from the beginning. Bacte-
ria often include several genes within a single mRNA tran-
script (polycistronic mRNA), while each eukaryotic gene is
transcribed on a separate mRNA (monocistronic mRNA).
