H A P T CE

Induction and Inductance

30-1 FaRADAY’s LAW AND LENZ’s LAW

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

30.01 Identify that the amount of magnetic field piercing a
surface (not skimming along the surface) is the magnetic
flux ® through the surface.

30.02 Identify that an area vector for a flat surface is a vector
that is perpendicular to the surface and that has a magni-
tude equal to the area of the surface.

30.03 Identify that any surface can be divided into area ele-
ments (patch elements) that are each small enough and
flat enough for an area vector dA tobe assigned to it, with
the vector perpendicular to the element and having a mag-
nitude equal to the area of the element.

30.04 Calculate the magnetic flux ® through a surface by
integrating the dot product of the magnetic field vector B
and the area vector dA (for patch elements) over the sur-
face, in magnitude-angle notation and unit-vector notation.

30.05 Identify that a current is induced in a conducting loop
while the number of magnetic field lines intercepted by the
loop is changing.

Key Ideas

@ The magnetic flux ®; through an area A in a magnetic field
B is defined as

®; = [Baa

where the integral is taken over the area. The Sl unit of
magnetic flux is the weber, where 1 Wb = 1 T-m?.

@ If B is perpendicular to the area and uniform overt, the flux is

®;=BA_ (BLA, Buniform).

@ If the magnetic flux ®, through an area bounded by a
closed conducting loop changes with time, a current and

30.06 Identify that an induced current in a conducting loop
is driven by an induced emf.

30.07 Apply Faraday's law, which is the relationship between
an induced emf in a conducting loop and the rate at which
magnetic flux through the loop changes.

30.08 Extend Faraday’s law from a loop to a coil with multiple
loops.

30.09 Identify the three general ways in which the magnetic
flux through a coil can change.

30.10 Use a right-hand rule for Lenz's law to determine
the direction of induced emf and induced current ina
conducting loop.

30.11 Identify that when a magnetic flux through a loop
changes, the induced current in the loop sets up a
magnetic field to oppose that change.

30.12 If an emf is induced in a conducting loop containing
a battery, determine the net emf and calculate the corre-
sponding current in the loop.

an emf are produced in the loop; this process is called
induction. The induced emf is

 

 

€=- ae (Faraday’s law).
@ If the loop is replaced by a closely packed coil of N turns, the
induced emf is db
€=-N—4.
dt

@ An induced current has a direction such that the magnetic
field due to the current opposes the change in the magnetic
flux that induces the current. The induced emf has the same
direction as the induced current.

 

What Is Physics?

In Chapter 29 we discussed the fact that a current produces a magnetic field. That
fact came as a surprise to the scientists who discovered the effect. Perhaps even
more surprising was the discovery of the reverse effect: A magnetic field can
produce an electric field that can drive a current. This link between a magnetic field
and the electric field it produces (induces) is now called Faraday’s law of induction.

864
