<Questions

1 Figure 29-24 shows three circuits, each consisting of two radial
lengths and two concentric circular arcs, one of radius r and the
other of radius R > r. The circuits have the same current through
them and the same angle between the two radial lengths. Rank the
circuits according to the magnitude of the net magnetic field at the

center, greatest first.
C@)
(@ (4) ()

Figure 29-24 Question 1.

2 Figure 29-25 represents a snap-
shot of the velocity vectors of four
electrons near a wire carrying cur-
rent i. The four velocities have the
same magnitude; velocity 2 is di-
rected into the page. Electrons 1 and
2 are at the same distance from the
wire, as are electrons 3 and 4. Rank
the electrons according to the mag-
nitudes of the magnetic forces on
them due to current i, greatest first.

—
x,

Figure 29-25 Question 2.

3. Figure 29-26 shows four arrangements in which long parallel wires
carry equal currents directly into or out of the page at the corners of
identical squares. Rank the arrangements according to the magnitude
of the net magnetic field at the center of the square, greatest first.

Figure 29-26 Question 3.

4 Figure 29-27 shows cross sections ———*———@®——_O——
of two long straight wires; the left- P 4 é
hand wire carries current i, directly
out of the page. If the net magnetic
field due to the two currents is to be zero at point P, (a) should the
direction of current i, in the right-hand wire be directly into or out of
the page and (b) should i, be greater than, less than, or equal to i,?

Figure 29-27 Question 4.

5 Figure 29-28 shows three circuits consisting of straight radial
lengths and concentric circular arcs (either half- or quarter-circles

QAD

a)

Figure 29-28 Question 5.

 

QUESTIONS 855

of radii r, 2r, and 3r). The circuits carry the same current. Rank
them according to the magnitude of the magnetic field produced at
the center of curvature (the dot), greatest first.

6 Figure 29-29 gives, as a function of radial distance r, the magni-
tude B of the magnetic field inside and outside four wires (a, b,c, and
d), each of which carries a current that is uniformly distributed across
the wire’s cross section. Overlapping portions of the plots (drawn
slightly separated) are indicated by double labels. Rank the wires ac-
cording to (a) radius, (b) the magnitude of the magnetic field on the
surface, and (c) the value of the current, greatest first. (d) Is the mag-
nitude of the current density in wire a greater than, less than, or equal
to that in wire c?

 

Figure 29-29 Question 6.

7 Figure 29-30 shows four circular
Amperian loops (a, b, c, d) concentric
with a wire whose current is directed
out of the page. The current is uniform
across the wire’s circular cross section
(the shaded region). Rank the loops ac-
cording to the magnitude of ¢B-ds
around each, greatest first.

 

Figure 29-30 Question 7.

8 Figure 29-31 shows four arrangements in which long, parallel,
equally spaced wires carry equal currents directly into or out of the
page. Rank the arrangements according to the magnitude of the
net force on the central wire due to the currents in the other wires,
greatest first.

(a) ——@—®—®—®—o—
(6) ——©—0—8—_ ®—_®—
() ——®—®@——@—@—_@—

(d) ——_®——9—_®——_@——_@——_
Figure 29-31 Question 8.
9 Figure 29-32 shows four circu-

lar Amperian loops (a, b, c,d) and,
in cross section, four long circular

conductors (the shaded regions), « ¢
all of which are concentric. Three
of the conductors are hollow cylin- a

ders; the central conductor is a
solid cylinder. The currents in the
conductors are, from smallest

radius to largest radius, 4 A out of Figure 29-32 Question 9.
