29-5 A CURRENT-CARRYING COIL AS A MAGNETIC DIPOLE

851

Sample Problem 29.04 The field inside a solenoid (a long coil of current)

A solenoid has length L=1.23m and inner diameter
d = 3.55 cm, and it carries a current i = 5.57 A. It consists of
five close-packed layers, each with 850 turns along length L.
What is B at its center?

KEY IDEA
The magnitude B of the magnetic field along the solenoid’s

central axis is related to the solenoid’s current i and number
of turns per unit length n by Eq. 29-23 (B = pin).

Calculation: Because B does not depend on the diameter of
the windings, the value of n for five identical layers is simply
five times the value for each layer. Equation 29-23 then tells us

5 x 850 turns
anaes 77. ae
B = gin = (dar X 10° T-m/A)(5.57 A) 55
= 2.42 x 10?T = 24.2 mT. (Answer)

To a good approximation, this is the field magnitude through-
out most of the solenoid.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

29-5 A CURRENT-CARRYING COIL AS A MAGNETIC DIPOLE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

29.22 Sketch the magnetic field lines of a flat coil that is
carrying current.

29.23 For a current-carrying coil, apply the relationship be-
tween the dipole moment magnitude yu and the coil’s

current i, number of turns N, and area per tum A.

29.24 For a point along the central axis, apply the relationship
between the magnetic field magnitude B, the magnetic
moment ju, and the distance z from the center of the coil.

Key Idea
@ The magnetic field produced by a current-carrying coil, which is a magnetic dipole, at a point P located a distance z along the
coil's perpendicular central axis is parallel to the axis and is given by

 

where /Z is the dipole moment of the coil. This equation applies only when z is much greater than the dimensions of the coil.

 

A Current-Carrying Coil as a Magnetic Dipole

So far we have examined the magnetic fields produced by current in a long
straight wire, a solenoid, and a toroid. We turn our attention here to the field
produced by a coil carrying a current. You saw in Module 28-8 that such a coil
behaves as a magnetic dipole in that, if we place it in an external magnetic field B,
a torque 7 given by

7=—XB (29-25)
acts on it. Here is the magnetic dipole moment of the coil and has the magni-
tude NiA, where N is the number of turns, i is the current in each turn, and A is
the area enclosed by each turn. (Caution: Don’t confuse the magnetic dipole
moment #é with the permeability constant ju.)

Recall that the direction of @ is given by a curled—straight right-hand rule:
Grasp the coil so that the fingers of your right hand curl around it in the direction
of the current; your extended thumb then points in the direction of the dipole
moment fi.
