846 CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

Only the current encircled
by the loop is used in
Ampere'’s law.

Wire
\ surface
Amperian

loop

Figure 29-15 Using Ampere’s law to find the
magnetic field that a current i produces in-
side a long straight wire of circular cross
section. The current is uniformly distrib-
uted over the cross section of the wire and
emerges from the page. An Amperian loop
is drawn inside the wire.

We can further simplify the quantity B cos @ in Eq. 29-15 by noting that B is
tangent to the loop at every point along the loop, as is ds. Thus, B and ds" are
either parallel or antiparallel at each point of the loop, and we shall arbitrarily
assume the former. Then at every point the angle @ between ds’ and B is 0°, so
cos @= cos0° = 1.The integral in Eq. 29-15 then becomes

fia = $ Boos 0a = Bf as = B(2mr).

Note that ¢ ds is the summation of all the line segment lengths ds around the
circular loop; that is, it simply gives the circumference 2 ar of the loop.

Our right-hand rule gives us a plus sign for the current of Fig. 29-14. The right
side of Ampere’s law becomes + poi, and we then have

B(2 ar) = poi
or B= FO (outside straight wire). (29-17)
2ar

With a slight change in notation, this is Eq. 29-4, which we derived earlier—with
considerably more effort —using the law of Biot and Savart. In addition, because
the magnitude B turned out positive, we know that the correct direction of B
must be the one shown in Fig. 29-14.

Magnetic Field Inside a Long Straight Wire with Current

Figure 29-15 shows the cross section of a long straight wire of radius R that
carries a uniformly distributed current i directly out of the page. Because the
current is uniformly distributed over a cross section of the wire, the magnetic
field B produced by the current must be cylindrically symmetrical. Thus, to find
the magnetic field at points inside the wire, we can again use an Amperian loop of
radius r,as shown in Fig. 29-15, where now r < R. Symmetry again suggests that B
is tangent to the loop, as shown; so the left side of Ampere’s law again yields

faa =B $ ds = B(2mr). (29-18)
Because the current is uniformly distributed, the current i,,, encircled by the loop
is proportional to the area encircled by the loop; that is,

ar.

fence = § aa (29-19)

Our right-hand rule tells us that i.,, gets a plus sign. Then Ampere’s law gives us

 

ar
BQnr) = poi 2
(2a) = boi ee
or B= ( Hol )r (inside straight wire). (29-20)
2aR? :

Thus, inside the wire, the magnitude B of the magnetic field is proportional to r,
is zero at the center, and is maximum at r = R (the surface). Note that Eqs. 29-17
and 29-20 give the same value for B at the surface.

lv] Checkpoint 2

The figure here shows three equal currents i (two parallel
and one antiparallel) and four Amperian loops. Rank the
loops according to the magnitude of § Bd" along each,
greatest first.

 

 

 

 

 
