RL Circuits

In Module 27-4 we saw that if we suddenly introduce an emf into a single-loop
circuit containing a resistor R and a capacitor C, the charge on the capacitor does
not build up immediately to its final equilibrium value C@ but approaches it in an
exponential fashion:

q= C&(1— et), (30-36)

The rate at which the charge builds up is determined by the capacitive time
constant 7c, defined in Eq. 27-36 as

te = RC. (30-37)

If we suddenly remove the emf from this same circuit, the charge does not
immediately fall to zero but approaches zero in an exponential fashion:

a= qe (30-38)

The time constant 7¢ describes the fall of the charge as well as its rise.

An analogous slowing of the rise (or fall) of the current occurs if we intro-
duce an emf € into (or remove it from) a single-loop circuit containing a resis-
tor R and an inductor L. When the switch S in Fig. 30-15 is closed on a, for
example, the current in the resistor starts to rise. If the inductor were not pres-
ent, the current would rise rapidly to a steady value €/R. Because of the induc-
tor, however, a self-induced emf €; appears in the circuit; from Lenz’s law, this
emf opposes the rise of the current, which means that it opposes the battery
emf € in polarity. Thus, the current in the resistor responds to the difference be-
tween two emfs, a constant € due to the battery and a variable €, (= —L di/dt)
due to self-induction. As long as this €; is present, the current will be less
than €/R.

As time goes on, the rate at which the current increases becomes less rapid
and the magnitude of the self-induced emf, which is proportional to di/dt,
becomes smaller. Thus, the current in the circuit approaches €/R asymptotically.

We can generalize these results as follows:

Oo Initially, an inductor acts to oppose changes in the current through it. A long time
later, it acts like ordinary connecting wire.

Now let us analyze the situation quantitatively. With the switch S in Fig. 30-15
thrown to a, the circuit is equivalent to that of Fig. 30-16. Let us apply the loop
tule, starting at point x in this figure and moving clockwise around the loop along
with current i.

1. Resistor. Because we move through the resistor in the direction of current i,
the electric potential decreases by iR. Thus, as we move from point x to
point y, we encounter a potential change of —iR.

2. Inductor. Because current i is changing, there is a self-induced emf €, in the
inductor. The magnitude of €, is given by Eq. 30-35 as L di/dt. The direction of
‘é, is upward in Fig. 30-16 because current i is downward through the inductor
and increasing. Thus, as we move from point y to point z, opposite the direc-
tion of ;, we encounter a potential change of —L dildt.

3. Battery. As we move from point z back to starting point x, we encounter a
potential change of +€ due to the battery’s emf.

Thus, the loop rule gives us

di
-iR-L&+€=0
‘ dt

30-6 RL CIRCUITS 883

 

Figure 30-15 An RZ circuit. When switch S is
closed on a, the current rises and approaches
limiting value €/R.

 

Figure 30-16 The circuit of Fig. 30-15 with the
switch closed on a. We apply the loop rule
for the circuit clockwise, starting at x.
