Figure 29-8 (a) A wire consists of two straight sections
(land 2) and a circular arc (3), and carries current i.
(b) For a current-length elementin section 1, the an-
gle between ds and f is zero. (c) Determining the di-
rection of magnetic field B, at C due to the current in
the circular are; the field is into the page there.

The same situation prevails in straight section 2, where
the angle @ between ds’ and f for any current-length element
is 180°. Thus,

B,=0.

Circular arc: Application of the Biot—Savart law to evalu-
ate the magnetic field at the center of a circular arc leads to
Eq.29-9 (B = poid/4z7R). Here the central angle ¢ of the arc
is 7/2 rad. Thus from Eq. 29-9, the magnitude of the magnetic
field B; at the arc’s center C is

Moi(m2) _ boi

Bs aR 8R°

To find the direction of B3, we apply the right-hand rule
displayed in Fig. 29-5. Mentally grasp the circular are with
your right hand as in Fig. 29-8c, with your thumb in the

29-1 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT

 

841

Current directly toward or
away from C does not
create any field there.

  

(b) c (c)

direction of the current. The direction in which your fingers
curl around the wire indicates the direction of the magnetic
field lines around the wire. They form circles around the
wire, coming out of the page above the arc and going into
the page inside the arc. In the region of point C (inside the
arc), your fingertips point into the plane of the page. Thus, B;
is directed into that plane.

Net field: Generally, we combine multiple magnetic fields as
vectors. Here, however, only the circular arc produces a
magnetic field at point C. Thus, we can write the magnitude
of the net field Bas
Hot Hol
B=B,+ B,+B,=0+0+— 7 ~-=-—__.
pees 8k 8R
The direction of B is the direction of B;—namely, into the
plane of Fig. 29-8.

(Answer)

Sample Problem 29.02 Magnetic field off to the side of two long straight currents

Figure 29-9a shows two long parallel wires carrying currents
i, and iy in opposite directions. What are the magnitude and
direction of the net magnetic field at point P? Assume the
following values: i; = 15 A,i, = 32 A,and d = 5.3 cm.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The net magnetic field Bat point P is the vector sum of
the magnetic fields due to the currents in the two wires. (2)
‘We can find the magnetic field due to any current by apply-
ing the Biot—Savart law to the current. For points near the
current in a long straight wire, that law leads to Eq. 29-4.

Finding the vectors: In Fig. 29-9a, point P is distance R
from both currents i, and 4. Thus, Eq. 29-4 tells us that at
point P those currents produce magnetic fields B, and B>
with magnitudes

Koln

Hol
B,=5oL ;
: 2aR

— aR and By) =

 

In the right triangle of Fig. 29-9a, note that the base angles
(between sides R and d) are both 45°. This allows us to write

.
R R
Ks
(a

The two currents create
magnetic fields that must
be added as vectors to get
the net field.

 

(d)

Figure 29-9 (a) Two wires carry currents i, andi, in opposite directions
(out ofandinto the page). Note the right angle at P. (b) The separate
fields B, and B, are combined vectorially to yield the net field B.

cos 45° = Rid and replace R with d cos 45°. Then the field
magnitudes B, and B, become

Hobe

Hol
B= ae,
: 2m cos 45°

= Dad cos ase 27d B=
