30-7 ENERGY STORED IN A MAGNETIC FIELD 887

30-7 ENERGY STORED IN A MAGNETIC FIELD

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

30.35 Describe the derivation of the equation for the 30.36 For an inductor in an RL circuit, apply the relationship
magnetic field energy of an inductor in an RL circuit between the magnetic field energy U, the inductance L,
with a constant emf source. and the current i.

Key Idea

 

@ If an inductor L carries a current i, the inductor's magnetic field stores an energy given by

Uz = SLi? (magnetic energy).

 

Energy Stored in a Magnetic Field

‘When we pull two charged particles of opposite signs away from each other, we
say that the resulting electric potential energy is stored in the electric field of the
particles. We get it back from the field by letting the particles move closer
together again. In the same way we say energy is stored in a magnetic field, but
now we deal with current instead of electric charges.

To derive a quantitative expression for that stored energy, consider again
Fig. 30-16, which shows a source of emf € connected to a resistor R and an induc-
tor L. Equation 30-39, restated here for convenience,

di
= LA +iR, (30-46)

is the differential equation that describes the growth of current in this circuit.
Recall that this equation follows immediately from the loop rule and that the
loop rule in turn is an expression of the principle of conservation of energy for
single-loop circuits. If we multiply each side of Eq. 30-46 by i, we obtain

d
€i= uit + PR, (30-47)

which has the following physical interpretation in terms of the work done by the
battery and the resulting energy transfers:

1. If a differential amount of charge dq passes through the battery of emf @ in
Fig. 30-16 in time dt, the battery does work on it in the amount € dq. The
rate at which the battery does work is (€ dq)/dt, or €i. Thus, the left side of
Eg. 30-47 represents the rate at which the emf device delivers energy to the
rest of the circuit.

2. The rightmost term in Eq. 30-47 represents the rate at which energy appears as
thermal energy in the resistor.

3. Energy that is delivered to the circuit but does not appear as thermal
energy must, by the conservation-of-energy hypothesis, be stored in the
magnetic field of the inductor. Because Eq. 30-47 represents the principle of
conservation of energy for RL circuits, the middle term must represent
the rate dU;/dt at which magnetic potential energy U, is stored in the
magnetic field.

Thus

 

ds _ ,, di

Gen eae (30-48)
