If the field varies with position,
we must integrate to get the
flux through the loop.

|

a

 
   
  

We start with a strip

so thin that we can
approximate the field as
being uniform within it.

%

Figure 30-7 A closed conducting loop, of width W and height H, lies
in anonuniform, varying magnetic field that points directly into the
page. To apply Faraday’s law, we use the vertical strip of height H,
width dx, and area dA.

any time t. However, because B is not uniform over the
area enclosed by the loop, we cannot use Eq. 30-2 (Pg =
BA) to find that expression; instead we must use Eq. 30-1
(®,; = { B-dA).

Calculations: In Fig. 30-7, Bis perpendicular to the plane
of the loop (and hence parallel to the differential area
vector dA); so the dot product in Eq. 30-1 gives B dA.
Because the magnetic field varies with the coordinate x but
not with the coordinate y, we can take the differential area

30-2 INDUCTION AND ENERGY TRANSFERS

871

dA to be the area of a vertical strip of height H and width dx
(as shown in Fig. 30-7). Then dA = H dx, and the flux
through the loop is

p= [B-aa= [par [ snac= {aevnae

Treating ¢ as a constant for this integration and inserting the
integration limits x = 0 and x = 3.0 m, we obtain

30 x3 ]30

®,; = 4°H I x? dx = 4P°H [=| Die

lo 3 Io
where we have substituted H = 2.0 m and ®, is in webers.
Now we can use Faraday’s law to find the magnitude of € at
any time ft:
— d®g — d(72?) _

“ dt dt

 

 

in which € is in volts. Att = 0.10s,

€ = (144 V/s)(0.10 s) ~ 14 V. (Answer)

The flux of B through the loop is into the page in
Fig. 30-7 and is increasing in magnitude because B is in-
creasing in magnitude with time. By Lenz’s law, the field Bing
of the induced current opposes this increase and so is di-
rected out of the page. The curled—straight right-hand rule
in Fig. 30-5a then tells us that the induced current is counter-
clockwise around the loop, and thus so is the induced emf €.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

30-2 inouctioN AND ENERGY TRANSFERS

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

30.13 For a conducting loop pulled into or out of a magnetic
field, calculate the rate at which energy is transferred to
thermal energy.

Key Idea

30.14 Apply the relationship between an induced current and
the rate at which it produces thermal energy.
30.15 Describe eddy currents.

 

@ The induction of a current by a changing flux means that energy is being transferred to that current. The energy can then be

transferred to other forms, such as thermal energy.

Induction and Energy Transfers

By Lenz’s law, whether you move the magnet toward or away from the loop in
Fig. 30-1, a magnetic force resists the motion, requiring your applied force to do
positive work. At the same time, thermal energy is produced in the material of
the loop because of the material’s electrical resistance to the current that is
induced by the motion. The energy you transfer to the closed loop + magnet sys-
tem via your applied force ends up in this thermal energy. (For now, we neglect
energy that is radiated away from the loop as electromagnetic waves during the
