 

 

FIGURE 15.13

 

Translocation. The initiating RNA‘ in prokaryotes (tRNA™* in eukaryotes) occupies the P site, anda tRNA molecule with an
anticodon complementary to the exposed mRNA codon binds at the A site. {Met is transferred to the incoming amino acid (Leu), as the
ribosome moves three nucleotides to the right along the mRNA. The empty tRNA™t moves to the E site to exit the ribosome, the
growing polypeptide chain moves to the P site, and the A site is again exposed and ready to bind the next amino acid-laden tRNA.

Translocation

In a process called translocation (figure 15.13), the ribo-
some now moves (translocates) three more nucleotides
along the mRNA molecule in the 5’ > 3° direction, guided
by other elongation factors. This movement relocates the
initial tRNA to the E site and ejects it from the ribosome,
repositions the growing polypeptide chain (at this point
containing two amino acids) to the P site, and exposes the
next codon on the mRNA at the A site. When a tRNA
molecule recognizing that codon appears, it binds to the
codon at the A site, placing its amino acid adjacent to the
growing chain. The chain then transfers to the new amino
acid, and the entire process is repeated.

factor

  

Polypeptide chain
released
Release

> . 6 >

Termination

Elongation continues in this fashion until a chain-terminating
nonsense codon is exposed (for example, UAA in figure
15.14). Nonsense codons do not bind to tRNA, but they are
recognized by release factors, proteins that release the
newly made polypeptide from the ribosome.

 

The first step in protein synthesis is the formation of an
initiation complex. Each step of the ribosome’s progress
exposes a codon, to which a tRNA molecule with the
complementary anticodon binds. The amino acid
carried by each tRNA molecule is added to the end of
the growing polypeptide chain.

 

tRNA

O

 

 

FIGURE 15.14

Termination of protein synthesis. There is no tRNA with an anticodon complementary to any of the three termination signal codons,
such as the UAA nonsense codon illustrated here. When a ribosome encounters a termination codon, it therefore stops translocating.

A specific release factor facilitates the release of the polypeptide chain by breaking the covalent bond that links the polypeptide to the
P-site tRNA.

308 Part V_ Molecular Genetics
