818 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

The protons spiral outward
in a cyclotron, picking up
energy in the gap.

   
 

Deflector
plate

Oscillator

Figure 28-13 The elements of a cyclotron,
showing the particle source S and the dees.
A uniform magnetic field is directed up
from the plane of the page. Circulating pro-
tons spiral outward within the hollow dees,
gaining energy every time they cross the
gap between the dees.

Cyclotrons and Synchrotrons

Beams of high-energy particles, such as high-energy electrons and protons, have
been enormously useful in probing atoms and nuclei to reveal the fundamental
structure of matter. Such beams were instrumental in the discovery that atomic
nuclei consist of protons and neutrons and in the discovery that protons and
neutrons consist of quarks and gluons. Because electrons and protons are
charged, they can be accelerated to the required high energy if they move
through large potential differences. The required acceleration distance is reason-
able for electrons (low mass) but unreasonable for protons (greater mass).

A clever solution to this problem is first to let protons and other massive
particles move through a modest potential difference (so that they gain a modest
amount of energy) and then use a magnetic field to cause them to circle back
and move through a modest potential difference again. If this procedure is
repeated thousands of times, the particles end up with a very large energy.

Here we discuss two accelerators that employ a magnetic field to repeatedly
bring particles back to an accelerating region, where they gain more and more
energy until they finally emerge as a high-energy beam.

The Cyclotron

Figure 28-13 is a top view of the region of a cyclotron in which the particles
(protons, say) circulate. The two hollow D-shaped objects (each open on its
straight edge) are made of sheet copper. These dees, as they are called, are part of
an electrical oscillator that alternates the electric potential difference across the
gap between the dees. The electrical signs of the dees are alternated so that the
electric field in the gap alternates in direction, first toward one dee and then
toward the other dee, back and forth. The dees are immersed in a large magnetic
field directed out of the plane of the page. The magnitude B of this field is set via
a control on the electromagnet producing the field.

Suppose that a proton, injected by source S at the center of the cyclotron in
Fig. 28-13, initially moves toward a negatively charged dee. It will accelerate
toward this dee and enter it. Once inside, it is shielded from electric fields by the
copper walls of the dee; that is, the electric field does not enter the dee. The mag-
netic field, however, is not screened by the (nonmagnetic) copper dee, so the
proton moves in a circular path whose radius, which depends on its speed, is given
by Eq. 28-16 (r = mv/|q|B).

Let us assume that at the instant the proton emerges into the center gap from
the first dee, the potential difference between the dees is reversed. Thus, the pro-
ton again faces a negatively charged dee and is again accelerated. This process
continues, the circulating proton always being in step with the oscillations of the
dee potential, until the proton has spiraled out to the edge of the dee system.
There a deflector plate sends it out through a portal.

Frequency. The key to the operation of the cyclotron is that the frequency f
at which the proton circulates in the magnetic field (and that does not depend on
its speed) must be equal to the fixed frequency f,,. of the electrical oscillator, or

f= fosc (resonance condition). (28-23)

This resonance condition says that, if the energy of the circulating proton is to
increase, energy must be fed to it at a frequency f,,. that is equal to the natural
frequency fat which the proton circulates in the magnetic field.
Combining Eqs. 28-18 (f= |g|B/27m) and 28-23 allows us to write the
resonance condition as
|q|B = 2amfre. (28-24)

The oscillator (we assume) is designed to work ata single fixed frequency fis. We
