 

Primary RNA

transcri
Nucleus. Fs

 

 

 

 

    

 

Primary RNA
transcript

 

 

 

 

 

Introns are excised from the RNA transcript, and the remaining
exons are spliced together producing mRNA.

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

   
   

Small
ribosomal
subunit

Lar
ribosomal subunit

 

 

 

 

“Amino
acids

 

 

 

  

5!

Codon

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

tRNAs bring their amino acids in at the A site on the ribosome.
Peptide bonds form between amino acids at the Psite, and
tRNAs exit the ribosome from the E site.

 

 

 

 

3 Gyigam 1RINA molecules become attached to specific amino acids with] >
mRNA is transported out of the nucleus. In the cytoplasm, the help of activating enzymes. Amino acids are brought to the
ribosomal subunits bind to the mRNA. ribosome in the order directed by the mRNA.

mal subunits
5 Growing peptide
chain

 

 

 

      
 

 

 

 

6
; Completed

polypeptide
chain

 

The polypeptide chain grows until the protein is completed.

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 15.16
An overview of gene expression in eukaryotes.

RNA Splicing

When a gene is transcribed, the primary RNA transcript
(that is, the gene copy as it is made by RNA polymerase, be-
fore any modification occurs) contains sequences comple-
mentary to the entire gene, including introns as well as
exons. However, in a process called RNA processing, or
splicing, the intron sequences are cut out of the primary
transcript before it is used in polypeptide synthesis; there-
fore, those sequences are not translated. The remaining se-
quences, which correspond to the exons, are spliced to-
gether to form the final, “processed” mRNA molecule that

310 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

is translated. In a typical human gene, the introns can be 10
to 30 times larger than the exons. For example, even though
only 432 nucleotides are required to encode the 144 amino
acids of hemoglobin, there are actually 1356 nucleotides in
the primary mRNA transcript of the hemoglobin gene. Fig-
ure 15.16 summarizes eukaryotic protein synthesis.

 

Much of a eukaryotic gene is not translated. Noncoding
segments scattered throughout the gene are removed
from the primary transcript before the mRNA is
translated.

 
