   

Template

FIGURE 15.8

Model of a transcription bubble. The
DNA duplex unwinds as it enters the RNA 3°
polymerase complex and rewinds as it
leaves. One of the strands of DNA
functions as a template, and nucleotide
building blocks are assembled into RNA
from this template.

newly synthesized RNA strand temporarily form a helix
with the template DNA strand. Corresponding to not quite
one turn of the helix, this stabilizes the positioning of the 3’
end of the RNA so it can interact with an incoming ribonu-
cleotide. The RNA-DNA hybrid helix rotates each time a
nucleotide is added so that the 3’ end of the RNA stays at
the catalytic site.

The transcription bubble moves down the DNA at a
constant rate, about 50 nucleotides per second, leaving the
growing RNA strand protruding from the bubble. After the
transcription bubble passes, the now transcribed DNA is
rewound as it leaves the bubble.

Unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase has no
proofreading capability. Transcription thus produces many
more copying errors than replication. These mistakes,
however, are not transmitted to progeny. Most genes are
transcribed many times, so a few faulty copies are not

harmful.

Termination

At the end of a gene are “stop” sequences that cause the
formation of phosphodiester bonds to cease, the RNA-
DNA hybrid within the transcription bubble to dissociate,
the RNA polymerase to release the DNA, and the DNA
within the transcription bubble to rewind. The simplest
stop signal is a series of GC base-pairs followed by a series
of AT base-pairs. The RNA transcript of this stop region
forms a GC hairpin (figure 15.9), followed by four or more
U ribonucleotides. How does this structure terminate tran-
scription? The hairpin causes the RNA polymerase to
pause immediately after the polymerase has synthesized it,
placing the polymerase directly over the run of four uracils.
The pairing of U with DNAa’s A is the weakest of the four
hybrid base-pairs and is not strong enough to hold the hy-
brid strands together during the long pause. Instead, the
RNA strand dissociates from the DNA within the tran-
scription bubble, and transcription stops. A variety of pro-
tein factors aid hairpin loops in terminating transcription of
particular genes.

DNA. OK
ih

 

RNA-DNA hybrid helix
6
A cea
“~c—G—G—c—G—C \
c
ya eG 0G ]
i Suu
U
1
U
1
q
3" OH
FIGURE 15.9

AGC hairpin. This structure stops gene transcription.

Posttranscriptional Modifications

In eukaryotes, every mRNA transcript must travel a long
journey out from the nucleus into the cytoplasm before it
can be translated. Eukaryotic mRNA transcripts are modi-
fied in several ways to aid this journey:

5’ caps. ‘Transcripts usually begin with A or G, and, in
eukaryotes, the terminal phosphate of the 5’ A or G is
removed, and then a very unusual 5’-5’ linkage forms
with GTP. Called a 5’ cap, this structure protects the 5’
end of the RNA template from nucleases and phos-
phatases during its long journey through the cytoplasm.
Without these caps, RNA transcripts are rapidly de-
graded.

3’ poly-A tails. The 3’ end of eukaryotic transcript is
cleaved off at a specific site, often containing the se-
quence AAUAAA. A special poly-A polymerase enzyme
then adds about 250 A ribonucleotides to the 3’ end of
the transcript. Called a 3’ poly-A tail, this long string of
As protects the transcript from degradation by nucleases.
It also appears to make the transcript a better template
for protein synthesis.

 

Transcription is carried out by the enzyme RNA
polymerase, aided in eukaryotes by many other
proteins.

 

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 305
