822 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

Sample Problem 28.06 Magnetic force on a wire carrying current

A straight, horizontal length of copper wire has a current
i = 28 A through it. What are the magnitude and direction
of the minimum magnetic field B needed to suspend the
wire—that is, to balance the gravitational force on it? The
linear density (mass per unit length) of the wire is 46.6 g/m.

KEY IDEAS

(1) Because the wire carries a current, a magnetic force Fy
can act on the wire if we place it in a magnetic field B.To
balance the downward gravitational force i on the wire, we
want F,, to be directed upward (Fig. 28-17). (2) The direction
of Fh ii is related to the directions of J B and the wire’s length
vector L by Eq.28-26 (Fy = iL x B).

Calculations: Because L is directed horizontally (and the
current is taken to be positive), Eq. 28-26 and the right-
hand rule for cross products tell us that B must be horizon-
tal and rightward (in Fig. 28-17) to give the required
upward Fy.

The magnitude of F; is Fp =iLB sin ¢ (Eq. 28-27).
Because we want Fy to balance i, we want

iLB sin ¢ = mg, (28-29)

28-7 TORQUE ON A CURRENT LOOP

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.36 Sketch a rectangular loop of current in a magnetic
field, indicating the magnetic forces on the four sides,
the direction of the current, the normal vector 7, and the
direction in which a torque from the forces tends to rotate
the loop.

Key Ideas

Figure 28-17 A wire (shown in cross section) mg
carrying current out of the page.

where mg is the magnitude of F, and m is the mass of the
wire. We also want the minimal field magnitude B for Fz to
balance Fi. Thus, we need to maximize sin gi in Eq. 28-29. To
do so, we set ¢ = 90°, thereby arranging for B to be perpendi-
cular to the wire. We then have sin ¢ = 1, so Eq. 28-29 yields
mg (mIL)g
1 nee 28-30

iL sin & i )
‘We write the result this way because we know m/L, the linear
density of the wire. Substituting known data then gives us

_ (46.6 x 10™ kg/m)(9.8 mis?)
- 28 A
=16 x 10°T. (Answer)

This is about 160 times the strength of Earth’s magnetic field.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

28.37 For a current-carrying coil in a magnetic field, apply
the relationship between the torque magnitude 7, the
number of turns N, the area of each turn A, the current i,
the magnetic field magnitude B, and the angle @ between
the normal vector i and the magnetic field vector B.

 

@ Various magnetic forces act on the sections of a current-

carrying coil lying in a uniform external magnetic field, but the

net force is zero.

@ The net torque acting on the coil has a magnitude given by
t= NiAB sin 6,

where N is the number of turns in the coil, A is the area of
each turn, iis the current, B is the field magnitude, and dis
the angle between the magnetic field B and the normal
vector to the coil 77.

 

Torque on a Current Loop

Much of the world’s work is done by electric motors. The forces behind this work
are the magnetic forces that we studied in the preceding section—that is, the
forces that a magnetic field exerts on a wire that carries a current.
