field at ds’ due to each current is in the plane of Fig. 29-12; thus, their net mag-
netic field Be at dS must also be in that plane. However, we do not know the ori-
entation of B within the plane. In Fig. 29-12, Bis arbitrarily drawn at an angle 0
to the direction of ds. The scalar product B-ds on the left side of Eg. 29-14 is
equal to B cos @ds. Thus, Ampere’s law can be written as

$a-as = $ Boos Od = pplenc:

‘We can now interpret the scalar product B-ds as being the product of a length ds
of the Amperian loop and the field component B cos @ tangent to the loop. Then
we can interpret the integration as being the summation of all such products
around the entire loop.

Signs. When we can actually perform this integration, we do not need to
know the direction of B before integrating. Instead, we arbitrarily assume B to be
generally in the direction of integration (as in Fig. 29-12). Then we use the follow-
ing curled—straight right-hand rule to assign a plus sign or a minus sign to each of
the currents that make up the net encircled current iegc:

(29-15)

o Curl your right hand around the Amperian loop, with the fingers pointing in the
direction of integration. A current through the loop in the general direction of your
outstretched thumb is assigned a plus sign, and a current generally in the opposite
direction is assigned a minus sign.

Finally, we solve Eq. 29-15 for the magnitude of B. If B turns out positive, then
the direction we assumed for B is correct. If it turns out negative, we neglect the
minus sign and redraw Bin the opposite direction.

Net Current. In Fig. 29-13 we apply the curled—straight right-hand rule for
Ampere’s law to the situation of Fig. 29-12. With the indicated counterclockwise
direction of integration, the net current encircled by the loop is

lege = by — i.
(Current i; is not encircled by the loop.) We can then rewrite Eq. 29-15 as

$a cos Ods = po(i; — in).

‘You might wonder why, since current i; contributes to the magnetic-field mag-
nitude B on the left side of Eq. 29-16, it is not needed on the right side. The answer
is that the contributions of current i, to the magnetic field cancel out because the
integration in Eq. 29-16 is made around the full loop. In contrast, the contributions
of an encircled current to the magnetic field do not cancel out.

We cannot solve Eq. 29-16 for the magnitude B of the magnetic field because for
the situation of Fig. 29-12 we do not have enough information to simplify and solve
the integral. However, we do know the outcome of the integration; it must be equal to
Bo(i; — iy), the value of which is set by the net current passing through the loop.

We shall now apply Ampere’s law to two situations in which symmetry does
allow us to simplify and solve the integral, hence to find the magnetic field.

(29-16)

Magnetic Field Outside a Long Straight Wire with Current

Figure 29-14 shows a long straight wire that carries current i directly out of the
page. Equation 29-4 tells us that the magnetic field B produced by the current has
the same magnitude at all points that are the same distance r from the wire; that is,
the field B has cylindrical symmetry about the wire. We can take advantage of that
symmetry to simplify the integral in Ampere’s law (Eqs. 29-14 and 29-15) if we en-
circle the wire with a concentric circular Amperian loop of radius r, as in Fig. 29-14.
The magnetic field then has the same magnitude B at every point on the loop. We
shall integrate counterclockwise, so that ds’ has the direction shown in Fig. 29-14.

29-3 AMPERE’S LAW 845

Only the currents
encircled by the
loop are used in
Ampere’s law.

Amperian
loop

Oi,

   

Direction of
integration

Figure 29-12, Ampere’s law applied to an
arbitrary Amperian loop that encircles two
long straight wires but excludes a third
wire. Note the directions of the currents.

This is how to assign a
sign to a current used in
Ampere'’s law.

Direction of
integration

Figure 29-13 A right-hand rule for Ampere’s
law, to determine the signs for currents
encircled by an Amperian loop. The situa-
tion is that of Fig. 29-12.

All of the current is
encircled and thus all
is used in Ampere’s law.

 

Figure 29-14 Using Ampere’s law to find the
magnetic field that a current i produces
outside a long straight wire of circular cross
section. The Amperian loop is a concentric
circle that lies outside the wire.
