30-1 FARADAY’S LAW AND LENZ’S LAW

Faraday’s law is formally written as

425

€=
dt

(Faraday’s law), (30-4)

with the minus sign indicating that opposition. We often neglect the minus sign in
Eq. 30-4, seeking only the magnitude of the induced emf.

If we change the magnetic flux through a coil of N turns, an induced emf
appears in every turn and the total emf induced in the coil is the sum of these
individual induced emfs. If the coil is tightly wound (closely packed), so that
the same magnetic flux ®, passes through all the turns, the total emf induced in

867

the coil is

€=-N oe (coil of N turns).

(30-5)

Here are the general means by which we can change the magnetic flux

through a coil:

1. Change the magnitude B of the magnetic field within the coil.

2. Change either the total area of the coil or the portion of that area that lies
within the magnetic field (for example, by expanding the coil or sliding it into

or out of the field).

3. Change the angle between the direction of the magnetic field B and the plane
of the coil (for example, by rotating the coil so that field B is first perpendicu-

lar to the plane of the coil and then is along that plane).

| Checkpoint 1

The graph gives the magnitude B(t) ofa uniform 8
magnetic field that exists throughout a conduct-

ing loop, with the direction of the field perpendi-

cular to the plane of the loop. Rank the five

regions of the graph according to the magnitude —q > >
of the emf induced in the loop, greatest first.

Sample Problem 30.01 Induced emf in coil due to a solenoid

The long solenoid S shown (in cross section) in Fig. 30-3 has
220 turns/cm and carries a current i = 1.5 A; its diameter D
is 3.2 cm. At its center we place a 130-turn closely packed
coil C of diameter d = 2.1 cm. The current in the solenoid is
reduced to zero at a steady rate in 25 ms. What is the magni-
tude of the emf that is induced in coil C while the current in
the solenoid is changing?

 

Figure 30-3 A coil C is located inside a solenoid S, which carries
current i.

KEY IDEAS

 

1.

Because it is located in the interior of the solenoid, coil C
lies within the magnetic field produced by current iin the
solenoid; thus, there is a magnetic flux ®, through coil C.

. Because current i decreases, flux Pz also decreases.
. As , decreases, emf © is induced in coil C.
. The flux through each turn of coil C depends on the area

A and orientation of that turn in the solenoid’s magnetic
field B. Because B is uniform and directed perpendicular
to area A, the flux is given by Eq. 30-2 (®; = BA).

. The magnitude B of the magnetic field in the interior of

a solenoid depends on the solenoid’s current i and its
number n of turns per unit length, according to Eq. 29-23
(B = pin).
