28-8 THE MAGNETIC DIPOLE MOMENT 825

The Magnetic Dipole Moment

As we have just discussed, a torque acts to rotate a current-carrying coil placed in
a magnetic field. In that sense, the coil behaves like a bar magnet placed in the
magnetic field. Thus, like a bar magnet, a current-carrying coil is said to be a mag-
netic dipole. Moreover, to account for the torque on the coil due to the magnetic
field, we assign a magnetic dipole moment ji to the coil. The direction of / is that
of the normal vector 7i to the plane of the coil and thus is given by the same right-
hand rule shown in Fig. 28-19. That is, grasp the coil with the fingers of your right
hand in the direction of current i; the outstretched thumb of that hand gives the
direction of 4.The magnitude of fis given by

= NiA (magnetic moment), (28-35)

in which N is the number of turns in the coil, iis the current through the coil, and
A is the area enclosed by each turn of the coil. From this equation, with i in
amperes and A in square meters, we see that the unit of 7 is the ampere—square
meter (A+ m?).

Torque. Using fd, we can rewrite Eq. 28-33 for the torque on the coil due toa
magnetic field as

r= uB sin 0, (28-36)

in which is the angle between the vectors i and B.
We can generalize this to the vector relation

F=EXB, (28-37)

which reminds us very much of the corresponding equation for the torque
exerted by an electric field on an electric dipole—namely, Eq. 22-34:

F=pKXE.

In each case the torque due to the field— either magnetic or electric—is equal to
the vector product of the corresponding dipole moment and the field vector.

Energy. A magnetic dipole in an external magnetic field has an energy that
depends on the dipole’s orientation in the field. For electric dipoles we have
shown (Eq. 22-38) that

U(0) = —p-E.

In strict analogy, we can write for the magnetic case
U(0) = —a-B. (28-38)

In each case the energy due to the field is equal to the negative of the scalar prod-
uct of the corresponding dipole moment and the field vector.

A magnetic dipole has its lowest energy (= —B cos 0 = —B) when its di-
pole moment 77 is lined up with the magnetic field (Fig. 28-20). It has its highest
energy (= —B cos 180° = +B) when is directed opposite the field. From
Eq. 28-38, with U in joules and Bin teslas, we see that the unit of f can be the
joule per tesla (J/T) instead of the ampere—square meter as suggested by
Eq. 28-35.

Work. If an applied torque (due to “an external agent”) rotates a magnetic
dipole from an initial orientation 6; to another orientation 6, then work W, is
done on the dipole by the applied torque. /f the dipole is stationary before and
after the change in its orientation, then work W, is

W, = U;- Uj, (28-39)
where U;and U; are calculated with Eq. 28-38.

The magnetic moment vector
attempts to align with the
magnetic field.

| F
bi |
Highest Lowest
energy energy
Figure 28-20 The orientations of highest and
lowest energy of a magnetic dipole (here
acoil carrying current) in an external mag-
netic field B. The direction of the current i
gives the direction of the magnetic
dipole moment via the right-hand rule
shown for 77 in Fig.28-19b.
