Buffers

The pH inside almost all living cells, and in the fluid sur-
rounding cells in multicellular organisms, is fairly close to 7.
Most of the biological catalysts (enzymes) in living systems
are extremely sensitive to pH; often even a small change in
pH will alter their shape, thereby disrupting their activities
and rendering them useless. For this reason it is important
that a cell maintain a constant pH level.

Yet the chemical reactions of life constantly produce acids
and bases within cells. Furthermore, many animals eat sub-
stances that are acidic or basic; cola, for example, is a strong
(although dilute) acidic solution. Despite such variations in
the concentrations of H* and OH, the pH of an organism is
kept at a relatively constant level by buffers (figure 2.19).

A buffer is a substance that acts as a reservoir for hy-
drogen ions, donating them to the solution when their con-
centration falls and taking them from the solution when
their concentration rises. What sort of substance will act in
this way? Within organisms, most buffers consist of pairs of
substances, one an acid and the other a base. The key buffer
in human blood is an acid-base pair consisting of carbonic
acid (acid) and bicarbonate (base). These two substances in-
teract in a pair of reversible reactions. First, carbon dioxide
(Cy) and H7O join to form carbonic acid (HyCO3), which
in a second reaction dissociates to yield bicarbonate ion
(HCO3) and H* (figure 2.20). If some acid or other sub-
stance adds H* ions to the blood, the HCO} ions act as a
base and remove the excess H+ ions by forming HyCO3.
Similarly, if a basic substance removes H* ions from the
blood, HyCO; dissociates, releasing more H* ions into the
blood. The forward and reverse reactions that interconvert
H)CO3 and HCO; thus stabilize the blood’s pH.

The reaction of carbon dioxide and water to form car-
bonic acid is important because it permits carbon, essential
to life, to enter water from the air. As we will discuss in
chapter 4, biologists believe that life first evolved in the
early oceans. These oceans were rich in carbon because of
the reaction of carbon dioxide with water.

 

  
  

t

Buffering
range

|

pH

 

° L L L 1 L
° 1 2 3 4 5

Amount of base added

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 2.19

Buffers minimize changes in pH. Adding a base to a solution
neutralizes some of the acid present, and so raises the pH. Thus,
as the curve moves to the right, reflecting more and more base, it
also rises to higher pH values. What a buffer does is to make the
curve rise or fall very slowly over a portion of the pH scale, called
the “buffering range” of that buffer.

In a condition called blood acidosis, human blood, which
normally has a pH of about 7.4, drops 0.2 to 0.4 points on the
pH scale. This condition is fatal if not treated immediately.
The reverse condition, blood alkalosis, involves an increase in
blood pH ofa similar magnitude and is just as serious.

 

The pH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the H*
ion concentration in the solution. Thus, low pH values
indicate high H* concentrations (acidic solutions), and
high pH values indicate low H* concentrations (basic
solutions). Even small changes in pH can be harmful to
life.

 

Q nm —r — +Q
\ == == — \
> X \

H,O co, H,CO, HCO, Ht
Water Carbon dioxide Carbonic acid Bicarbonate Hydrogen
ion ion
FIGURE 2.20

Buffer formation. Carbon dioxide and water combine chemically to form carbonic acid (H,COs). The acid then dissociates in water,
freeing H’ ions. This reaction makes carbonated beverages acidic, and produced the carbon-rich early oceans that cradled life.

Chapter 2. The Nature of Molecules 33
