28-7 TORQUE ON A CURRENT LOOP

Figure 28-18 shows a simple motor, consisting of a single current-carrying
loop immersed in a magnetic field B. The two magnetic forces F and —F
produce a torque on the loop, tending to rotate it about its central axis. Although
many essential details have been omitted, the figure does suggest how the action
of a magnetic field on a current loop produces rotary motion. Let us analyze that
action.

Figure 28-19a shows a rectangular loop of sides a and b, carrying current
i through uniform magnetic field B. We place the loop in the field so that
its long sides, labeled 1 and 3, are perpendicular to the field direction (which is
into the page), but its short sides, labeled 2 and 4, are not. Wires to lead the cur-
rent into and out of the loop are needed but, for simplicity, are not shown.

To define the orientation of the loop in the magnetic field, we use a normal
vector 7 that is perpendicular to the plane of the loop. Figure 28-19b shows
a right-hand rule for finding the direction of 7. Point or curl the fingers of your
right hand in the direction of the current at any point on the loop. Your extended
thumb then points in the direction of the normal vector ft.

In Fig. 28-19c, the normal vector of the loop is shown at an arbitrary angle
@ to the direction of the magnetic field B. We wish to find the net force and net
torque acting on the loop in this orientation.

Net Torque. The net force on the loop is the vector sum of the forces acting
on its four sides. For side 2 the vector Lin Eq. 28-26 points in the direction of the
current and has magnitude b. The angle between LE and B for side2 (see Fig. 28-19c)
is 90° — @.Thus, the magnitude of the force acting on this side is

F, = ibB sin(90° — 6) = ibB cos 0. (28-31)

You can show that the force F, acting on side 4 has the same magnitude as F, but
the opposite direction. Thus, Fy and F, cancel out exactly. Their net force is zero
and, because their common line of action is through the center of the loop, their
net torque is also zero.

The situation is different for sides 1 and 3. For them, Lis perpendicular to B,
so the forces F, and F; have the common magnitude iaB. Because these two
forces have opposite directions, they do not tend to move the loop up or down.
However, as Fig. 28-19c shows, these two forces do not share the same line of
action; so they do produce a net torque. The torque tends to rotate the loop so
as to align its normal vector 7 with the direction of the magnetic field B. That
torque has moment arm (b/2) sin @ about the central axis of the loop. The magni-
tude 7 of the torque due to forces F, and F; is then (see Fig. 28-19c)

b. b.. .
r= (ias 3 sin 0) + (ias 3 sin 0) = iabB sin 0. (28-32)

Coil. Suppose we replace the single loop of current with a coil of N loops, or

turns. Further, suppose that the turns are wound tightly enough that they can be

 

(d)

823

 

Figure 28-18 The elements of an electric
motor.A rectangular loop of wire, carrying
acurrent and free to rotate about a fixed
axis, is placed in a magnetic field. Magnetic
forces on the wire produce a torque that
rotates it. A commutator (not shown)
reverses the direction of the current every
half-revolution so that the torque always
acts in the same direction.

Figure 28-19 A rectangular loop, of length a
and width b and carrying a current i,is lo-
cated in a uniform magnetic field. A torque 7
acts to align the normal vector 77 with the di-
rection of the field. (a) The loop as seen by
looking in the direction of the magnetic
field. (b) A perspective of the loop showing
how the right-hand rule gives the direction
of 7, which is perpendicular to the plane of
the loop. (c) A side view of the loop, from
side 2. The loop rotates as indicated.

 
