30-1 FARADAY’S LAW AND LENZ’S LAW

The observations by Michael Faraday and other scientists that led to this law
were at first just basic science. Today, however, applications of that basic science
are almost everywhere. For example, induction is the basis of the electric guitars
that revolutionized early rock and still drive heavy metal and punk today. It is
also the basis of the electric generators that power cities and transportation lines
and of the huge induction furnaces that are commonplace in foundries where
large amounts of metal must be melted rapidly.

Before we get to applications like the electric guitar, we must examine two
simple experiments about Faraday’s law of induction.

Two Experiments

Let us examine two simple experiments to prepare for our discussion of Faraday’s
law of induction.

First Experiment. Figure 30-1 shows a conducting loop connected to a sensitive
ammeter. Because there is no battery or other source of emf included, there is no
current in the circuit. However, if we move a bar magnet toward the loop, a current
suddenly appears in the circuit. The current disappears when the magnet stops. If we
then move the magnet away, a current again suddenly appears, but now in the oppo-
site direction. If we experimented for a while, we would discover the following:

1. A current appears only if there is relative motion between the loop and the
magnet (one must move relative to the other); the current disappears when
the relative motion between them ceases.

2. Faster motion produces a greater current.

3. If moving the magnet’s north pole toward the loop causes, say, clockwise
current, then moving the north pole away causes counterclockwise current.
Moving the south pole toward or away from the loop also causes currents, but
in the reversed directions.

The current produced in the loop is called an induced current; the work done
per unit charge to produce that current (to move the conduction electrons that
constitute the current) is called an induced emf; and the process of producing the
current and emf is called induction.

Second Experiment. For this experiment we use the apparatus of Fig. 30-2,
with the two conducting loops close to each other but not touching. If we close
switch S, to turn on a current in the right-hand loop, the meter suddenly and
briefly registers a current—an induced current—in the left-hand loop. If we
then open the switch, another sudden and brief induced current appears in
the left-hand loop, but in the opposite direction. We get an induced current (and
thus an induced emf) only when the current in the right-hand loop is changing
(either turning on or turning off) and not when it is constant (even if it is large).

The induced emf and induced current in these experiments are apparently
caused when something changes—but what is that “something”? Faraday knew.

Faraday’s Law of Induction

Faraday realized that an emf and a current can be induced in a loop, as in our
two experiments, by changing the amount of magnetic field passing through the
loop. He further realized that the “amount of magnetic field” can be visualized
in terms of the magnetic field lines passing through the loop. Faraday’s law of
induction, stated in terms of our experiments, is this:

ke] An emfis induced in the loop at the left in Figs. 30-1 and 30-2 when the number
of magnetic field lines that pass through the loop is changing,

865

The magnet's motion
creates a current in
the loop.

 

Figure 30-1 An ammeter registers a current
in the wire loop when the magnet is moving
with respect to the loop.

  
 

Closing the switch
causes a current in
the left-hand loop.

Figure 30-2 An ammeter registers a current

in the left-hand wire loop just as switch S is
closed (to turn on the current in the right-

hand wire loop) or opened (to turn off the
current in the right-hand loop). No motion
of the coils is involved.
