850 CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

(mim) :

Cc

 

()

Figure 29-21 (a) A toroid carrying a current i.
(b) A horizontal cross section of the toroid.

The interior magnetic field (inside the
bracelet-shaped tube) can be found by ap-
plying Ampere’s law with the Amperian
loop shown.

The first integral on the right of Eq. 29-22 is Bh, where B is the magnitude of
the uniform field B inside the solenoid and h is the (arbitrary) length of the
segment from a to b. The second and fourth integrals are zero because for every
element ds of these segments, B either is perpendicular to ds or is zero, and thus
the product B -d3 is zero. The third integral, which is taken along a segment that
lies outside the solenoid, is zero because B = 0 at all external points. Thus,
§ B +d for the entire rectangular loop has the value Bh.

Net Current. The net current i,,, encircled by the rectangular Amperian
loop in Fig. 29-20 is not the same as the current iin the solenoid windings because
the windings pass more than once through this loop. Let n be the number of turns
per unit length of the solenoid; then the loop encloses nh turns and

lene = i(nh).
Ampere’s law then gives us
Bh = poinh
or B= oin (ideal solenoid). (29-23)

Although we derived Eq. 29-23 for an infinitely long ideal solenoid, it
holds quite well for actual solenoids if we apply it only at interior points and
well away from the solenoid ends. Equation 29-23 is consistent with the ex-
perimental fact that the magnetic field magnitude B within a solenoid does
not depend on the diameter or the length of the solenoid and that B is uni-
form over the solenoidal cross section. A solenoid thus provides a practical
way to set up a known uniform magnetic field for experimentation, just as a
parallel-plate capacitor provides a practical way to set up a known uniform
electric field.

Magnetic Field of a Toroid

Figure 29-21a shows a toroid, which we may describe as a (hollow) solenoid that
has been curved until its two ends meet, forming a sort of hollow bracelet. What
magnetic field B is set up inside the toroid (inside the hollow of the bracelet)? We
can find out from Ampere’s law and the symmetry of the bracelet.

From the symmetry, we see that the lines of B form concentric circles inside
the toroid, directed as shown in Fig. 29-21. Let us choose a concentric circle of
radius r as an Amperian loop and traverse it in the clockwise direction. Ampere’s
law (Eq. 29-14) yields

(B)2a7) = moi,

where i is the current in the toroid windings (and is positive for those windings
enclosed by the Amperian loop) and Nis the total number of turns. This gives

pa HON 1 croid). (29-24)
2a r

In contrast to the situation for a solenoid, B is not constant over the cross section
ofa toroid.

It is easy to show, with Ampere’s law, that B = 0 for points outside an ideal
toroid (as if the toroid were made from an ideal solenoid). The direction of the
magnetic field within a toroid follows from our curled-straight right-hand rule:
Grasp the toroid with the fingers of your right hand curled in the direction of
the current in the windings; your extended right thumb points in the direction
of the magnetic field.
