904 CHAPTER 31

Figure 31-1 Eight stages in a single cycle of
oscillation of a resistanceless LC circuit.

The bar graphs by each figure show the
stored magnetic and electrical energies. The
magnetic field lines of the inductor and the
electric field lines of the capacitor are
shown. (a) Capacitor with maximum
charge,no current. (b) Capacitor discharg-
ing, current increasing. (c) Capacitor fully
discharged,current maximum. (d)
Capacitor charging but with polarity
opposite that in (a), current decreasing. (e)
Capacitor with maximum charge having
polarity opposite that in (a), no current. (f)
Capacitor discharging, current increasing
with direction opposite that in (b). (g)
Capacitor fully discharged, current
maximum. (h) Capacitor charging, current
decreasing.

 

‘ny
Entirely  (@
electrical
energy

 

 

ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT

What Is Physics?

‘We have explored the basic physics of electric and magnetic fields and how
energy can be stored in capacitors and inductors. We next turn to the associated
applied physics, in which the energy stored in one location can be transferred to
another location so that it can be put to use. For example, energy produced at a
power plant can show up at your home to run a computer. The total worth of this
applied physics is now so high that its estimation is almost impossible. Indeed,
modern civilization would be impossible without this applied physics.

In most parts of the world, electrical energy is transferred not as a direct
current but as a sinusoidally oscillating current (alternating current, or ac). The
challenge to both physicists and engineers is to design ac systems that transfer
energy efficiently and to build appliances that make use of that energy. Our first
step here is to study the oscillations in a circuit with inductance L and capacitance C.

LE Oscillations, Qualitatively

Of the three circuit elements, resistance R, capacitance C,and inductance L, we have
so far discussed the series combinations RC (in Module 27-4) and RL (in Module
30-6). In these two kinds of circuit we found that the charge, current, and potential
difference grow and decay exponentially. The time scale of the growth or decay is
given by a time constant 7, which is either capacitive or inductive.

‘We now examine the remaining two-element circuit combination LC. You will
see that in this case the charge, current, and potential difference do not decay expo-
nentially with time but vary sinusoidally (with period T and angular frequency w).
The resulting oscillations of the capacitor’s electric field and the inductor’s magnetic
field are said to be electromagnetic oscillations. Such a circuit is said to oscillate.

Parts a through h of Fig. 31-1 show succeeding stages of the oscillations in
a simple LC circuit. From Eq. 25-21, the energy stored in the electric field of the

   

 

    

© Entirely

magnetic
energy

 

— (0 Entirely
electrical

energy

 

(hy (g)

Entirely
magnetic
energy
