29-5 A CURRENT-CARRYING COIL AS A MAGNETIC DIPOLE 853

and the other side as a south pole, as suggested by the lightly drawn magnet in
the figure. If we were to place a current-carrying coil in an external magnetic
field, it would tend to rotate just like a bar magnet would.

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure here shows four arrangements of circular loops of radius r or 2r, centered
on vertical axes (perpendicular to the loops) and carrying identical currents in the di-
rections indicated. Rank the arrangements according to the magnitude of the net

magnetic field at the dot, midway between the loops on the central axis, greatest first.

rc> &
LbBoS

| | 1
(a) © io) (@

Proof of Equation 29-26

Figure 29-23 shows the back half of a circular loop of radius R carrying a current
i. Consider a point P on the central axis of the loop, a distance z from its plane.
Let us apply the law of Biot and Savart to a differential element ds of the loop,
located at the left side of the loop. The length vector ds for this element points
perpendicularly out of the page. The angle @ between ds’ and f in Fig. 29-23 is 90°;
the plane formed by these two vectors is perpendicular to the plane of the page
and contains both f and ds: From the law of Biot and Savart (and the right-hand
rule), the differential field dB produced at point P by the current in this element
is perpendicular to this plane and thus is directed in the plane of the figure,
perpendicular to f, as indicated in Fig. 29-23.

Let us resolve dB into two components: dB, along the axis of the loop and
dB, perpendicular to this axis. From the symmetry, the vector sum of all the per-
pendicular components dB, due to all the loop elements ds is zero. This leaves
only the axial (parallel) components dB, and we have

B= [ew

For the element ds" in Fig. 29-23, the law of Biot and Savart (Eq. 29-1) tells us
that the magnetic field at distance r is
_ Ho ids sin 90°
dB = An r .
We also have
dB, =dBcosa.

Combining these two relations, we obtain

Hoi cos ads

aBy = Anr?

(29-28)

Figure 29-23 shows that r and a are related to each other. Let us express each in
terms of the variable z, the distance between point P and the center of the loop.

The relations are
r=VR+2 (29-29)

  
   

The perpendicular
components

just cancel. We add
only the parallel
components.

Figure 29-23 Cross section through a current
loop of radius R. The plane of the loop is
perpendicular to the page, and only the
back half of the loop is shown. We use the
law of Biot and Savart to find the magnetic
field at point P on the central perpendicu-
lar axis of the loop.
