890

CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

lv] Checkpoint 7

The table lists the number of turns per unit length, current, and cross-sectional area
for three solenoids. Rank the solenoids according to the magnetic energy density
within them, greatest first.

 

Turns per
Solenoid Unit Length Current Area
a 2n, ah 2A;
b ny Dn A
c ny a 6A,
Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...
30.39 Describe the mutual induction of two coils and sketch 30.41 Calculate the emf induced in one coil by a second coil

the arrangement.

in terms of the mutual inductance and the rate of change

30.40 Calculate the mutual inductance of one coil with respect of the current in the second coil.
to a second coil (or some second current that is changing).

Key Idea

@ If coils 1 and 2 are near each other, a changing current in either coil can induce an emf in the other. This mutual induction is

described by

and

di,

€,= -M—
> dt
di,

€,= -M—.
1 dt’

where M (measured in henries) is the mutual inductance.

Mutual Induction

In this section we return to the case of two interacting coils, which we first dis-
cussed in Module 30-1, and we treat it in a somewhat more formal manner. We
saw earlier that if two coils are close together as in Fig. 30-2, a steady current iin
one coil will set up a magnetic flux ® through the other coil (linking the other
coil). If we change i with time, an emf given by Faraday’s law appears in the sec-
ond coil; we called this process induction. We could better have called it mutual
induction, to suggest the mutual interaction of the two coils and to distinguish it
from self-induction, in which only one coil is involved.

Let us look a little more quantitatively at mutual induction. Figure 30-19a
shows two circular close-packed coils near each other and sharing a common
central axis. With the variable resistor set at a particular resistance R, the battery
produces a steady current i, in coil 1. This current creates a magnetic field repre-
sented by the lines of B, in the figure. Coil 2 is connected to a sensitive meter but
contains no battery; a magnetic flux ®,, (the flux through coil 2 associated with
the current in coil 1) links the N, turns of coil 2.

‘We define the mutual inductance M), of coil 2 with respect to coil 1 as
NP

My =
4

(30-57)
