28-6 MAGNETIC FORCE ON A CURRENT-CARRYING WIRE 821

drifting downward in the wire (the actual case) or positive charges drifting up-
ward. The direction of the deflecting force on the wire is the same. We are safe
then in dealing with a current of positive charge, as we usually do in dealing with
circuits.

Find the Force. Consider a length L of the wire in Fig. 28-15. All the conduc-
tion electrons in this section of wire will drift past plane xx in Fig. 28-15 in a time
t = L/v,.Thus, in that time a charge given by

' L
q=it=i—
Va

will pass through that plane. Substituting this into Eq. 28-3 yields

iL
Fz = qvaBsin d= = vgB sin 90°

d
or Fy =iLB. (28-25)

Note that this equation gives the magnetic force that acts on a length L of straight
wire carrying a current i and immersed in a uniform magnetic field B that is per-
pendicular to the wire.

If the magnetic field is not perpendicular to the wire, as in Fig. 28-16, the
magnetic force is given by a generalization of Eq. 28-25:

F, =iL x B (force ona current). (28-26)

Here L isa length vector that has magnitude L and is directed along the wire
segment in the direction of the (conventional) current. The force magnitude Fz is

Fy = iLBsin 6, (28-27)

where ¢ is the angle between the directions of L and B. The direction of Fy is
that of the cross product L’ x B because we take current i to be a positive quan-
tity. Equation 28-26 tells us that F;, is always perpendicular to the plane defined
by vectors LE and B,asindicated in Fig. 28-16.

Equation 28-26 is equivalent to Eq. 28-2 in that either can be taken as the
defining equation for Bin practice, we define B from Eg. 28-26 because it is
much easier to measure the magnetic force acting on a wire than that on a single
moving charge.

Crooked Wire. If a wire is not straight or the field is not uniform, we can
imagine the wire broken up into small straight segments and apply Eq. 28-26 to
each segment. The force on the wire as a whole is then the vector sum of all the
forces on the segments that make it up. In the differential limit, we can write

dF, =idL x B, (28-28)

and we can find the resultant force on any given arrangement of currents by
integrating Eq. 28-28 over that arrangement.

In using Eq. 28-28, bear in mind that there is no such thing as an isolated
current-carrying wire segment of length dL.There must always be a way to intro-
duce the current into the segment at one end and take it out at the other end.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

The figure shows a current i through a wire ina uni-
form magnetic field B, as well as the magnetic force
F; acting on the wire. The field is oriented so that the
force is maximum. In what direction is the field?

 

The force is perpendicular
to both the field and the length.

 

Figure 28-16 A wire carrying current i makes
an angle ¢ with magnetic field B.The wire
has length L in the field and length vector
cL (in the direction of the current). A mag-
netic force Fy = = iL X B actson the wire.
