874

Eddy
current
loop

 

 

(2)
Figure 30-10 (a) As you pull a solid conduct-
ing plate out of a magnetic field, eddy cur-
rents are induced in the plate.A typical
loop of eddy current is shown. (b) A con-
ducting plate is allowed to swing like a pen-
dulum about a pivot and into a region of
magnetic field. As it enters and leaves the
field, eddy currents are induced in the
plate.

CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

Eddy Currents

Suppose we replace the conducting loop of Fig. 30-8 with a solid conducting
plate. If we then move the plate out of the magnetic field as we did the loop
(Fig. 30-10a), the relative motion of the field and the conductor again induces a
current in the conductor. Thus, we again encounter an opposing force and must
do work because of the induced current. With the plate, however, the conduc-
tion electrons making up the induced current do not follow one path as they
do with the loop. Instead, the electrons swirl about within the plate as if they
were caught in an eddy (whirlpool) of water. Such a current is called an eddy
current and can be represented, as it is in Fig. 30-10a, as if it followed a single
path.

As with the conducting loop of Fig. 30-8, the current induced in the plate
results in mechanical energy being dissipated as thermal energy. The dissipa-
tion is more apparent in the arrangement of Fig. 30-10b; a conducting plate,
free to rotate about a pivot, is allowed to swing down through a magnetic field
like a pendulum. Each time the plate enters and leaves the field, a portion
of its mechanical energy is transferred to its thermal energy. After several
swings, no mechanical energy remains and the warmed-up plate just hangs
from its pivot.

Vv] Checkpoint 3

The figure shows four wire loops, with edge lengths of either L or 2L. All four loops
will move through a region of uniform magnetic field B (directed out of the page) at
the same constant velocity. Rank the four loops according to the maximum magni-
tude of the emf induced as they move through the field, greatest first.

 

30-3 inoucen ELECTRIC FIELDS

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

30.16 Identify that a changing magnetic field induces an elec-

tric field, regardless of whether there is a conducting loop.
30.17 Apply Faraday’s law to relate the electric field E.
induced along a closed path (whether it has conducting

Key Ideas

@ An emf is induced by a changing magnetic flux even if the
loop through which the flux is changing is not a physical
conductor but an imaginary line. The changing magnetic field
induces an electric field Eat every point of such a loop; the
induced emf is related to E’ by

é = Fas.

material or not) to the rate of change d®/dt of the magnetic
flux encircled by the path.

30.18 Identify that an electric potential cannot be associated
with an induced electric field.

@ Using the induced electric field, we can write Faraday's law
in its most general form as

a dy
$a a

A changing magnetic field induces an electric field E.

ay
Il

(Faraday’s law).

 
