30-3 INDUCED ELECTRIC FIELDS

Induced Electric Fields

Let us place a copper ring of radius r in a uniform external magnetic field, as in
Fig. 30-11a. The field —neglecting fringing —fills a cylindrical volume of radius R.
Suppose that we increase the strength of this field at a steady rate, perhaps by
increasing—in an appropriate way—the current in the windings of the electro-
magnet that produces the field. The magnetic flux through the ring will then
change at a steady rate and—by Faraday’s law—an induced emf and thus an
induced current will appear in the ring. From Lenz’s law we can deduce that the
direction of the induced current is counterclockwise in Fig. 30-11a.

If there is a current in the copper ring, an electric field must be present along the
ring because an electric field is needed to do the work of moving the conduction
electrons. Moreover, the electric field must have been produced by the changing
magnetic flux. This induced electric field E is just as real as an electric field pro-
duced by static charges; either field will exert a force qyE on a particle of charge qo.

By this line of reasoning, we are led to a useful and informative restatement
of Faraday’s law of induction:

o A changing magnetic field produces an electric field.

The striking feature of this statement is that the electric field is induced even if
there is no copper ring. Thus, the electric field would appear even if the changing
magnetic field were in a vacuum.

To fix these ideas, consider Fig. 30-11, which is just like Fig. 30-1la except
the copper ring has been replaced by a hypothetical circular path of radius r. We
assume, as previously, that the magnetic field B is increasing in magnitude at
a constant rate dB/dt. The electric field induced at various points around the

Circular.
path

Copper
ring

 

Electric field
lines

   

(e) (a)
Figure 30-11 (a) If the magnetic field increases at a steady rate, a constant induced current
appears, as shown, in the copper ring of radius r.(b) An induced electric field exists even
when the ring is removed; the electric field is shown at four points. (c) The complete
picture of the induced electric field, displayed as field lines. (d) Four similar closed paths that
enclose identical areas. Equal emfs are induced around paths 1 and 2, which lie entirely within
the region of changing magnetic field. A smaller emf is induced around path 3, which only
partially lies in that region. No net emf is induced around path 4, which lies entirely outside
the magnetic field.

875
