Differences between Bacterial and 4. In bacteria, translation begins at an AUG codon pre-

: ceded by a special nucleotide sequence. In eukaryotic
Eukaryotic Gene Expression cells, mRNA molecules are modified at the 5” leading

end after transcription, adding a 5’ cap, a methylated
guanosine triphosphate. The cap initiates translation
by binding the mRNA, usually at the first AUG, to
the small ribosomal subunit.

5. Eukaryotic mRNA molecules are modified before
they are translated: introns are cut out, and the re-
maining exons are spliced together; a 5’ cap is
added; and a 3” poly-A tail consisting of some 200
adenine (A) nucleotides is added. These modifica-
tions can delay the destruction of the mRNA by cel-
lular enzymes.

6. The ribosomes of eukaryotes are a little larger than
those of bacteria.

1. Most eukaryotic genes possess introns. With the ex-
ception of a few genes in the Archaebacteria, prokary-
otic genes lack introns (figure 15.17).

2. Individual bacterial mRNA molecules often contain
transcripts of several genes. By placing genes with re-
lated functions on the same mRNA, bacteria coordi-
nate the regulation of those functions. Eukaryotic
mRNA molecules rarely contain transcripts of more
than one gene. Regulation of eukaryotic gene expres-
sion is achieved in other ways.

3. Because eukaryotes possess a nucleus, their mRNA
molecules must be completely formed and must pass
across the nuclear membrane before they are trans-
lated. Bacteria, which lack nuclei, often begin transla-
tion of an mRNA molecule before its transcription is
completed.

 

Gene expression is broadly similar in bacteria and
eukaryotes, although it differs in some details.

 

Bacterial
chromosome

    

 

 

 

 

a Intron Transcription
Transcription "
i Primary al Ya

Sq mRNA RNA transcript i

 

Processing
a

 

 

Translation

 

 

ae =<

Cap

 

Nuclear
envelope

 

 

 

 

Protein

   

Cell membrane

 

 

 

Plasma
membrane
a Cell wall
Sebi
—
(b)
FIGURE 15.17

Gene information is processed differently in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. (a) Bacterial genes are transcribed into mRNA, which is
translated immediately. Hence, the sequence of DNA nucleotides corresponds exactly to the sequence of amino acids in the encoded
polypeptide. (6) Eukaryotic genes are typically different, containing long stretches of nucleotides called introns that do not correspond to
amino acids within the encoded polypeptide. Introns are removed from the primary RNA transcript of the gene and a 5” cap and 3” poly-A
tail are added before the mRNA directs the synthesis of the polypeptide.

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 311
