H A P T R

Electromagnetic Oscillations
and Alternating Current

31-1 ceosciLtations

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to. . .
31.01 Sketch an LC oscillator and explain which quantities

oscillate and what constitutes one period of the oscillation.

31.02 For an LC oscillator, sketch graphs of the potential
difference across the capacitor and the current through
the inductor as functions of time, and indicate the period
T on each graph.

31.03 Explain the analogy between a block-spring oscillator
and an LC oscillator.

31.04 For an LC oscillator, apply the relationships between
the angular frequency w (and the related frequency f
and period 7) and the values of the inductance and
capacitance.

31.05 Starting with the energy of a block—spring system,
explain the derivation of the differential equation for charge
q in an LC oscillator and then identify the solution for q(¢).

31.06 For an LC oscillator, calculate the charge q on the ca-
pacitor for any given time and identify the amplitude Q of
the charge oscillations.

Key Ideas

31.07 Starting from the equation giving the charge q(t)
on the capacitor in an LC oscillator, find the current i(t)
in the inductor as a function of time.

31.08 For an LC oscillator, calculate the current i in the
inductor for any given time and identify the amplitude J
of the current oscillations.

31.09 For an LC oscillator, apply the relationship between
the charge amplitude Q, the current amplitude J, and the
angular frequency .

31.10 From the expressions for the charge q and the current
iin an LC oscillator, find the magnetic field energy U;(t)
and the electric field energy U;(t) and the total energy.

31.11 For an LC oscillator, sketch graphs of the magnetic
field energy U;(t), the electric field energy U;(t), and the
total energy, all as functions of time.

31.12 Calculate the maximum values of the magnetic field
energy U; and the electric field energy U; and also
calculate the total energy.

 

e In an oscillating LC circuit, energy is shuttled periodically
between the electric field of the capacitor and the magnetic
field of the inductor; instantaneous values of the two forms of
energy are
2 2
q Li
Uz= sn and Us =——
E> 36 B 2°
where q is the instantaneous charge on the capacitor and iis
the instantaneous current through the inductor.
@ The total energy U (= U;, + Ug) remains constant.

@ The principle of conservation of energy leads to

(LC oscillations)

as the differential equation of LC oscillations (with no
resistance).

@ The solution of this differential equation is
q = Qcos(wt + )

in which Q is the charge amplitude (maximum charge
on the capacitor) and the angular frequency w of the
oscillations is

(charge),

@ The phase constant ¢ is determined by the initial conditions
(at t = 0) of the system.

@ The current ij in the system at any time fis
i= —wQ sin(wt + )

(current),

in which wQ is the current amplitude J.

 

903
