876

CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

circular path must —from the symmetry —be tangent to the circle, as Fig. 30-11b
shows.* Hence, the circular path is an electric field line. There is nothing special
about the circle of radius r, so the electric field lines produced by the changing
magnetic field must be a set of concentric circles, as in Fig. 30-11c.

As long as the magnetic field is increasing with time, the electric field repre-
sented by the circular field lines in Fig. 30-11c will be present. If the magnetic
field remains constant with time, there will be no induced electric field and thus
no electric field lines. If the magnetic field is decreasing with time (at a constant
rate), the electric field lines will still be concentric circles as in Fig. 30-11c, but
they will now have the opposite direction. All this is what we have in mind when
we say “A changing magnetic field produces an electric field.”

A Reformulation of Faraday's Law

Consider a particle of charge gg moving around the circular path of Fig. 30-11b.
The work W done on it in one revolution by the induced electric field is W = €qo,
where © is the induced emf —that is, the work done per unit charge in moving the
test charge around the path. From another point of view, the work is

We | F-ds = (qgE)(271), (30-16)

where qoE is the magnitude of the force acting on the test charge and 2 ar is the
distance over which that force acts. Setting these two expressions for W equal to
each other and canceling qo, we find that

€ = 2m E. (30-17)

Next we rewrite Eq. 30-16 to give a more general expression for the work
done on a particle of charge gy moving along any closed path:

W = ® Feds = qo Evds. (30-18)
f Fas= af

(The loop on each integral sign indicates that the integral is to be taken around
the closed path.) Substituting €q for W, we find that

€= $ Fas (30-19)

This integral reduces at once to Eq. 30-17 if we evaluate it for the special case of
Fig. 30-1 1b.

Meaning of emf. With Eq. 30-19, we can expand the meaning of induced emf.
Up to this point, induced emf has meant the work per unit charge done in maintain-
ing current due to a changing magnetic flux, or it has meant the work done per unit
charge on a charged particle that moves around a closed path in a changing mag-
netic flux. However, with Fig.30-11b and Eq. 30-19, an induced emf can exist without
the need of a current or particle: An induced emf is the sum—via integration—of
quantities Eds around a closed path, where E is the electric field induced by
achanging magnetic flux and dis a differential length vector along the path.

If we combine Eq. 30-19 with Faraday’s law in Eq. 30-4 (€ = —d®,/dt), we
can rewrite Faraday’s law as

- d®
$ E-dg =- ie (Faraday’s law). (30-20)

a

*Arguments of symmetry would also permit the lines of E around the circular path to be radial,
rather than tangential. However, such radial lines would imply that there are free charges, distributed
symmetrically about the axis of symmetry, on which the electric field lines could begin or end; there
are no such charges.
