844 CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

29-3 AMPERE’S LAW

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to. . .

29.13 Apply Ampere's law to a loop that encircles current. 29.16 Apply Ampere's law to a long straight wire with current,
29.14 With Ampere's law, use a right-hand rule for determin- to find the magnetic field magnitude inside and outside the

ing the algebraic sign of an encircled current. wire, identifying that only the current encircled by the
29.15 For more than one current within an Amperian loop, de- Amperian loop matters.

termine the net current to be used in Ampere’s law.

 

Key Idea

@ Ampere’s law states that

$ B+ d& = poien (Ampere’s law).

The line integral in this equation is evaluated around a closed loop called an Amperian loop. The current i on the right side is the

net current encircled by the loop.

 

Ampere’s Law

We can find the net electric field due to any distribution of charges by first writ-
ing the differential electric field dE due to a charge element and then summing
the contributions of dE from all the elements. However, if the distribution is
complicated, we may have to use a computer. Recall, however, that if the distribu-
tion has planar, cylindrical, or spherical symmetry, we can apply Gauss’ law to
find the net electric field with considerably less effort.

Similarly, we can find the net magnetic field due to any distribution of currents
by first writing the differential magnetic field dB (Eq.29-3) due to a current-length
element and then summing the contributions of dB from all the elements. A gain we
may have to use a computer for a complicated distribution. However, if the distri-
bution has some symmetry, we may be able to apply Ampere’s law to find the mag-
netic field with considerably less effort. This law, which can be derived from the
Biot—Savart law, has traditionally been credited to André-Marie Ampére
(1775-1836), for whom the SI unit of current is named. However, the law actually
was advanced by English physicist James Clerk Maxwell. Ampere’s law is

$a +d = pugiene — (Ampere’s law). (29-14)

The loop on the integral sign means that the scalar (dot) product B-ds is to be
integrated around a closed loop, called an Amperian loop. The current i,q, is the
net current encircled by that closed loop.

To see the meaning of the scalar product B- ds and its integral, let us first apply
Ampere’s law to the general situation of Fig. 29-12. The figure shows cross sections
of three long straight wires that carry currents i, i,, and i; either directly into
or directly out of the page. An arbitrary Amperian loop lying in the plane of
the page encircles two of the currents but not the third. The counterclockwise
direction marked on the loop indicates the arbitrarily chosen direction of inte-
gration for Eq. 29-14.

To apply Ampere’s law, we mentally divide the loop into differential vec-
tor elements ds that are everywhere directed along the tangent to the loop in
the direction of integration. Assume that at the location of the element ds”
shown in Fig. 29-12, the net magnetic field due to the three currents is B.
Because the wires are perpendicular to the page, we know that the magnetic
