852

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

Cy

Figure 29-22 A current loop produces a magnetic field like that of a bar magnet and thus has
associated north and south poles. The magnetic dipole moment £ of the loop, its direction
given by a curled—straight right-hand rule, points from the south pole to the north pole, in
the direction of the field B within the loop.

Magnetic Field of a Coil

‘We turn now to the other aspect of a current-carrying coil as a magnetic dipole.
‘What magnetic field does it produce at a point in the surrounding space? The
problem does not have enough symmetry to make Ampere’s law useful; so we
must turn to the law of Biot and Savart. For simplicity, we first consider only a
coil with a single circular loop and only points on its perpendicular central axis,
which we take to be a z axis. We shall show that the magnitude of the magnetic
field at such points is

Moi R™

PO FR

(29-26)

in which R is the radius of the circular loop and z is the distance of the point in
question from the center of the loop. Furthermore, the direction of the mag-
netic field B is the same as the direction of the magnetic dipole moment 7 of
the loop.

Large z. For axial points far from the loop, we have z > R in Eq. 29-26. With
that approximation, the equation reduces to

Moi R?
23°

Recalling that 7R? is the area A of the loop and extending our result to include
acoil of N turns, we can write this equation as

bo NiA
ao”

B(z) ~

 

Biz) =
«@=4
Further, because B and /i have the same direction, we can write the equation in
vector form, substituting from the identity 4 = NiA:

Bi) = al (qmemteraingesi), (29-27)

Thus, we have two ways in which we can regard a current-carrying coil as a
magnetic dipole: (1) it experiences a torque when we place it in an external
magnetic field; (2) it generates its own intrinsic magnetic field, given, for dis-
tant points along its axis, by Eq. 29-27. Figure 29-22 shows the magnetic field of
a current loop; one side of the loop acts as a north pole (in the direction of 2)
