856

the page, 9 A into the page, 5 A out of the page, and 3 A into the
page. Rank the Amperian loops according to the magnitude of
§ B- ds around each, greatest first.

10 Figure 29-33 shows four identical currents i and five Amperian
paths (a through e) encircling them. Rank the paths according to the
value of  B - ds taken in the directions shown, most positive first.

 

 

hi 4 a
) _

ocd <b
(0

 

ad
od

vi

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 29-33 Question 10.

<Problems

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

11 Figure 29-34 shows three arrangements of three long straight
wires carrying equal currents directly into or out of the page.
(a) Rank the arrangements according to the magnitude of the net
force on wire A due to the currents in the other wires, greatest first.
(b) In arrangement 3, is the angle between the net force on wire A
and the dashed line equal to, less than, or more than 45°?

cI

dj D —+
-©—_®—_®
A A
qd) (2)
'
MA
D
a
(3)

Figure 29-34 Question 11.

© _ Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM__Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
+ — see Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

WWW Worked-out solution is at

Interactive solution is at | htip//wneey.com/colege/haliy

SE Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 29-1 Magnetic Field Due to a Current
1 A surveyor is using a magnetic
compass 6.1 m below a power line
in which there is a steady current of
100 A. (a) What is the magnetic
field at the site of the compass due
to the power line? (b) Will this field
interfere seriously with the com-
pass reading? The horizontal com-
ponent of Earth’s magnetic field at
the site is 20 wT. ab.

 

+2 Figure 29-35a shows an ele-
ment of length ds = 1.00 wm in a
very long straight wire carrying
current. The current in that ele-
ment sets up_a differential mag-
netic field dB at points in the
surrounding space. Figure 29-35b
gives the magnitude dB of the field
for points 2.5 cm from the element,
as a function of angle @ between the wire and a straight line to the
point. The vertical scale is set by dB, = 60.0 pT. What is the magni-
tude of the magnetic field set up by the entire wire at perpendicular
distance 2.5 cm from the wire?

6 (rad)
()

Figure 29-35 Problem 2.

*3 ssM Ata certain location in the Philippines, Earth’s magnetic
field of 39 wT is horizontal and directed due north. Suppose the
net field is zero exactly 8.0 cm above a long, straight, horizontal
wire that carries a constant current. What are the (a) magnitude
and (b) direction of the current?

4 A straight conductor carrying cur-
rent i = 5.0 A splits into identical semi-
circular arcs as shown in Fig, 29-36.
Whats the magnetic field at the center
Cof the resulting circular loop?

5 In Fig, 29-37, a current i= 10 A
is set up in a long hairpin conductor
formed by bending a wire into a
semicircle of radius R = 5.0 mm. Point
b is midway between the straight sec-
tions and so distant from the semicir-
cle that each straight section can be
approximated as being an infinite
wire. What are the (a) magnitude and
(b) direction (into or out of the page)
of B at a and the (c) magnitude and
(d) direction of B at b?

°6 In Fig. 29-38, point P is at perpendicular distance R = 2.00 em
from a very long straight wire carrying a current. The magnetic field
B set up at point P is due to contributions from all the identical cur-
rent-length elements i ds along the wire. What is the distance s to the

  

Figure 29-37 Problem 5.

 

Pe
I
i
ik
=—_—__—
b#—s—+| Wire

Figure 29-38 Problem 6.
