854

and

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

R
VR+ 2°

cos a= — =
r

(29-30)

Substituting Eqs. 29-29 and 29-30 into Eq. 29-28, we find

MoiR

“Bi = TR + Be

ds.

Note that i, R, and z have the same values for all elements ds around the loop; so
when we integrate this equation, we find that

B = {as,

= BoiR Ja
4n(R? + 2)?

or, because { ds is simply the circumference 2 7R of the loop,

MoiR®

FO FRE. RE

This is Eq. 29-26, the relation we sought to prove.

Review & Summary

The Biot-Savart Law The magnetic field set up by a current-

carrying conductor can be found from the Biot—Savart law. This

law asserts that the contribution dB to the field produced by a

current-length element i ds at a point P located a distance r from
the current element is

= ids Xi

dB= a (Biot-Savart law).

Here f is a unit vector that points from the element toward P. The
quantity zo, called the permeability constant, has the value

4X 10-7 T-m/A ~ 1.26 X 10-6 T- V/A.

(29-3)

Magnetic Field of a Long Straight Wire For a long
straight wire carrying a current i, the Biot—Savart law gives, for the
magnitude of the magnetic field at a perpendicular distance R
from the wire,

 

i
B= Ho

— aR (29-4)

(long straight wire).

Magnetic Field of a Circular Arc The magnitude of the
magnetic field at the center of a circular arc, of radius R and central
angle ¢ (in radians), carrying current i,is

Hoid

B=
4nR

(29-9)

(at center of circular arc).

Force Between Parallel Currents Parallel wires carrying
currents in the same direction attract each other, whereas parallel
wires carrying currents in opposite directions repel each other. The
magnitude of the force on a length L of either wire is

boLiniy
2nd ~°

where d is the wire separation, and i, and i, are the currents in the
wires.

Fry = iy LB, sin 90° = (29-13)

Ampere’sLaw Ampere’s law states that

$ B-d8 = puoige — (Ampere’s law). (29-14)
The line integral in this equation is evaluated around a closed loop
called an Amperian loop. The current i on the right side is the net
current encircled by the loop. For some current distributions,
Eq. 29-14 is easier to use than Eq. 29-3 to calculate the magnetic
field due to the currents.

Fields of a Solenoid and a Toroid Inside a /ong solenoid
carrying current i, at points not near its ends, the magnitude B of
the magnetic field is
B=oin (ideal solenoid), (29-23)

where n is the number of turns per unit length. Thus the internal
magnetic field is uniform. Outside the solenoid, the magnetic field
is approximately zero.

At a point inside a toroid, the magnitude B of the magnetic
field is

_ HoiN

B
Qa

= (toroid), (29-24)

where ris the distance from the center of the toroid to the point.

Field of a Magnetic Dipole The magnetic field produced by
a current-carrying coil, which is a magnetic dipole, at a point P lo-
cated a distance z along the coil’s perpendicular central axis is par-
allel to the axis and is given by

(29-27)

 

where 7 is the dipole moment of the coil. This equation applies
only when z is much greater than the dimensions of the coil.
