872

CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

induction.) The faster you move the magnet, the more rapidly your applied force
does work and the greater the rate at which your energy is transferred to thermal
energy in the loop; that is, the power of the transfer is greater.

Regardless of how current is induced in a loop, energy is always transferred
to thermal energy during the process because of the electrical resistance of the
loop (unless the loop is superconducting). For example, in Fig. 30-2, when switch S
is closed and a current is briefly induced in the left-hand loop, energy is trans-
ferred from the battery to thermal energy in that loop.

Figure 30-8 shows another situation involving induced current. A rectangular
loop of wire of width L has one end in a uniform external magnetic field that is
directed perpendicularly into the plane of the loop. This field may be produced,
for example, by a large electromagnet. The dashed lines in Fig. 30-8 show the
assumed limits of the magnetic field; the fringing of the field at its edges is
neglected. You are to pull this loop to the right at a constant velocity V.

Flux Change. The situation of Fig. 30-8 does not differ in any essential way
from that of Fig. 30-1. In each case a magnetic field and a conducting loop are in
relative motion; in each case the flux of the field through the loop is changing
with time. It is true that in Fig. 30-1 the flux is changing because Bis changing and
in Fig. 30-8 the flux is changing because the area of the loop still in the magnetic
field is changing, but that difference is not important. The important difference
between the two arrangements is that the arrangement of Fig. 30-8 makes calcu-
lations easier. Let us now calculate the rate at which you do mechanical work as
you pull steadily on the loop in Fig. 30-8.

Rate of Work. As you will see, to pull the loop at a constant velocity v”, you
must apply a constant force F to the loop because a magnetic force of equal mag-
nitude but opposite direction acts on the loop to oppose you. From Eq. 7-48, the
rate at which you do work — that is, the power—is then

P=F, (30-6)

where F is the magnitude of your force. We wish to find an expression for P in
terms of the magnitude B of the magnetic field and the characteristics of the
loop—namely, its resistance R to current and its dimension L.

As you move the loop to the right in Fig. 30-8, the portion of its area within
the magnetic field decreases. Thus, the flux through the loop also decreases and,
according to Faraday’s law, a current is produced in the loop. It is the presence of
this current that causes the force that opposes your pull.

Induced emf. To find the current, we first apply Faraday’s law. When x is the
length of the loop still in the magnetic field, the area of the loop still in the field is
Lx.Then from Eq. 30-2, the magnitude of the flux through the loop is

@, = BA = BLx. (30-7)

Decreasing the area
decreases the flux,
inducing a current.

  
  

Figure 30-8 You pull a closed conduct-
ing loop out of a magnetic field at
constant velocity V. While the loop
is moving, a clockwise current iis
induced in the loop, and the loop seg-
ments still within the magnetic field
experience forces F\, Fy, and Fy.
