28-3 CROSSED FIELDS: THE HALL EFFECT

Crossed Fields: The Hall Effect

As we just discussed, a beam of electrons in a vacuum can be deflected by a
magnetic field. Can the drifting conduction electrons in a copper wire also be
deflected by a magnetic field? In 1879, Edwin H. Hall, then a 24-year-old grad-
uate student at the Johns Hopkins University, showed that they can. This Hall
effect allows us to find out whether the charge carriers in a conductor are posi-
tively or negatively charged. Beyond that, we can measure the number of such
carriers per unit volume of the conductor.

Figure 28-8a shows a copper strip of width d, carrying a current i whose
conventional direction is from the top of the figure to the bottom. The charge
carriers are electrons and, as we know, they drift (with drift speed vq) in the
opposite direction, from bottom to top. At the instant shown in Fig. 28-84,
an external magnetic field B, pointing into the plane of the figure, has just
been turned on. From Eq. 28-2 we see that a magnetic deflecting force F,, will act
on each drifting electron, pushing it toward the right edge of the strip.

As time goes on, electrons move to the right, mostly piling up on the right
edge of the strip, leaving uncompensated positive charges in fixed positions at the
left edge. The separation of positive charges on the left edge and negative charges
on the right edge produces an electric field E’ within the strip, pointing from left
to right in Fig. 28-8b. This field exerts an electric force F); on each electron, tend-
ing to push it to the left. Thus, this electric force on the electrons, which opposes
the magnetic force on them, begins to build up.

Equilibrium. An equilibrium quickly develops in which the electric force on
each electron has increased enough to match the magnetic force. When this hap-
pens, as Fig. 28-8) shows, the force due to B and the force due to E are in balance.
The drifting electrons then move along the strip toward the top of the page at ve-
locity ¥, with no further collection of electrons on the right edge of the strip and
thus no further increase in the electric field E’.

A Hall potential difference V is associated with the electric field across strip
width d. From Eq. 24-21, the magnitude of that potential difference is

V= Ed. (28-9)

By connecting a voltmeter across the width, we can measure the potential differ-
ence between the two edges of the strip. Moreover, the voltmeter can tell us
which edge is at higher potential. For the situation of Fig. 28-8b, we would find
that the left edge is at higher potential, which is consistent with our assumption
that the charge carriers are negatively charged.

For a moment, let us make the opposite assumption, that the charge carriers in
current i are positively charged (Fig. 28-8c). Convince yourself that as these charge
carriers move from top to bottom in the strip, they are pushed to the right edge by Fy
and thus that the right edge is at higher potential. Because that last statement is con-
tradicted by our voltmeter reading, the charge carriers must be negatively charged.

Number Density. Now for the quantitative part. When the electric and mag-
netic forces are in balance (Fig. 28-8b), Eqs. 28-1 and 28-3 give us

eE = ev,B.
From Eq. 26-7, the drift speed vy is

(28-10)

J i
a= Te = Tea" (28-11)
in which J (= i/A) is the current density in the strip, A is the cross-sectional area of
the strip, and n is the number density of charge carriers (number per unit volume).
In Eg. 28-10, substituting for E with Eq. 28-9 and substituting for vy with
Eg. 28-11, we obtain

Bi

n= Vie

(28-12)

| t

|u|

x x x x
B B
R x & x
x x x x
=
x x &
= 8
x x x x
x x x x

 

(a)

xb] x
x x

x Low x

x High x

x
x

 

Figure 28-8 A strip of copper carrying a cur-
rent iis immersed in a magnetic field B.

(a) The situation immediately after the
magnetic field is turned on. The curved
path that will then be taken by an electron
is shown. (b) The situation at equilibrium,
which quickly follows. Note that negative
charges pile up on the right side of the strip,
leaving uncompensated positive charges on
the left. Thus, the left side is at a higher po-
tential than the right side. (c) For the same
current direction, if the charge carriers

were positively charged, they would pile up
on the right side, and the right side would

be at the higher potential.
