capacitor at any time is
Py
q

U, =e
k= 36°

(31-1)

where q is the charge on the capacitor at that time. From Eq. 30-49, the energy
stored in the magnetic field of the inductor at any time is

Le
b=. G12)
where /is the current through the inductor at that time.

We now adopt the convention of representing instantaneous values of the
electrical quantities of a sinusoidally oscillating circuit with small letters, such
as q, and the amplitudes of those quantities with capital letters, such as Q. With
this convention in mind, let us assume that initially the charge q on the capac-
itor in Fig. 31-1 is at its maximum value Q and that the current i through the
inductor is zero. This initial state of the circuit is shown in Fig. 31-la. The bar
graphs for energy included there indicate that at this instant, with zero current
through the inductor and maximum charge on the capacitor, the energy Uz of the
magnetic field is zero and the energy U; of the electric field is a maximum. As the
circuit oscillates, energy shifts back and forth from one type of stored energy to
the other, but the total amount is conserved.

The capacitor now starts to discharge through the inductor, positive charge
carriers moving counterclockwise, as shown in Fig. 31-1b. This means that a cur-
rent i, given by dg/dt and pointing down in the inductor, is established. As the
capacitor’s charge decreases, the energy stored in the electric field within the
capacitor also decreases. This energy is transferred to the magnetic field that
appears around the inductor because of the current i that is building up there.
Thus, the electric field decreases and the magnetic field builds up as energy is
transferred from the electric field to the magnetic field.

The capacitor eventually loses all its charge (Fig. 31-1c) and thus also loses its
electric field and the energy stored in that field. The energy has then been fully
transferred to the magnetic field of the inductor. The magnetic field is then at
its maximum magnitude, and the current through the inductor is then at its
maximum value J.

Although the charge on the capacitor is now zero, the counterclockwise
current must continue because the inductor does not allow it to change suddenly
to zero. The current continues to transfer positive charge from the top plate to
the bottom plate through the circuit (Fig. 31-1d). Energy now flows from the
inductor back to the capacitor as the electric field within the capacitor builds
up again. The current gradually decreases during this energy transfer. When,
eventually, the energy has been transferred completely back to the capacitor
(Fig. 31-1e), the current has decreased to zero (momentarily). The situation
of Fig. 31-1e is like the initial situation, except that the capacitor is now charged
oppositely.

The capacitor then starts to discharge again but now with a clockwise current
(Fig. 31-1f). Reasoning as before, we see that the clockwise current builds to a
maximum (Fig. 31-1g) and then decreases (Fig. 31-1), until the circuit eventually
returns to its initial situation (Fig. 31-la). The process then repeats at some
frequency fand thus at an angular frequency w = 27f. In the ideal LC circuit with
no resistance, there are no energy transfers other than that between the electric
field of the capacitor and the magnetic field of the inductor. Because of the con-
servation of energy, the oscillations continue indefinitely. The oscillations need
not begin with the energy all in the electric field; the initial situation could be any
other stage of the oscillation.

31-1 LC OSCILLATIONS

905
