 

 

 

: Tryptophan
Anticodon attached to ’
tRNAT? tRNA™? binds to UGG
codon of mRNA

FIGURE 15.11

Activating enzymes “read” the genetic code. Each kind of activating enzyme recognizes and binds to a specific amino acid, such as
tryptophan; it also recognizes and binds to the tRNA molecules with anticodons specifying that amino acid, such as ACC for tryptophan.
In this way, activating enzymes link the tRNA molecules to specific amino acids.

Initiation in eukaryotes is similar, although it differs in
two important ways. First, in eukaryotes, the initiating
amino acid is methionine rather than N-formylmethionine.
Second, the initiation complex is far more complicated
than in bacteria, containing nine or more protein factors,
many consisting of several subunits. Eukaryotic initiation
complexes are discussed in detail in the following chapter.

Elongation

After the initiation complex has formed, the large ribosome
subunit binds, exposing the mRNA codon adjacent to the

 

Initiation

  
 

tRNAMet

Small ribosomal subunit
(containing ribosomal RNA)

Initiation
factor

FIGURE 15.12

 

initiating AUG codon, and so positioning it for interaction
with another amino acid-bearing tRNA molecule. When a
tRNA molecule with the appropriate anticodon appears,
proteins called elongation factors assist in binding it to the
exposed mRNA codon at the A site. When the second
tRNA binds to the ribosome, it places its amino acid di-
rectly adjacent to the initial methionine, which is still at-
tached to its tRNA molecule, which in turn is still bound to
the ribosome. The two amino acids undergo a chemical re-
action, catalyzed by peptidyl transferase, which releases the
initial methionine from its tRNA and attaches it instead by
a peptide bond to the second amino acid.

Lage >
ribosomal

subunit

mRNA.

 

Initiation complex

Formation of the initiation complex. In prokaryotes, proteins called initiation factors play key roles in positioning the small ribosomal
subunit and the N-formylmethionine, or RNA, molecule at the beginning of the MRNA. When the tRNA‘ is positioned over the
first AUG codon of the mRNA, the large ribosomal subunit binds, forming the P, A, and E sites where successive tRNA molecules bind to

the ribosomes, and polypeptide synthesis begins.

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 307
