87 Figure 28-56 shows a homopolar generator, which has a solid
conducting disk as rotor and which is rotated by a motor (not
shown). Conducting brushes connect this emf device to a circuit
through which the device drives current. The device can produce a
greater emf than wire loop rotors because they can spin at a much
higher angular speed without rupturing. The disk has radius R =
0.250 m and rotation frequency f = 4000 Hz, and the device is in a
uniform magnetic field of magnitude B = 60.0 mT that is perpendi-
cular to the disk. As the disk is rotated, conduction electrons along
the conducting path (dashed line) are forced to move through the
magnetic field. (a) For the indicated rotation, is the magnetic force
on those electrons up or down in the figure? (b) Is the magnitude
of that force greater at the rim or near the center of the disk?
(c) What is the work per unit charge done by that force in moving
charge along the radial line, between the rim and the center?
(d) What, then, is the emf of the device? (e) If the current is 50.0 A,
what is the power at which electrical energy is being produced?

Brush

 

Figure 28-56 Problem 87.

88 In Fig. 28-57, the two ends of a U-shaped wire of mass m =
10.0 g and length L = 20.0cm are immersed in mercury (which is a
conductor). The wire is in a uniform field of magnitude B = 0.100 T.
A switch (unshown) is rapidly closed and then reopened, sending a
pulse of current through the wire, which causes the wire to jump up-
ward. If jump height h = 3.00 m, how much charge was in the pulse?
Assume that the duration of the pulse is much less than the time
of flight. Consider the definition of impulse (Eq. 9-30) and its

PROBLEMS 835

relationship with momentum (Eq. 9-31). Also consider the
relationship between charge and current (Eq.26-2).

 

Figure 28-57 Problem 88.

89 In Fig. 28-58, an electron of ss __ X™
mass m, charge —e, and low (negligi- (=
ble) speed enters the region between |"

two plates of potential difference | | x x be xx
V and plate separation d, initially ain

headed directly toward the top x x x x *
plate. A uniform magnetic field of Figure 28-58 Problem 89.
magnitude B is normal to the plane

of the figure. Find the minimum value of B such that the electron
will not strike the top plate.

 

90 A particle of charge q moves in a circle of radius r with speed v.
‘Treating the circular path as a current loop with an average current,
find the maximum torque exerted on the loop by a uniform field of
magnitude B.

91 Ina Hall-effect experiment, express the number density of
charge carriers in terms of the Hall-effect electric field magnitude
E, the current density magnitude J, and the magnetic field magni-
tude B.

92 An electron that is moving through a uniform magnetic field
has velocity 7 = (40 km/s)i + (35 km/s)j when it experiences
a force F = —(4.2 fN)i + (4.8 {N)j due to the magnetic field. If
B, = 0,calculate the magnetic field B.
