812

CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

in which / (= A/d) is the thickness of the strip. With this equation we can find n
from measurable quantities.

Drift Speed. It is also possible to use the Hall effect to measure directly the
drift speed vy of the charge carriers, which you may recall is of the order of cen-
timeters per hour. In this clever experiment, the metal strip is moved mechani-
cally through the magnetic field in a direction opposite that of the drift velocity
of the charge carriers. The speed of the moving strip is then adjusted until the
Hall potential difference vanishes. At this condition, with no Hall effect, the
velocity of the charge carriers with respect to the laboratory frame must be zero,
so the velocity of the strip must be equal in magnitude but opposite the direction
of the velocity of the negative charge carriers.

Moving Conductor. When a conductor begins to move at speed v through a
magnetic field, its conduction electrons do also. They are then like the moving
conduction electrons in the current in Figs. 28-8a and b, and an electric field
and potential difference V are quickly set up. As with the current, equilibrium of
the electric and magnetic forces is established, but we now write that condition in
terms of the conductor’s speed v instead of the drift speed vy in a current as we
did in Eq. 28-10:

eE =evB.
Substituting for E with Eq. 28-9, we find that the potential difference is
V=vBd. (28-13)

Such a motion-caused circuit potential difference can be of serious concern in
some situations, such as when a conductor in an orbiting satellite moves through
Earth’s magnetic field. However, if a conducting line (said to be an electrody-
namic tether) dangles from the satellite, the potential produced along the line
might be used to maneuver the satellite.

Sample Problem 28.02 Potential difference set up across a moving conductor

Figure 28-9a shows a solid metal cube, of edge length
d = 1.5 cm, moving in the positive y direction at a constant
velocity ¥ of magnitude 4.0 m/s. The cube moves through a
uniform magnetic field B of magnitude 0.050 T in the posi-
tive z direction.

(a) Which cube face is at a lower electric potential and
which is at a higher electric potential because of the motion
through the field?

KEY IDEA

Because the cube is moving through a magnetic field B, a
magnetic force Fy acts on its charged particles, including its
conduction electrons.

Reasoning: When the cube first begins to move through
the magnetic field, its electrons do also. Because each elec-
tron has charge g and is moving through a magnetic field
with velocity 7, the magnetic force F, acting on the electron
is given by Eq. 28-2. Because q is negative, the direction of
F; is opposite the cross product 7 x B, which is in the posi-

tive direction of the x axis (Fig. 28-9b). Thus, Fy acts in the
negative direction of the x axis, toward the left face of the
cube (Fig. 28-9c).

Most of the electrons are fixed in place in the atoms
of the cube. However, because the cube is a metal, it con-
tains conduction electrons that are free to move. Some of
those conduction electrons are deflected by F; to the left
cube face, making that face negatively charged and
leaving the right face positively charged (Fig. 28-9d). This
charge separation produces an electric field E directed
from the positively charged right face to the negatively
charged left face (Fig. 28-9e). Thus, the left face is at
a lower electric potential, and the right face is at a higher
electric potential.

(b) What is the potential difference between the faces of
higher and lower electric potential?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. The electric field E created by the charge separation
produces an electric force Fy = gE on each electron
