H A P T R

Magnetic Fields Due to Currents

29-1 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

29.01 Sketch a current-length element in a wire and indicate
the direction of the magnetic field that it sets up at a given
point near the wire.

29.02 For a given point near a wire and a given current-element
in the wire, determine the magnitude and direction of the
magnetic field due to that element.

29.03 Identify the magnitude of the magnetic field set up by a
current-length element at a point in line with the direction
of that element.

29.04 For a point to one side of a long straight wire carrying
current, apply the relationship between the magnetic field
magnitude, the current, and the distance to the point.

29.05 For a point to one side of along straight wire carrying

Key Ideas

current, use a right-hand rule to determine the direction of
the field vector.

29.06 Identify that around a long straight wire carrying cur-
rent, the magnetic field lines form circles.

29.07 For a point to one side of the end of a semi-infinite wire
carrying current, apply the relationship between the magnetic
field magnitude, the current, and the distance to the point.

29.08 For the center of curvature of a circular arc of wire car-
tying current, apply the relationship between the magnetic
field magnitude, the current, the radius of curvature, and
the angle subtended by the arc (in radians).

29.09 For a point to one side of a short straight wire carrying
current, integrate the Biot-Savart law to find the magnetic
field set up at the point by the current.

 

@ The magnetic field set up by a current-carrying conductor can
be found from the Biot-Savart law. This law asserts that the
contribution dB to the field produced by a current-length ele-
ment i ds at a point P located a distance r from the current ele-
ment is

bo ids Xt

dB=
an P

(Biot—Savart law).

Here f is a unit vector that points from the element toward P.
The quantity 19, called the permeability constant, has the value

4a X 10-7 T-m/A ~ 1.26 X 10-6 T-m/A.

@ For along straight wire carrying a current i, the Biot-Savart
law gives, for the magnitude of the magnetic field at a perpen-
dicular distance R from the wire,

Kol
B=
2aR

 

(long straight wire).

@ The magnitude of the magnetic field at the center of a circular
arc, of radius R and central angle ¢ (in radians), carrying current
iis

Hol

Be taR

(at center of circular arc).

What Is Physics?

One basic observation of physics is that a moving charged particle produces a
magnetic field around itself. Thus a current of moving charged particles produces
a magnetic field around the current. This feature of electromagnetism, which is
the combined study of electric and magnetic effects, came as a surprise to the
people who discovered it. Surprise or not, this feature has become enormously
important in everyday life because it is the basis of countless electromagnetic
devices. For example, a magnetic field is produced in maglev trains and other
devices used to lift heavy loads.

Our first step in this chapter is to find the magnetic field due to the current in
a very small section of current-carrying wire. Then we shall find the magnetic
field due to the entire wire for several different arrangements of the wire.

836
