29-1 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT 837

Calculating the Magnetic Field Due to a Current

Figure 29-1 shows a wire of arbitrary shape carrying a current i. We want to find
the magnetic field Bata nearby point P. We first mentally divide the wire into
differential elements ds and then define for each element a length vector ds’ that
has length ds and whose direction is the direction of the current in ds. We can
then define a differential current-length element to be i ds; we wish to calculate
the field dB produced at P by a typical current-length element. From experiment
we find that magnetic fields, like electric fields, can be superimposed to find a net
field. Thus, we can calculate the net field BatP by summing, via integration, the
contributions dB from all the current- -length elements. However, this summation
is more challenging than the process associated with electric fields because of
a complexity; whereas a charge element dq producing an electric field is a scalar,
a current-length element i ds producing a magnetic field is a vector, being the
product of a scalar and a vector.

Magnitude. The magnitude of the field dB produced at point P at distance r
by acurrent-length element i ds turns out to be

dp = ids sin 0

An ro? Qo)

where @is the angle between the directions of ds’ and f, a unit vector that points
from ds toward P. Symbol jo is a constant, called the permeability constant,
whose value is defined to be exactly

po = 4 X 10-7 T- m/A ~ 1.26 X 10-°T -m/A. (29-2)

Direction. The direction of dB, shown as being into the page in Fig. 29-1, is

that of the cross product ds’ x t.We can therefore write Eq. 29-1 in vector form as
dB = 2 —————  @iot—Savart law). (29-3)

This vector equation and its scalar form, Eq. 29-1, are known as the law of Biot
and Savart (rhymes with “Leo and bazaar”). The law, which is experimentally
deduced, is an inverse-square law. We shall use this law to calculate the net
magnetic field B produced at a point by various distributions of current.

Here is one easy distribution: If current in a wire is either directly toward or
directly away from a point P of measurement, can you see from Eq. 29-1 that the

magnetic field at P from the current is simply zero (the angle 0 is either 0° for to-
ward or 180° for away, and both result in sin @ = 0)?

Magnetic Field Due to a Current in a Long Straight Wire

Shortly we shall use the law of Biot and Savart to prove that the magnitude of the
magnetic field at a perpendicular distance R from a long (infinite) straight wire
carrying a current iis given by

_ Hot
2aR

 

(long straight wire). (29-4)

The field magnitude B in Eq. 29-4 depends only on the current and the per-
pendicular distance R of the point from the wire. We shall show in our derivation
that the field lines of B form concentric circles around the wire, as Fig. 29-2 shows

 

Figure 29-2 The magnetic field lines produced by a current in a long straight wire form
concentric circles around the wire. Here the current is into the page, as indicated by the x.

    
  

This element of current creates a
magnetic field at P, into the page.

\
\ ae
\ids

dB (into
pase)
P

distribution

Figure 29-1 A current-length element i ds
produces a differential magnetic field dBat
point P. The green X (the tail of an arrow)
at the dot for point P indicates that Bis
directed into the page there.

The magnetic field vector
at any point is tangent to
a circle.

Wire with current
into the page

  
