840

Sample Problem 29.01

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

between the vectors ds’ and f is 90°; also, r = R. Thus, by substituting R for r and
90° for din Eq. 29-1, we obtain

Mo ids sin 90° Mo ids

4a R 4n RO (298)
The field at C due to each current-length element in the arc has this magnitude.

Directions. How about the direction of the differential field dB set up by
an element? From above we know that the vector must be perpendicular to a
radial line extending through point C from the element, either into the plane of
Fig. 29-7a or out of it. To tell which direction is correct, we use the right-hand rule
for any of the elements, as shown in Fig. 29-7c. Grasping the wire with the thumb
in the direction of the current and bringing the fingers into the region near C, we
see that the vector dB due to any of the differential elements is out of the plane
of the figure, not into it.

Total Field. To find the total field at C due to all the elements on the arc,
we need to add all the differential field vectors dB. However, because the vectors
are all in the same direction, we do not need to find components. We just sum the
magnitudes dB as given by Eq. 29-8. Since we have a vast number of those magni-
tudes, we sum via integration. We want the result to indicate how the total field
depends on the angle ¢ of the arc (rather than the arc length). So, in Eq. 29-8 we
switch from ds to d¢ by using the identity ds = R d¢. The summation by integra-
tion then becomes

C2 C2

bo iRdd Bol I
B= |dB=}| #2 = dd.
J l 4n R 4nR Jo $

dB=

 

 

Integrating, we find that

ea enero eee (29-9)
4nR

Heads Up. Note that this equation gives us the magnetic field only at the
center of curvature of a circular arc of current. When you insert data into the
equation, you must be careful to express ¢ in radians rather than degrees. For ex-
ample, to find the magnitude of the magnetic field at the center of a full circle of
current, you would substitute 27 rad for ¢in Eq. 29-9, finding

Hoi(27) — Hol

BAR 2R

(at center of full circle). (29-10)

Magnetic field at the center of a circular arc of current

The wire in Fig. 29-8a carries a current i and consists of a
circular arc of radius R and central angle 7/2 rad, and two
straight sections whose extensions intersect the center C of
the arc. What magnetic field B (magnitude and direction)
does the current produce at C?

KEY IDEAS

 

We can find the magnetic field B at point C by applying the
Biot —Savart law of Eq. 29-3 to the wire, point by point along
the full length of the wire. However, the application of
Eq. 29-3 can be simplified by evaluating B separately for the
three distinguishable sections of the wire —namely, (1) the

straight section at the left, (2) the straight section at the right,
and (3) the circular arc.

Straight sections: For any current-length element in
section 1, the angle @ between ds‘ and f is zero (Fig. 29-8b);
so Eq. 29-1 gives us

Bo idssin@d — wo idssinO _

d= — ep “a 2 =o

Thus, the current along the entire length of straight section 1
contributes no magnetic field at C:

B,=0.
