842

‘We want to combine B, and B, to find their vector sum,
which is the net field B at P. To find the directions of B, and
B,, we apply the right-hand rule of Fig. 29-5 to each current
in Fig. 29-9a. For wire 1, with current out of the page, we
mentally grasp the wire with the right hand, with the thumb
pointing out of the page. Then the curled fingers indicate
that the field lines run counterclockwise. In particular, in the
region of point P, they are directed upward to the left.
Recall that the magnetic field at a point near a long, straight
current-carrying wire must be directed perpendicular to a
radial line between the point and the current. Thus, B, must
be directed upward to the left as drawn in Fig. 29-9b. (Note
carefully the perpendicular symbol between vector B, and
the line connecting point P and wire 1.)

Repeating this analysis for the current in wire 2, we find
that B, is directed upward to the right as drawn in Fig. 29-9b.

Adding the vectors: We can now vectorially add B, and By
to find the net magnetic field Bat point P, either by using a
vector-capable calculator or by resolving the vectors into
components and then combining the components of B.

CHAPTER 29 MAGNETIC FIELDS DUE TO CURRENTS

However, in Fig. 29-9b, there is a third method: Because B,
and B, are perpendicular to each other, they form the legs
of aright triangle, with B as the hypotenuse. So,

are Talleos 45°) ae

(4m x 10-7 T-m/A)V(5 A)? + 32 AP?
(27)(5.3 X 10-2 m)(cos 45°)

1.89 x 10° T ~ 190 wT. (Answer)

The angle ¢ between the directions of B and By in Fig. 29-9b
follows from

 

B
@ =tan! By
which, with B, and B, as given above, yields
i ISA
= tan? — = tan = 25°.
= tan 5 an 32A

The angle between B and the x axis shown in Fig. 29-9b is
then

& + 45° = 25° + 45° = 70°. (Answer)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

29-2 FORCE BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL CURRENTS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

29.10 Given two parallel or antiparallel currents, find the
magnetic field of the first current at the location of the

second current and then find the force acting on that
second current.

Key Ideas

@ Parallel wires carrying currents in the same direction attract
each other, whereas parallel wires carrying currents in oppo-
site directions repel each other. The magnitude of the force
ona length L of either wire is

29.11 Identify that parallel currents attract each other, and an-
tiparallel currents repel each other.
29.12 Describe how a rail gun works.

HoLiaiy

2ad
where d is the wire separation, and i, and i, are the currents
in the wires.

Pq = ip LB, sin 90° =

Force Between Two Parallel Currents

Two long parallel wires carrying currents exert forces on each other. Figure 29-10
shows two such wires, separated by a distance d and carrying currents i, and i).
Let us analyze the forces on these wires due to each other.

We seek first the force on wire b in Fig. 29-10 due to the current in wire a.
That current produces a magnetic field B,, and it is this magnetic field that actu-
ally causes the force we seek. To find the force, then, we need the magnitude and
direction of the field B,, at the site of wire b. The magnitude of B, at every point of
wire b is, from Eq. 29-4,

= Mola
2ad~

 

(29-11)
