820 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

28-6 MAGNETIC FORCE ON A CURRENT-CARRYING WIRE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.31 For the situation where a current is perpendicular to a
magnetic field, sketch the current, the direction of the mag-
netic field, and the direction of the magnetic force on the
current (or wire carrying the current).

28.32 For a current in a magnetic field, apply the relationship
between the magnetic force magnitude Fp, the current i,
the length of the wire L, and the angle ¢ between the
length vector L and the field vector B.

28.33 Apply the right-hand rule for cross products to find

Key Ideas

@ A straight wire carrying a current i in a uniform magnetic

the direction of the magnetic force on a current ina
magnetic field.

28.34 For a current in a magnetic field, calculate the
magnetic force F;, with a cross product of the length
vector I’ and the field vector B, in magnitude-angle and
unit-vector notations.

28.35 Describe the procedure for calculating the force on a
current-carrying wire in a magnetic field if the wire is not
straight or if the field is not uniform.

fieldis

field experiences a sideways force
Fy = iL x B.

@ The force acting on a current element i aL ina magnetic

A force acts on
a current through
a B field.

   

(a) (4) ()
Figure 28-14 A flexible wire passes between
the pole faces of a magnet (only the farther
pole face is shown). (a) Without current
in the wire, the wire is straight. (b) With
upward current, the wire is deflected right-
ward. (c) With downward current, the
deflection is leftward.The connections for
getting the current into the wire at one end
and out of it at the other end are not shown.

dFy = idL x B.
@ The direction of the length vector L ord is that of the
current i.

Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire

We have already seen (in connection with the Hall effect) that a magnetic field
exerts a sideways force on electrons moving in a wire. This force must then be
transmitted to the wire itself, because the conduction electrons cannot escape
sideways out of the wire.

In Fig. 28-14a, a vertical wire, carrying no current and fixed in place at both
ends, extends through the gap between the vertical pole faces of a magnet.
The magnetic field between the faces is directed outward from the page. In
Fig. 28-145, a current is sent upward through the wire; the wire deflects to the
right. In Fig. 28-14c, we reverse the direction of the current and the wire deflects
to the left.

Figure 28-15 shows what happens inside the wire of Fig. 28-14b. We see one
of the conduction electrons, drifting downward with an assumed drift speed vy.
Equation 28-3, in which we must put ¢ = 90°, tells us that a force Fy of magnitude
ev,B must act on each such electron. From Eq. 28-2 we see that this force must
be directed to the right. We expect then that the wire as a whole will experience
a force to the right, in agreement with Fig. 28-14).

If, in Fig. 28-15, we were to reverse either the direction of the magnetic field or
the direction of the current, the force on the wire would reverse, being directed now
to the left. Note too that it does not matter whether we consider negative charges

Figure 28-15 A close-up view of a section of the wire of Fig. 28-14b.
The current direction is upward, which means that electrons drift
downward. A magnetic field that emerges from the plane of the
page causes the electrons and the wire to be deflected to the right.

xt

 
