824

CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

approximated as all having the same dimensions and lying in a plane. Then the
turns form a flat coil, and a torque 7’ with the magnitude given in Eq. 28-32 acts
on each of them. The total torque on the coil then has magnitude

7 = Nr = NiabB sin 0 = (NiA)B sin 0, (28-33)

in which A (= ab) is the area enclosed by the coil. The quantities in parentheses
(NiA) are grouped together because they are all properties of the coil: its number
of turns, its area, and the current it carries. Equation 28-33 holds for all flat coils,
no matter what their shape, provided the magnetic field is uniform. For example,
for the common circular coil, with radius r, we have
7 =(Nizr)B sin 6. (28-34)
Normal Vector. Instead of focusing on the motion of the coil, it is simpler to
keep track of the vector 7, which is normal to the plane of the coil. Equation 28-33
tells us that a current-carrying flat coil placed in a magnetic field will tend to
rotate so that 7i has the same direction as the field. In a motor, the current in
the coil is reversed as 7 begins to line up with the field direction, so that a torque
continues to rotate the coil. This automatic reversal of the current is done via
a commutator that electrically connects the rotating coil with the stationary con-
tacts on the wires that supply the current from some source.

28-8 THE MAGNETIC DIPOLE MOMENT

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.38 Identify that a current-carrying coil is a magnetic dipole
with a magnetic dipole moment /# that has the direction of
the normal vector /7, as given by a right-hand rule.

28.39 For a current-carrying coil, apply the relationship
between the magnitude ju of the magnetic dipole moment,
the number of turns N, the area A of each turn, and the
current i.

28.40 On asketch of a current-carrying coil, draw the direction
of the current, and then use a right-hand rule to determine the
direction of the magnetic dipole moment vector jz.

28.41 For amagnetic dipole in an external magnetic field, ap-
ply the relationship between the torque magnitude 7, the
dipole moment magnitude ju, the magnetic field magnitude
B, and the angle @ between the dipole moment vector
and the magnetic field vector B.

28.42 Identify the convention of assigning a plus or minus
sign to a torque according to the direction of rotation.

28.43 Calculate the torque on a magnetic dipole by evaluat-
ing a cross product of the dipole moment vector ji and the

Key Ideas

@ Acoil (of area A and N turns, carrying current i) in a uni-

form magnetic field B will experience a torque 7 given by
7=pxB.

Here jiis the magnetic dipole moment of the coil, with
magnitude 4. = NiA and direction given by the right-
hand rule.

@ The orientation energy of a magnetic dipole in a magnetic

external magnetic field vector B,in magnitude-angle nota-
tion and unit-vector notation.

28.44 For a magnetic dipole in an external magnetic field,
identify the dipole orientations at which the torque magni-
tude is minimum and maximum.

28.45 For a magnetic dipole in an external magnetic field,
apply the relationship between the orientation energy U,
the dipole moment magnitude ju, the external magnetic
field magnitude B, and the angle @ between the dipole
moment vector / and the magnetic field vector B.

28.46 Calculate the orientation energy U by taking a dot prod-
uct of the dipole moment vector j and the external magnetic
field vector B, in magnitude-angle and unit-vector notations.

28.47 Identify the orientations of a magnetic dipole in an ex-
ternal magnetic field that give the minimum and maximum
orientation energies.

28.48 For a magnetic dipole in a magnetic field, relate the ori-
entation energy U to the work W, done by an external
torque as the dipole rotates in the magnetic field.

fieldis
U(0) = —B'B.

@ If an external agent rotates a magnetic dipole from an initial
orientation 6; to some other orientation 6; and the dipole is
stationary both initially and finally, the work W, done on the
dipole by the agent is

W, = AU = U,-U,
