29-1 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT

Proof of Equation 29-4
Figure 29-6, which is just like Fig. 29-1 except that now the wire is straight and of
infinite length, illustrates the task at hand. We seek the field B at point P, a per-
pendicular distance R from the wire. The magnitude of the differential magnetic
field produced at P by the current-length element i d¥ located a distance r from P
is given by Eq. 29-1:
Mo idssin 0
dB = ~~ —.—
4n oP

The direction of dB in Fig. 29-6 is that of the vector ds’ x namely, directly
into the page.

Note that dB at point P has this same direction for all the current-length
elements into which the wire can be divided. Thus, we can find the magnitude of
the magnetic field produced at P by the current-length elements in the upper half
of the infinitely long wire by integrating dB in Eq.29-1 from 0 to ».

Now consider a current-length element in the lower half of the wire, one that
is as far below P as ds is above P. By Eq. 29-3, the magnetic field produced at P
by this current-length element has the same magnitude and direction as that from
element i ds’ in Fig. 29-6. Further, the magnetic field produced by the lower half
of the wire is exactly the same as that produced by the upper half. To find the
magnitude of the total magnetic field B at P, we need only multiply the result of
our integration by 2.We get

* Moi [* sin Ods
B= 2f ap = Hef Sees
0 2a Jo OP

The variables @,s, and r in this equation are not independent; Fig. 29-6 shows

that they are related by
r= Vs? + R?

(29-5)

R
Vs7 + RO
With these substitutions and integral 19 in Appendix E, Eq. 29-5 becomes

and sin 0 = sin(a — 0) =

_ Hol Rds
2a Jo (8 + RY

 

 

Bol s Mot
= = |! = 29-6

2aR [= + R12 I 2aR° (29-6)
as we wanted. Note that the magnetic field at P due to either the lower half or the
upper half of the infinite wire in Fig. 29-6 is half this value; that is,

— bol re r
B= Gar (Sembinfinite straight wire). (29-7)

Magnetic Field Due to a Current in a Circular Arc of Wire

To find the magnetic field produced at a point by a current in a curved wire, we
would again use Eq. 29-1 to write the magnitude of the field produced by a single
current-length element, and we would again integrate to find the net field
produced by all the current-length elements. That integration can be difficult,
depending on the shape of the wire; it is fairly straightforward, however, when the
wire is a circular arc and the point is the center of curvature.

Figure 29-7a shows such an arc-shaped wire with central angle ¢, radius R,
and center C, carrying current i. At C, each current-length element i ds of the
wire produces a magnetic field of magnitude dB given by Eq. 29-1. Moreover, as
Fig. 29-7b shows, no matter where the element is located on the wire, the angle 0

839

This element of current
creates a magnetic field
at P, into the page.

 

Figure 29-6 Calculating the magnetic field
produced by a current i ina long straight
wire. The field dB at P associated with the
current-length element i dS is directed into
the page, as shown.

 

(

The right-hand rule
reveals the field’s
direction at the center.

Figure 29-7 (a) A wire in the shape of a
circular are with center C carries current i.
(b) For any element of wire along the arc,
the angle between the directions of d¥ and
f is 90°. (c) Determining the direction of
the magnetic field at the center C due to the
current in the wire; the field is out of the
page, in the direction of the fingertips, as
indicated by the colored dot at C.
