866

CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

The actual number of field lines passing through the loop does not matter; the
values of the induced emf and induced current are determined by the rate at
which that number changes.

In our first experiment (Fig. 30-1), the magnetic field lines spread out from
the north pole of the magnet. Thus, as we move the north pole closer to the loop,
the number of field lines passing through the loop increases. That increase appar-
ently causes conduction electrons in the loop to move (the induced current) and
provides energy (the induced emf) for their motion. When the magnet stops mov-
ing, the number of field lines through the loop no longer changes and the induced
current and induced emf disappear.

In our second experiment (Fig. 30-2), when the switch is open (no current),
there are no field lines. However, when we turn on the current in the right-hand
loop, the increasing current builds up a magnetic field around that loop and at the
left-hand loop. While the field builds, the number of magnetic field lines through
the left-hand loop increases. As in the first experiment, the increase in field lines
through that loop apparently induces a current and an emf there. When the
current in the right-hand loop reaches a final, steady value, the number of field
lines through the left-hand loop no longer changes, and the induced current and
induced emf disappear.

A Quantitative Treatment

To put Faraday’s law to work, we need a way to calculate the amount of magnetic
field that passes through a loop. In Chapter 23, in a similar situation, we needed to
calculate the amount of electric field that passes through a surface. There we
defined an electric flux ®, = [ E-dA. Here we define a magnetic flux: Suppose
a loop enclosing an area A is placed in a magnetic field B. Then the magnetic flux
through the loop is

®; = | B-dA (magnetic flux through area A). (30-1)

As in Chapter 23, dA is a vector of magnitude dA that is perpendicular to a
differential area dA. As with electric flux, we want the component of the field
that pierces the surface (not skims along it). The dot product of the field and the
area vector automatically gives us that piercing component.

Special Case. As a special case of Eq. 30-1, suppose that the loop lies ina
plane and that the magnetic field is perpendicular to the plane of the loop.
Then we can write the dot product in Eq. 30-1 as B dA cos 0° = B dA. If the
magnetic field is also uniform, then B can be brought out in front of the inte-
gral sign. The remaining J dA then gives just the area A of the loop. Thus, Eq.
30-1 reduces to

®3 = BA (B 1 area A, B uniform). (30-2)

Unit. From Egs. 30-1 and 30-2, we see that the SI unit for magnetic flux is the
tesla—square meter, which is called the weber (abbreviated Wb):
1 weber = 1 Wb = 1 T-m’. (30-3)

Faraday’s Law. With the notion of magnetic flux, we can state Faraday’s law
in a more quantitative and useful way:

Oo The magnitude of the emf @ induced in a conducting loop is equal to the rate at
which the magnetic flux ©, through that loop changes with time.

As you will see below, the induced emf @ tends to oppose the flux change, so
