15.4 Eukaryotic gene transcripts are spliced.

The Discovery of Introns

While the mechanisms of protein synthesis are similar in
bacteria and eukaryotes, they are not identical. One differ-
ence is of particular importance. Unlike bacterial genes,
most eukaryotic genes are larger than they need to be to
produce the polypeptides they code for. Such genes contain
long sequences of nucleotides, known as introns, that do
not code for any portion of the polypeptide specified by the
gene. Introns are inserted between exons, much shorter se-
quences in the gene that do code for portions of the
polypeptide.

In bacteria, virtually every nucleotide within a bacterial
gene transcript is part of an amino acid-specifying codon.
Scientists assumed for many years that this was true of all
organisms. In the late 1970s, however, biologists were
amazed to discover that many of the characteristics of
prokaryotic gene expression did not apply to eukaryotes. In
particular, they found that eukaryotic proteins are encoded
by RNA segments that are excised from several locations
along what is called the primary RNA transcript (or pri-
mary transcript) and then spliced together to form the
mRNA that is eventually translated in the cytoplasm. The
experiment that revealed this unexpected mode of gene ex-
pression consisted of several steps:

1. The mRNA transcribed from a particular gene was
isolated and purified. For example, ovalbumin mRNA
could be obtained fairly easily from unfertilized eggs.

Exon
(coding region)

Intron
(noncoding region)

ae

oNa—| ig) sts) 12) ls) Jind) JS) i) et)

, Transcription
5’ cap

2. Molecules of DNA complementary to the isolated
mRNA were synthesized with the enzyme reverse
transcriptase. These DNA molecules, which are
called “copy” DNA (cDNA), had the same nucleotide
sequence as the template strand of the gene that pro-
duced the mRNA.

3. With genetic engineering techniques (chapter 19),
the portion of the nuclear DNA containing the gene
that produced the mRNA was isolated. This proce-
dure is referred to as doning the gene in question.

4. Single-stranded forms of the cDNA and the nuclear
DNA were mixed and allowed to pair with each other
(to hybridize).

When the researchers examined the resulting hybrid
DNA molecules with an electron microscope, they found
that the DNA did not appear as a single duplex. Instead,
they observed unpaired loops. In the case of the ovalbu-
min gene, they discovered seven loops, corresponding to
sites where the nuclear DNA contained long nucleotide
sequences not present in the cDNA. The conclusion was
inescapable: nucleotide sequences must have been re-
moved from the gene transcript before it appeared as cy-
toplasmic mRNA. These removed sequences are introns,
and the remaining sequences are exons (figure 15.15).
Because introns are excised from the RNA transcript be-
fore it is translated into protein, they do not affect the
structure of the protein encoded by the gene in which
they occur.

 

3" poly-A tail

 

 

Primary
RNA
transcript

 

Introns are cut out and
coding regions are
spliced together

(a)

FIGURE 15.15

 

Matue mANA vanscint | (SSI

 

 

 

 

The eukaryotic gene that codes for ovalbumin in eggs contains introns. (2) The ovalbumin gene and its primary RNA transcript
contain seven segments not present in the mRNA the ribosomes use to direct protein synthesis. Enzymes cut these segments (introns) out
and splice together the remaining segments (exons). (b) The seven loops are the seven introns represented in the schematic drawing (c) of

the mature mRNA transcript hybridized to DNA.

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 309
