15.3 Genes are first transcribed, then translated.

Transcription

The first step in gene expression is the production of an
RNA copy of the DNA sequence encoding the gene, a
process called transcription. To understand the mecha-
nism behind the transcription process, it is useful to focus
first on RNA polymerase, the remarkable enzyme responsi-
ble for carrying it out (figure 15.7).

RNA Polymerase

RNA polymerase is best understood in bacteria. Bacterial
RNA polymerase is very large and complex, consisting of
five subunits: two o& subunits bind regulatory proteins, a
B’ subunit binds the DNA template, a 6 subunit binds
RNA nucleoside subunits, and a 6 subunit recognizes the
promoter and initiates synthesis. Only one of the two
strands of DNA, called the template strand, is tran-
scribed. The RNA transcript’s sequence is complemen-
tary to the template strand. The strand of DNA that is
not transcribed is called the coding strand. It has the
same sequence as the RNA transcript, except T takes the
place of U. The coding strand is also known as the sense
(+) strand, and the template strand as the antisense (-)
strand.

In both bacteria and eukaryotes, the polymerase adds ri-
bonucleotides to the growing 3’ end of an RNA chain. No
primer is needed, and synthesis proceeds in the 5’ — 3’ di-
rection. Bacteria contain only one RNA polymerase en-
zyme, while eukaryotes have three different RNA poly-
merases: RNA polymerase I synthesizes rRNA in the
nucleolus; RNA polymerase II synthesizes mRNA; and
RNA polymerase III synthesizes tRNA.

Promoter

Transcription starts at RNA polymerase binding sites
called promoters on the DNA template strand. A pro-
moter is a short sequence that is not itself transcribed by
the polymerase that binds to it. Striking similarities are evi-
dent in the sequences of different promoters. For example,
two six-base sequences are common to many bacterial pro-
moters, a TTGACA sequence called the -35 sequence, lo-
cated 35 nucleotides upstream of the position where tran-
scription actually starts, and a TATAAT sequence called
the -10 sequence, located 10 nucleotides upstream of the
start site. In eukaryotic DNA, the sequence TATAAA,
called the TATA box, is located at -25 and is very similar
to the prokaryotic —10 sequence but is farther from the
start site.

Promoters differ widely in efficiency. Strong promoters
cause frequent initiations of transcription, as often as every
2 seconds in some bacteria. Weak promoters may tran-

304 = =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

 

FIGURE 15.7

RNA polymerase. In this electron micrograph, the dark circles
are RNA polymerase molecules bound to several promoter sites
on bacterial virus DNA.

scribe only once every 10 minutes. Most strong promoters
have unaltered —35 and -10 sequences, while weak promot-
ers often have substitutions within these sites.

Initiation

The binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter is the
first step in gene transcription. In bacteria, a subunit of
RNA polymerase called o (sigma) recognizes the -10 se-
quence in the promoter and binds RNA polymerase there.
Importantly, this subunit can detect the -10 sequence with-
out unwinding the DNA double helix. In eukaryotes, the
25 sequence plays a similar role in initiating transcription,
as it is the binding site for a key protein factor. Other eu-
karyotic factors then bind one after another, assembling a
large and complicated transcription complex. The cu-
karyotic transcription complex is described in detail in the
following chapter.

Once bound to the promoter, the RNA polymerase be-
gins to unwind the DNA helix. Measurements indicate that
bacterial RNA polymerase unwinds a segment approxi-
mately 17 base-pairs long, nearly two turns of the DNA
double helix. This sets the stage for the assembly of the
RNA chain.

Elongation

The transcription of the RNA chain usually starts with
ATP or GTP. One of these forms the 5’ end of the chain,
which grows in the 5’ — 3 direction as ribonucleotides are
added. Unlike DNA synthesis, a primer is not required.
The region containing the RNA polymerase, DNA, and
growing RNA transcript is called the transcription bubble
because it contains a locally unwound “bubble” of DNA

(figure 15.8). Within the bubble, the first 12 bases of the
