30-5 SELF-INDUCTION 881

30-5 ser-inpuction

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

30.22 Identify that an induced emf appears in a coil when 30.24 When an emf is induced in a coil because the current
the current through the coil is changing. in the coil is changing, determine the direction of the emf
30.23 Apply the relationship between the induced emf in by using Lenz's law to show that the emf always opposes
a coil, the coil's inductance L, and the rate di/dt at the change in the current, attempting to maintain the initial
which the current is changing. current.
Key Ideas
@ If acurrent iin a coil changes with time, an emf is induced in the coil. This self-induced emf is
di
€, =-L—
r dt

@ The direction of €; is found from Lenz's law: The self-induced emf acts to oppose the change that produces it.

 

Self-Induction

If two coils —which we can now call inductors—are near each other, a current jin
one coil produces a magnetic flux ®, through the second coil. We have seen that if
we change this flux by changing the current, an induced emf appears in the second
coil according to Faraday’s law. An induced emf appears in the first coil as well.

) An induced emf ; appears in any coil in which the current is changing,

This process (see Fig. 30-13) is called self-induction, and the emf that appears is
called a self-induced emf. It obeys Faraday’s law of induction just as other
induced emfs do.

For any inductor, Eq. 30-28 tells us that

N®, = Li. (30-33)
Faraday’s law tells us that
d(N®,
é.=- ee (30-34)

By combining Eqs. 30-33 and 30-34 we can write
di
ie ar (self-induced emf). (30-35)

Thus, in any inductor (such as a coil, a solenoid, or a toroid) a self-induced emf
appears whenever the current changes with time. The magnitude of the current
has no influence on the magnitude of the induced emf; only the rate of change of
the current counts.

Direction. You can find the direction of a self-induced emf from Lenz’s law.
The minus sign in Eq. 30-35 indicates that—as the law states —the self-induced
emf €, has the orientation such that it opposes the change in current i. We can
drop the minus sign when we want only the magnitude of €,.

Suppose that you set up a current i in a coil and arrange to have the current Fi
increase with time at a rate di/dt. In the language of Lenz’s law, this increase in Figure 30-13 If the current in a coil is changed
the current in the coil is the “change” that the self-induction must oppose. by varying the contact position on a vari-
Thus, a self-induced emf must appear in the coil, pointing so as to oppose the able resistor, a self-induced emf €, will ap-
increase in the current, trying (but failing) to maintain the initial condition, as _ pear in the coil while the current is changing.

 

 

 

 
