29-4 SOLENOIDS AND TOROIDS 849

*P

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

==

Figure 29-18 A vertical cross section through the central axis of a “stretched-out” solenoid.
The back portions of five turns are shown, as are the magnetic field lines due to a current
through the solenoid. Each turn produces circular magnetic field lines near itself. Near the
solenoid’s axis, the field lines combine into a net magnetic field that is directed along the
axis. The closely spaced field lines there indicate a strong magnetic field. Outside the sole-
noid the field lines are widely spaced; the field there is very weak.

close to a turn, the wire behaves magnetically almost like a long straight wire,
and the lines of B there are almost concentric circles. Figure 29-18 suggests
that the field tends to cancel between adjacent turns. It also suggests that, at
points inside the solenoid and reasonably far from the wire, B is approxi-
mately parallel to the (central) solenoid axis. In the limiting case of an ideal
solenoid, which is infinitely long and consists of tightly packed (close-packed)
turns of square wire, the field inside the coil is uniform and parallel to the so-
lenoid axis.

At points above the solenoid, such as P in Fig. 29-18, the magnetic field set
up by the upper parts of the solenoid turns (these upper turns are marked ©)
is directed to the left (as drawn near P) and tends to cancel the field set up at P
by the lower parts of the turns (these lower turns are marked ®), which is di-
rected to the right (not drawn). In the limiting case of an ideal solenoid, the
magnetic field outside the solenoid is zero. Taking the external field to be zero
is an excellent assumption for a real solenoid if its length is much greater than
its diameter and if we consider external points such as point P that are not at
either end of the solenoid. The direction of the magnetic field along the sole-
noid axis is given by a curled —straight right-hand rule: Grasp the solenoid with
your right hand so that your fingers follow the direction of the current in the
windings; your extended right thumb then points in the direction of the axial
magnetic field.

Figure 29-19 shows the lines of B for a real solenoid. The spacing of these
lines in the central region shows that the field inside the coil is fairly strong
and uniform over the cross section of the coil. The external field, however, is
relatively weak.

Ampere’s Law. Let us now apply Ampere’s law,

$ B+ ds = pipiens (29-21)

to the ideal solenoid of Fig. 29-20, where B is uniform within the solenoid and
zero outside it, using the rectangular Amperian loop abcda. We write § B+ ds’ as
the sum of four integrals, one for each loop segment:

b c a ‘a
$a-as=[ Bear + [Bas + [ Beas + [Beas (29-22)
la b Ic id

b d

 

Figure 29-19 Magnetic field lines for a real
solenoid of finite length. The field is strong
and uniform at interior points such as P;
but relatively weak at external points such
as P).

-— h —_|

d ©

 

i
2 7EEEEEEEEEREPEEEEEEEEEEEEE
a

 

 

3{_——a —S

oe

Figure 29-20 Application of Ampere’s law to
a section of a long ideal solenoid carrying
acurrent i. The Amperian loop is the rec-
tangle abcda.

 

 

 

 

 
