30-3 INDUCED ELECTRIC FIELDS

This equation says simply that a changing magnetic field induces an electric field.
The changing magnetic field appears on the right side of this equation, the elec-
tric field on the left.

Faraday’s law in the form of Eq. 30-20 can be applied to any closed path that
can be drawn in a changing magnetic field. Figure 30-1 1d, for example, shows four
such paths, all having the same shape and area but located in different positions
in the changing field. The induced emfs € (= § E. ds’) for paths 1 and 2 are equal
because these paths lie entirely in the magnetic field and thus have the same
value of d®;/dt. This is true even though the electric field vectors at points along
these paths are different, as indicated by the patterns of electric field lines in the
figure. For path 3 the induced emf is smaller because the enclosed flux ®g (hence
d®,/dt) is smaller, and for path 4 the induced emf is zero even though the electric
field is not zero at any point on the path.

A New Look at Electric Potential

Induced electric fields are produced not by static charges but by a changing mag-
netic flux. Although electric fields produced in either way exert forces on charged
particles, there is an important difference between them. The simplest evidence
of this difference is that the field lines of induced electric fields form closed loops,
as in Fig. 30-11c. Field lines produced by static charges never do so but must start
on positive charges and end on negative charges. Thus, a field line from a charge
can never loop around and back onto itself as we see for each of the field lines
in Fig. 30-11c.

In a more formal sense, we can state the difference between electric fields
produced by induction and those produced by static charges in these words:

os Electric potential has meaning only for electric fields that are produced by static
charges; it has no meaning for electric fields that are produced by induction.

You can understand this statement qualitatively by considering what happens
to a charged particle that makes a single journey around the circular path in
Fig. 30-110. It starts at a certain point and, on its return to that same point, has
experienced an emf € of, let us say, 5 V; that is, work of 5 J/C has been done on the
particle by the electric field, and thus the particle should then be at a point that is
5 V greater in potential. However, that is impossible because the particle is back
at the same point, which cannot have two different values of potential. Thus, po-
tential has no meaning for electric fields that are set up by changing magnetic
fields.

We can take a more formal look by recalling Eq. 24-18, which defines the
potential difference between two points i and fin an electric field E in terms of
an integration between those points:

fi,
y-VY= -{ E-ds. (30-21)
F

In Chapter 24 we had not yet encountered Faraday’s law of induction; so the elec-
tric fields involved in the derivation of Eq. 24-18 were those due to static charges.
If i and f in Eq. 30-21 are the same point, the path connecting them is a closed
loop, V; and V; are identical, and Eq. 30-21 reduces to

$ E-ds =0. (30-22)

However, when a changing magnetic flux is present, this integral is not zero but
is —d®,/dt, as Eq. 30-20 asserts. Thus, assigning electric potential to an induced
electric field leads us to a contradiction. We must conclude that electric potential
has no meaning for electric fields associated with induction.

877
