Review & Summary

Magnetic Flux The magnetic flux bg through an area A in a
magnetic field B is defined as

®; = [aa (30-1)
where the integral is taken over the area. The SI unit of magnetic
flux is the weber, where 1 Wb = 1 T-m’. If B is perpendicular to
the area and uniform over it, Eq.30-1 becomes

®; = BA (B 1 A, Buniform). (30-2)
Faraday’s Law of Induction If the magnetic flux ©; through an
area bounded by a closed conducting loop changes with time, a current
and an emf are produced in the loop; this process is called induction.
The induced emfis

g- — Aes

 

(30-4)

(Faraday’s law).

If the loop is replaced by a closely packed coil of N turns, the induced
emfis

 

€=-n—4,

dt
Lenz’s Law An induced current has a direction such that
the magnetic field due to the current opposes the change in the
magnetic flux that induces the current. The induced emf has the
same direction as the induced current.

Emf and the Induced Electric Field An emf is induced by
a changing magnetic flux even if the loop through which the flux is
changing is not a physical conductor but an imaginary line. The
changing magnetic field induces an electric field E at every point
of such a loop; the induced emfis related to E by

bop kas

where the integration is taken around the loop. From Eq. 30-19 we
can write Faraday’s law in its most general form,

=. dbs
pia dt

A changing magnetic field induces an electric field E.

(30-5)

(30-19)

(30-20)

(Faraday’s law).

Inductors An inductor is a device that can be used to produce a
known magnetic field in a specified region. If a current i is estab-
lished through each of the N windings of an inductor, a magnetic
flux ®, links those windings. The inductance L of the inductor is

N®,
L= — (inductance defined).

<Questions

1 If the circular conductor in Fig. 30-21 undergoes thermal
expansion while it is in a uniform mag-
netic field, a current is induced clockwise
around it. Is the magnetic field directed
into or out of the page?

2 The wire loop in Fig, 30-22a is sub-
jected, in turn, to six uniform magnetic
fields, each directed parallel to the z

(30-28)

 

Figure 30-21 Question 1.

QUESTIONS 893

The SI unit of inductance is the henry (H), where 1 henry = 1 H =
1T-n’/A. The inductance per unit length near the middle of a long
solenoid of cross-sectional area A and n turns per unit length is

L
= = pyn?A (solenoid). (30-31)

l
Self-Induction [facurrentiin a coil changes with time,an emf
is induced in the coil. This self-induced emf is
di
€,=-L—.
r dt
The direction of €, is found from Lenz’s law: The self-induced emf
acts to oppose the change that produces it.

Series RL Circuits Ifa constant emf € is introduced into a sin-
gle-loop circuit containing a resistance R and an inductance L, the
current rises to an equilibrium value of €/R:

(30-35)

i=sa =e) (rise of current). (30-41)

Here 7, (= L/R) is the inductive time constant. When the source of
constant emf is removed, the current decays from a value iy
according to

i= igo (30-45)

(decay of current).

Magnetic Energy If an inductor L carries a current i, the
inductor’s magnetic field stores an energy given by
U; = 3L? (30-49)

(magnetic energy).

If B is the magnitude of a magnetic field at any point (in an
inductor or anywhere else), the density of stored magnetic energy
at that point is

2

 

Up (magnetic energy density). (30-55)

2mo
Mutual Induction If coils 1 and2 are near each other, a chang-
ing current in either coil can induce an emf in the other. This mu-
tual induction is described by

¢._ —y fis
€.= Ma (30-64)
di.
and €,=-M 7 (30-65)

where M (measured in henries) is the mutual inductance.

 

(a) (b)
Figure 30-22 Question 2.
