Table 15.1 The Genetic Code

Second Letter

 

 

 

 

 

First Third
Letter U c A G Letter
UF ehenyiatanine fe UAU Tyrosine a Cysteine iu

UUC x UAC UGC ©

UUA . UCA UMA Stop UGA Stop A

Leucine

UUG UCG UAG Stop UGG Tryptophan G

© cuu ccu CAU _— cGu U
Histidine

CUC Leucine CCC Proline CAC CGC Arginine c

CUA CCA CAA . CGA A
Glutamine

cuG ccG CAG CGG eI

A AUU . ACU AAU . AGU . U

Isoleucine Asparagine Serine
AUC ACC . AAC AGC (or
_ Threonine

AUA ea ACA AKA) Lysine BEM arsinine A

AUG fare ACG AAG AGG G

G Guu Gcu GAU GGU U
Aspartate

GUC Valine GCC Alanine GAC GGC Glycine c

GUA GCA GAA GGA A
Glutamate

GUG GCG GAG GGG a

A codon consists of three nucleotides read in the sequence shown. For example, ACU codes for threonine, The first letter, A, is in the First Letter column;
the second letter, C, is in the Second Letter column; and the third letter, U, is in the Third Letter column. Each of the mRNA codons is recognized by a
corresponding anticodon sequence on a tRNA molecule. Some tRNA molecules recognize more than one codon in mRNA, but they always code for the
same amino acid. In fact, most amino acids are specified by more than one codon, For example, threonine is specified by four codons, which differ only in

the third nucleotide (ACU, ACC, ACA, and ACG).

The Code Is Practically Universal

The genetic code is the same in almost all organisms. For
example, the codon AGA specifies the amino acid arginine
in bacteria, in humans, and in all other organisms whose
genetic code has been studied. The universality of the ge-
netic code is among the strongest evidence that all living
things share a common evolutionary heritage. Because the
code is universal, genes transcribed from one organism can
be translated in another; the mRNA is fully able to dictate a
functionally active protein. Similarly, genes can be trans-
ferred from one organism to another and be successfully
transcribed and translated in their new host. This univer-
sality of gene expression is central to many of the advances
of genetic engineering. Many commercial products such as
the insulin used to treat diabetes are now manufactured by
placing human genes into bacteria, which then serve as tiny
factories to turn out prodigious quantities of insulin.

But Not Quite

In 1979, investigators began to determine the complete
nucleotide sequences of the mitochondrial genomes in

humans, cattle, and mice. It came as something of a shock
when these investigators learned that the genetic code
used by these mammalian mitochondria was not quite the
same as the “universal code” that has become so familiar
to biologists. In the mitochondrial genomes, what should
have been a “stop” codon, UGA, was instead read as the
amino acid tryptophan; AUA was read as methionine
rather than isoleucine; and AGA and AGG were read as
“stop” rather than arginine. Furthermore, minor differ-
ences from the universal code have also been found in the
genomes of chloroplasts and ciliates (certain types of
protists).

Thus, it appears that the genetic code is not quite uni-
versal. Some time ago, presumably after they began their
endosymbiotic existence, mitochondria and chloroplasts
began to read the code differently, particularly the portion
of the code associated with “stop” signals.

 

Within genes that encode proteins, the nucleotide
sequence of DNA is read in blocks of three consecutive
nucleotides, without punctuation between the blocks.
Each block, or codon, codes for one amino acid.

 

Chapter 15 Genes and How They Work 303
