29-2 FORCE BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL CURRENTS

The curled-straight right-hand rule tells us that the direction of B, at wire b is
down, as Fig. 29-10 shows. Now that we have the field, we can find the force it pro-
duces on wire b. Equation 28-26 tells us that the force F,, on a length L of wire b
due to the external magnetic field B, is

Fya = ipL X By, (29-12)

where L is the length vector of the wire. In Fig. 29-10, vectors L and B, are per-
pendicular to each other, and so with Eq. 29-11, we can write
HoLigiy
2nd

The direction of F,,, is the direction of the cross product L x B,. Applying
the right-hand rule for cross products to E and B, in Fig. 29-10, we see that Fra
is directly toward wire a, as shown.

The general procedure for finding the force on a current-carrying wire is this:

Fya = iy LB, sin 90° = (29-13)

o To find the force ona current-carrying wire due to a second current-carrying wire,
first find the field due to the second wire at the site of the first wire. Then find the
force on the first wire due to that field.

We could now use this procedure to compute the force on wire a due to the
current in wire b. We would find that the force is directly toward wire b; hence,
the two wires with parallel currents attract each other. Similarly, if the two cur-
rents were antiparallel, we could show that the two wires repel each other. Thus,

Oo Parallel currents attract each other, and antiparallel currents repel each other.

The force acting between currents in parallel wires is the basis for the defini-
tion of the ampere, which is one of the seven SI base units. The definition,
adopted in 1946, is this: The ampere is that constant current which, if maintained
in two straight, parallel conductors of infinite length, of negligible circular cross
section, and placed 1 m apart in vacuum, would produce on each of these con-
ductors a force of magnitude 2 x 10~7 newton per meter of wire length.

The basics of a rail gun are shown in Fig. 29-11a. A large current is sent out along
one of two parallel conducting rails, across a conducting “fuse” (such as a narrow
piece of copper) between the rails, and then back to the current source along the
second rail. The projectile to be fired lies on the far side of the fuse and fits
loosely between the rails. Immediately after the current begins, the fuse element
melts and vaporizes, creating a conducting gas between the rails where the fuse
had been.

The curled—straight right-hand rule of Fig. 29-5 reveals that the currents in the
rails of Fig. 29-11a produce magnetic fields that are directed downward between the
rails The net magnetic field B exerts a force F on the gas due to the current i through
the gas (Fig. 29-11b). With Eq. 29-12 and the right-hand rule for cross products, we
find that F points outward along the rails As the gas is forced outward along the rails,
it pushes the projectile, accelerating it by as much as 5 x 10°g, and then launches it
with a speed of 10 km/s, all within 1 ms. Someday rail guns may be used to launch
materials into space from mining operations on the Moon or an asteroid.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

The figure here shows three long, straight, parallel, equally spaced wires with identical cur-
rents either into or out of the page. Rank the wires according to the magnitude of the force
on each due to the currents in the other two wires, greatest first.

843

The field due to a
at the position of b
creates a force on b.

  

i, B, (due to i,)

Figure 29-10 Two parallel wires carrying cur-
rents in the same direction attract each
other. B, is the magnetic field at wire b pro-
duced by the current in wire a. F;,, is the re-
sulting force acting on wire b because it
carries current in B,,.

Projectile

Conducting fuse
L

  
  

 

Conducting rail

(a)

Conducting
gas

 

(d)

Figure 29-11 (a) A rail gun,as a current iis
set up init. The current rapidly causes the
conducting fuse to vaporize. (b) The cur-
rent produces a magnetic field B between
the rails, and the field causes a force F to
act on the conducting gas, which is part of
the current path. The gas propels the pro-
jectile along the rails, launching it.

ee ee

a b c
