ss2 CHAPTER 30 INDUCTION AND INDUCTANCE

i (increasing)

The changing
current changes
the flux, which
creates an emf
that opposes

 

i (decreasing)
——___,

 

the change.
3
oP
oo]

(0)
Figure 30-14 (a) The current iis increasing,
and the self-induced emf €;, appears along
the coil in a direction such that it opposes

the increase. The arrow representing €; can

be drawn along a turn of the coil or along-
side the coil. Both are shown. (b) The cur-
rent jis decreasing, and the self-induced
emf appears in a direction such that it
opposes the decrease.

30-6 rc circuits

Learning Objectives

shown in Fig. 30-14a. If, instead, the current decreases with time, the self-induced
emf must point in a direction that tends to oppose the decrease (Fig. 30-14b),
again trying to maintain the initial condition.

Electric Potential. In Module 30-3 we saw that we cannot define an electric
potential for an electric field (and thus for an emf) that is induced by a changing
magnetic flux. This means that when a self-induced emf is produced in the induc-
tor of Fig. 30-13, we cannot define an electric potential within the inductor itself,
where the flux is changing. However, potentials can still be defined at points of
the circuit that are not within the inductor—points where the electric fields are
due to charge distributions and their associated electric potentials.

Moreover, we can define a self-induced potential difference V; across an
inductor (between its terminals, which we assume to be outside the region of
changing flux). For an ideal inductor (its wire has negligible resistance), the mag-
nitude of V; is equal to the magnitude of the self-induced emf €;.

If, instead, the wire in the inductor has resistance r, we mentally separate the
inductor into a resistance r (which we take to be outside the region of changing
flux) and an ideal inductor of self-induced emf €,. As with a real battery of emf
‘é and internal resistance r, the potential difference across the terminals of a real
inductor then differs from the emf. Unless otherwise indicated, we assume here
that inductors are ideal.

lv Checkpoint 5

The figure shows an emf €, induced in a coil. Which of $,0——
the following can describe the current through the coil:

(a) constant and rightward, (b) constant and leftward, LLU

(c) increasing and rightward, (d) decreasing and rightward, (e) increasing and left-
ward, (f) decreasing and leftward?

After reading this module, you should be able to...

30.25 Sketch a schematic diagram of an RL circuit in which
the current is rising.

30.26 Write a loop equation (a differential equation) for an
RL circuit in which the current is rising.

30.27 For an RL circuit in which the current is rising, apply
the equation i(t) for the current as a function of time.

30.28 For an RL circuit in which the current is rising, find equa-
tions for the potential difference V across the resistor, the rate
di/dt at which the current changes, and the emf of the inductor,
as functions of time.

30.29 Calculate an inductive time constant 7.

30.30 Sketch a schematic diagram of an RL circuit in which
the current is decaying.

30.31 Write a loop equation (a differential equation) for an
RL circuit in which the current is decaying.

30.32 For an RL circuit in which the current is decaying,
apply the equation i(t) for the current as a function of time.

30.33 From an equation for decaying current in an RL circuit,
find equations for the potential difference V across the
resistor, the rate di/dt at which current is changing, and the
emf of the inductor, as functions of time.

30.34 For an RL circuit, identify the current through the induc-
tor and the emf across it just as current in the circuit begins
to change (the initial condition) and a long time later when
equilibrium is reached (the final condition).

 

Key Ideas
@ If aconstant emf © is introduced into a single-loop circuit
containing a resistance R and an inductance L, the current
rises to an equilibrium value of /R according to

 

é
Re —e "%) (rise of current).

Here 7, (= L/R) governs the rate of rise of the current and is
called the inductive time constant of the circuit.

@ When the source of constant emf is removed, the current
decays from a value ip according to

i=ige"™ (decay of current).
