814 CHAPTER 28 MAGNETIC FIELDS

28-4 a CIRCULATING CHARGED PARTICLE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

28.20 For a charged particle moving through a uniform
magnetic field, identify under what conditions it will travel
ina straight line, in a circular path, and in a helical path.

28.21 For a charged particle in uniform circular motion due to
a magnetic force, start with Newton's second law and
derive an expression for the orbital radius r in terms of the
field magnitude B and the particle's mass m, charge
magnitude q, and speed v.

28.22 For a charged particle moving along a circular path in
a magnetic field, calculate and relate speed, centripetal
force, centripetal acceleration, radius, period, frequency,
and angular frequency, and identify which of the quantities
do not depend on speed.

28.23 For a positive particle and a negative particle moving

Key Ideas

along a circular path in a uniform magnetic field, sketch the
path and indicate the magnetic field vector, the velocity
vector, the result of the cross product of the velocity and
field vectors, and the magnetic force vector.

28.24 For a charged particle moving in a helical path in a
magnetic field, sketch the path and indicate the magnetic
field, the pitch, the radius of curvature, the velocity
component parallel to the field, and the velocity compo-
nent perpendicular to the field.

28.25 For helical motion in a magnetic field, apply the
relationship between the radius of curvature and one of
the velocity components.

28.26 For helical motion in a magnetic field, identify pitch p
and relate it to one of the velocity components.

 

@ A charged particle with mass m and charge magnitude |q|
moving with velocity V perpendicular to a uniform magnetic
field B will travel in a circle.

@ Applying Newton's second law to the circular motion
yields

mv?
B=
lalv a

 

from which we find the radius r of the circle to be

p=
lq\B-

@ The frequency of revolution f, the angular frequency «, and

the period of the motion T are given by

po == 08
ln Tam’

 

@ If the velocity of the particle has a component parallel to the mag-
netic field, the particle moves in a helical path about field vector

 

 

A Circulating Charged Particle

If a particle moves in a circle at constant speed, we can be sure that the net force
acting on the particle is constant in magnitude and points toward the center of
the circle, always perpendicular to the particle’s velocity. Think of a stone tied to
a string and whirled in a circle on a smooth horizontal surface, or of a satellite
moving in a circular orbit around Earth. In the first case, the tension in the string
provides the necessary force and centripetal acceleration. In the second case,
Earth’s gravitational attraction provides the force and acceleration.

Figure 28-10 shows another example: A beam of electrons is projected into
a chamber by an electron gun G.The electrons enter in the plane of the page with
speed v and then move in a region of uniform magnetic field B directed out of
that plane. As a result, a magnetic force F, = qv X B continuously deflects the

electrons, and because V

and B are always perpendicular to each other, this

deflection causes the electrons to follow a circular path. The path is visible in the
photo because atoms of gas in the chamber emit light when some of the circulat-
ing electrons collide with them.

‘We would like to determine the parameters that characterize the circular
motion of these electrons, or of any particle of charge magnitude |q! and mass m
moving perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field B at speed v. From Eq. 28-3,
the force acting on the particle has a magnitude of |q| vB. From Newton’s second
law (F = m@) applied to uniform circular motion (Eq. 6-18),

v2

F=m— (28-14)
