32-2 INDUCED MAGNETIC FIELDS 945

where iegc is the current encircled by the closed loop. Thus, our two equations that
specify the magnetic field B produced by means other than a magnetic material
(that is, by a current and by a changing electric field) give the field in exactly the
same form. We can combine the two equations into the single equation

$a. d= yey —= de Moieae (Ampere -Maxwell law). (32-5)

When there is a current but no change in electric flux (such as with a wire
carrying a constant current), the first term on the right side of Eq. 32-5 is zero,
and so Eq. 32-5 reduces to Eq. 32-4, Ampere’s law. When there is a change in elec-
tric flux but no current (such as inside or outside the gap of a charging capacitor),
the second term on the right side of Eq. 32-5 is zero, and so Eq. 32-5 reduces to

Eq. 32-3, Maxwell’s law of induction.

Iv] Checkpoint 2

The figure shows graphs of the electric field magnitude
E versus time ¢ for four uniform electric fields, all con- rg
tained within identical circular regions as in Fig. 32-5b.

Rank the fields according to the magnitudes of the

magnetic fields they induce at the edge of the region,

greatest first.

Sample Problem 32.01

A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius R is
being charged as in Fig. 32-Sa.

(a) Derive an expression for the magnetic field at radius r
for the caser = R.

KEY IDEAS

A magnetic field can be set up by a current and by induction
due to a changing electric flux; both effects are included in
Eg. 32-5. There is no current between the capacitor plates
of Fig. 32-5, but the electric flux there is changing. Thus,
Eq. 32-5 reduces to
3 ae d®,

$ Bas = M080
We shall separately evaluate the left and right sides of this
equation.

(32-6)

Left side of Eq. 32-6: We choose a circular Amperian loop
with a radius r = R as shown in Fig. 32-5b because we want
to evaluate the magnetic field for r= R—that is, inside the
capacitor. The magnetic field B at all points along the loop is
tangent to the loop, as is the path element ds’. Thus, Band
ds are either parallel or antiparallel at each point of the
loop. For simplicity, assume they are parallel (the choice
does not alter our outcome here). Then

$B-ds= 4 Bascost = $B a

Magnetic field induced by changing electric field

Due to the circular symmetry of the plates, we can also as-
sume that B has the same magnitude at every point around
the loop. Thus, B can be taken outside the integral on the
right side of the above equation. The integral that remains is
§ ds, which simply gives the circumference 27r of the loop.
The left side of Eq. 32-6 is then (B)(2 ar).

Right side of Eq. 32-6: We assume that the electric field
Eis uniform between the capacitor plates and directed per-
pendicular to the plates. Then the electric flux ®; through
the Amperian loop is EA, where A is the area encircled by
the loop within the electric field. Thus, the right side of Eq.
32-6 is puge d(EA)/dt.

Combining results: Substituting our results for the left and
right sides into Eq. 32-6, we get
d(EA)

dt

Because A isa constant, we write d(EA) as A dE;so we have

 

(B)(2ar) = woe

(BQ) = peo @2-7)
The area A that is encircled by the Amperian loop within
the electric field is the full area zr? of the loop because the
loop’s radius r is less than (or equal to) the plate radius R.

Substituting zr? for A in Eq. 32-7 leads to, for r= R,
Moto” dE

Bey at”

(Answer) (32-8)

 
