932

CHAPTER 31

ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT

With switch S open, no energy is transferred from the generator to the rest of
the circuit, but when we close S to connect the secondary to the resistive load R,
energy is transferred. (In general, the load would also contain inductive and
capacitive elements, but here we consider just resistance R.) Here is the process:

1. An alternating current J, appears in the secondary circuit, with corresponding
energy dissipation rate 1?R (= V?/R) in the resistive load.

2. This current produces its own alternating magnetic flux in the iron core, and
this flux induces an opposing emf in the primary windings.

3. The voltage V, of the primary, however, cannot change in response to this
opposing emf because it must always be equal to the emf € that is provided by
the generator; closing switch S cannot change this fact.

4, To maintain V,, the generator now produces (in addition to Jpg) an alternat-
ing current J, in the primary circuit; the magnitude and phase constant of
I, are just those required for the emf induced by J, in the primary to exactly
cancel the emf induced there by /,. Because the phase constant of J, is not 90°
like that of Jag, this current J, can transfer energy to the primary.

Energy Transfers. We want to relate I, to I,. However, rather than analyze the
foregoing complex process in detail, let us just apply the principle of conservation
of energy. The rate at which the generator transfers energy to the primary is equal
to I,V,.The rate at which the primary then transfers energy to the secondary (via
the alternating magnetic field linking the two coils) is /,V,. Because we assume
that no energy is lost along the way, conservation of energy requires that

pV = 15Vs.
Substituting for V, from Eq. 31-79, we find that

= ie (transformation of currents). (31-80)
is
This equation tells us that the current J, in the secondary can differ from the
current J, in the primary, depending on the turns ratio N,/N,.
Current J, appears in the primary circuit because of the resistive load R in
the secondary circuit. To find J,, we substitute J, = V,/R into Eq. 31-80 and then
we substitute for V, from Eq. 31-79. We find

1/N, \
5 -7(# yyy (31-81)

ip

 

This equation has the form J, = V,/R.q, where equivalent resistance Rog is

eq

Nn,
Reg = (2) R. (31-82)

This R.q is the value of the load resistance as “seen” by the generator; the genera-
tor produces the current /, and voltage V,, as if the generator were connected to a
resistance Reg.

Impedance Matching

Equation 31-82 suggests still another function for the transformer. For maximum
transfer of energy from an emf device to a resistive load, the resistance of the emf
device must equal the resistance of the load. The same relation holds for ac
circuits except that the impedance (rather than just the resistance) of the genera-
tor must equal that of the load. Often this condition is not met. For example, in
a music-playing system, the amplifier has high impedance and the speaker set has
low impedance. We can match the impedances of the two devices by coupling
them through a transformer that has a suitable turns ratio N,/N,.
