31-3 FORCED OSCILLATIONS OF THREE SIMPLE CIRCUITS 913

Key Ideas
@ A series RLC circuit may be set into forced oscillation at a amplitude Vz = IR; the current is in phase with the potential
driving angular frequency w, by an external alternating emf difference.
€ =E,, sin wy. @ For a capacitor, Ve = LX, in which X¢ = 1/w,C is the
@ The current driven in the circuit is capacitive reactance; the current here leads the potential
i =Isin(wjt — $), difference by 90° (¢@ = —90° = — w/2 rad).

. @ For an inductor, V;, = LX, in which X;, = w,L is the
where ¢ is the phase constant of the current. inductive reactance; the current here lags the potential
@ The alternating potential difference across a resistor has difference by 90° (@ = +90° = +7/2 rad).

 

Alternating Current

The oscillations in an RLC circuit will not damp out if an external emf device
supplies enough energy to make up for the energy dissipated as thermal energy
in the resistance R. Circuits in homes, offices, and factories, including countless
RLC circuits, receive such energy from local power companies. In most countries
the energy is supplied via oscillating emfs and currents— the current is said to be
an alternating current, or ac for short. (The nonoscillating current from a battery
is said to be a direct current, or de.) These oscillating emfs and currents vary si-
nusoidally with time, reversing direction (in North America) 120 times per sec-
ond and thus having frequency f = 60 Hz.

Electron Oscillations. At first sight this may seem to be a strange arrange-
ment. We have seen that the drift speed of the conduction electrons in household
wiring may typically be 4 x 10~ m/s. If we now reverse their direction every 75s,
such electrons can move only about 3 x 10-7 mina half-cycle. At this rate, a typi-
cal electron can drift past no more than about 10 atoms in the wiring before it is
required to reverse its direction. How, you may wonder, can the electron ever get
anywhere?

Although this question may be worrisome, it is a needless concern. The con-
duction electrons do not have to “get anywhere.” When we say that the current in
a wire is one ampere, we mean that charge passes through any plane cutting
across that wire at the rate of one coulomb per second. The speed at which the
charge carriers cross that plane does not matter directly; one ampere may corre-
spond to many charge carriers moving very slowly or to a few moving very
rapidly. Furthermore, the signal to the electrons to reverse directions—which
originates in the alternating emf provided by the power company’s generator —
is propagated along the conductor at a speed close to that of light. All electrons,
no matter where they are located, get their reversal instructions at about the
same instant. Finally, we note that for many devices, such as lightbulbs and toast-
ers, the direction of motion is unimportant as long as the electrons do move so as
to transfer energy to the device via collisions with atoms in the device.

Why ac? The basic advantage of alternating current is this: As the current
alternates, so does the magnetic field that surrounds the conductor. This makes
possible the use of Faraday’s law of induction, which, among other things,
means that we can step up (increase) or step down (decrease) the magnitude of
an alternating potential difference at will, using a device called a transformer,
as we shall discuss later. Moreover, alternating current is more readily adapt-
able to rotating machinery such as generators and motors than is (nonalternat-
ing) direct current.

Emf and Current. Figure 31-6 shows a simple model of an ac generator. As
the conducting loop is forced to rotate through the external magnetic field B, a
sinusoidally oscillating emf is induced in the loop:

€ = Ey, sin wyt. (31-28)

 

Figure 31-6 The basic mechanism of an
alternating-current generator is a conduct-
ing loop rotated in an external magnetic
field. In practice, the alternating emf
induced in a coil of many turns of wire is
made accessible by means of slip rings
attached to the rotating loop. Each ring is
connected to one end of the loop wire and
is electrically connected to the rest of the
generator circuit by a conducting brush
against which the ring slips as the loop
(and it) rotates.
