966

2 Figure 32-20 shows a parallel-plate ca- P
pacitor and the current in the connecting
wires that is discharging the capacitor. Are

the directions of (a) electric field E and

(b) displacement current i, leftward or

rightward between the plates? (c) Is the Figure 32-20

magnetic field at point P into or out of the .
Question 2.

page?
3 Figure 32-21 shows, in two situations, an electric field vector E
and an induced magnetic field line. In each, is the magnitude of E
increasing or decreasing?

[* ap

(@ (4)
Figure 32-21 Question 3.

4 Figure 32-22a shows a pair of opposite spin orientations for an
electron in an external magnetic field By. Figure 32-22b gives
three choices for the graph of the energies associated with those
orientations as a function of the magnitude of B,... Choices b and c
consist of intersecting lines, choice a of parallel lines. Which is the
correct choice?

 

(a)
Figure 32-22 Question 4.

5 Anelectron in an external magnetic field B,., has its spin angu-
lar momentum S, antiparallel to B..,. If the electron undergoes a
spin-flip so that S, is then parallel with B,,, must energy be sup-
plied to or lost by the electron?

6 Does the magnitude of the net force on the current loop of
Figs. 32-12a and b increase, decrease, or remain the same if we in-
crease (a) the magnitude of B.,, and (b) the divergence of Bry?

7 Figure 32-23 shows a face-on
view of one of the two square plates
of a parallel-plate capacitor, as well
as four loops that are located be-
tween the plates. The capacitor is
being discharged. (a) Neglecting
fringing of the magnetic field, rank
the loops according to the magni-
tude of § B+ ds along them, great-
est first. (b) Along which loop, if
any, is the angle between the directions of B and ds constant

 

Figure 32-23 Question 7.

CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

(so that their dot product can easily be evaluated)? (c) Along
which loop, if any, is B constant (so that B can be brought in front
of the integral sign in Eq. 32-3)?

8 Figure 32-24 shows three loop models of an electron orbiting
counterclockwise within a magnetic field. The fields are nonuni-
form for models 1 and 2 and uniform for model 3. For each model,
are (a) the magnetic dipole moment of the loop and (b) the mag-
netic force on the loop directed up, directed down, or zero?

B B B

qd) (2) (3)
Figure 32-24 Questions 8, 9, and 10.

9 Replace the current loops of Question 8 and Fig, 32-24 with
diamagnetic spheres. For each field, are (a) the magnetic dipole
moment of the sphere and (b) the magnetic force on the sphere
directed up, directed down, or zero?

10 Replace the current loops of Question 8 and Fig. 32-24 with
paramagnetic spheres. For each field, are (a) the magnetic dipole
moment of the sphere and (b) the magnetic force on the sphere
directed up, directed down, or zero?

11 Figure 32-25 represents three rectangular samples of a ferro-
magnetic material in which the magnetic dipoles of the domains
have been directed out of the page (encircled dot) by a very strong
applied field Bo. In each sample, an island domain still has its mag-
netic field directed into the page (encircled x). Sample 1 is one
(pure) crystal. The other samples contain impurities collected
along lines; domains cannot easily spread across such lines.

The applied field is now to be reversed and its magnitude
kept moderate. The change causes the island domain to grow.
(a) Rank the three samples according to the success of that growth,
greatest growth first. Ferromagnetic materials in which the mag-
netic dipoles are easily changed are said to be magnetically sofi;
when the changes are difficult, requiring strong applied fields, the
materials are said to be magnetically hard. (b) Of the three sam-
ples, which is the most magnetically hard?

Impurity line

 

 

Figure 32-25 Question 11.

12 Figure 32-26 shows four
steel bars; three are perma-

a ¢ e g
nent magnets. One of the poles
is indicated. Through experi-
ment we find that ends a and d
attract each other, ends c and f
repel, ends ¢ and / attract, and s
ends a and A attract. (a) Which
b d f h

ends are north poles? (b) d

Which bar is not a magnet? Figure 32-26 Question 12.
