994

 

Courtesy Bausch & Lomb

(a)

White

i

(
Figure 33-20 (a) A triangular prism separat-
ing white light into its component colors.
(b) Chromatic dispersion occurs at the
first surface and is increased at the second
surface.

Figure 33-21 (a) The separation of colors
when sunlight refracts into and out of
falling raindrops leads to a primary
rainbow. The antisolar point A is on the
horizon at the right. The rainbow colors ap-
pear at an angle of 42° from the direction of
A. (b) Drops at 42° from A in any direction
can contribute to the rainbow. (c) The rain-
bow are when the Sun is higher (and thus A
is lower). (d) The separation of colors lead-
ing to a secondary rainbow.

CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

To increase the color separation, we can use a solid glass prism with a trian-
gular cross section, as in Fig. 33-20a. The dispersion at the first surface (on the left
in Figs. 33-20a, b) is then enhanced by the dispersion at the second surface.

Rainbows

The most charming example of chromatic dispersion is a rainbow. When sunlight
(which consists of all visible colors) is intercepted by a falling raindrop, some of
the light refracts into the drop, reflects once from the drop’s inner surface, and
then refracts out of the drop. Figure 33-21a shows the situation when the Sun is
on the horizon at the left (and thus when the rays of sunlight are horizontal). The
first refraction separates the sunlight into its component colors, and the second
refraction increases the separation. (Only the red and blue rays are shown in the
figure.) If many falling drops are brightly illuminated, you can see the separated
colors they produce when the drops are at an angle of 42° from the direction of
the antisolar point A, the point directly opposite the Sun in your view.

To locate the drops, face away from the Sun and point both arms directly
away from the Sun, toward the shadow of your head. Then move your right arm
directly up, directly rightward, or in any intermediate direction until the angle
between your arms is 42°. If illuminated drops happen to be in the direction of
your right arm, you see color in that direction.

Because any drop at an angle of 42° in any direction from A can contribute
to the rainbow, the rainbow is always a 42° circular arc around A (Fig. 33-21) and
the top of a rainbow is never more than 42° above the horizon. When the Sun is
above the horizon, the direction of A is below the horizon, and only a shorter,
lower rainbow arc is possible (Fig. 33-21c).

Because rainbows formed in this way involve one reflection of light inside
each drop, they are often called primary rainbows. A secondary rainbow involves
two reflections inside a drop, as shown in Fig. 33-21d. Colors appear in the sec-
ondary rainbow at an angle of 52° from the direction of A. A secondary rainbow

Sunlight Water drops

Rainbow
T

   

 

 

Q- ar A—
ne a
(a (b) >
Water drops
Sunlight
Rainbow
NY Pa
42\. 42°
w
© A (a)
