944 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

“2

  

The changing of the
electric field between
the plates creates a
02 magnetic field.

 

(Y)

Figure 32-5 (a) A circular parallel-plate
capacitor, shown in side view, is being
charged by a constant current i. (b) A view
from within the capacitor, looking toward
the plate at the right in (a). The electric
field £ is uniform, is directed into the page
(toward the plate), and grows in magnitude.
as the charge on the capacitor increases.
The magnetic field B induced by this
changing electric field is shown at four
points ona circle with a radius rless than
the plate radius R.

Figure 32-6 A uniform magnetic field Bina
circular region. The field, directed into the
page, is increasing in magnitude. The electric
field E induced by the changing magnetic
field is shown at four points on a circle con-
centric with the circular region. Compare
this situation with that of Fig. 32-5b.

 

law of induction after James Clerk Maxwell, and we write it as

 

= d®,
$ B-d¥ = pe i (Maxwell’s law of induction). (32-3)

Here B is the magnetic field induced along a closed loop by the changing electric
flux ® ; in the region encircled by that loop.

Charging a Capacitor. As an example of this sort of induction, we con-
sider the charging of a parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates. (Although
we shall focus on this arrangement, a changing electric flux will always induce
a magnetic field whenever it occurs.) We assume that the charge on our capac-
itor (Fig. 32-5a) is being increased at a steady rate by a constant current / in
the connecting wires. Then the electric field magnitude between the plates
must also be increasing at a steady rate.

Figure 32-Sb is a view of the right-hand plate of Fig. 32-5a from between
the plates. The electric field is directed into the page. Let us consider a circu-
lar loop through point 1 in Figs. 32-Sa and b, a loop that is concentric with the
capacitor plates and has a radius smaller than that of the plates. Because the
electric field through the loop is changing, the electric flux through the loop
must also be changing. According to Eq. 32-3, this changing electric flux in-
duces a magnetic field around the loop.

Experiment proves that a magnetic field B is indeed induced around such
a loop, directed as shown. This magnetic field has the same magnitude at every
point around the loop and thus has circular symmetry about the central axis of the
capacitor plates (the axis extending from one plate center to the other).

If we now consider a larger loop—say, through point 2 outside the plates
in Figs. 32-5a and b—we find that a magnetic field is induced around that loop
as well. Thus, while the electric field is changing, magnetic fields are induced
between the plates, both inside and outside the gap. When the electric field stops
changing, these induced magnetic fields disappear.

Although Eq. 32-3 is similar to Eq. 32-2, the equations differ in two ways.
First, Eq. 32-3 has the two extra symbols jp and go, but they appear only because
we employ SI units. Second, Eq. 32-3 lacks the minus sign of Eq. 32-2, mean-
ing that the induced electric field E and the induced magnetic field B have
opposite directions when they are produced in otherwise similar situations. To
see this opposition, examine Fig. 32-6, in which an increasing magnetic field B,
directed into the page, induces an electric field E. The induced field F is counter-
clockwise, opposite the induced magnetic field Bin Fig. 32-5b.

Ampere-Maxwell Law

Now recall that the left side of Eq. 32-3, the integral of the dot product B-ds
around a closed loop, appears in another equation— namely, Ampere’s law:

$ B+ d5 = pgien: — (Ampere’s law), (32-4)

The induced Edirection here is opposite the
induced B direction in the preceding figure.
