988

   
 
 
 

Polarizing
direction

This light is vertically
polarized.

The sheet's polarizing axis
is tilted, so only a fraction
of the intensity passes.

Figure 33-13 The light transmitted by polariz-
ing sheet P; is vertically polarized. as repre-
sented by the vertical double arrow. The
amount of that light that is then transmit-
ted by polarizing sheet P; depends on the
angle between the polarization direction of
that light and the polarizing direction of P)
(indicated by the lines drawn in the sheet
and by the dashed line).

Figure 33-14 (a) Overlapping polarizing
sheets transmit light fairly well when their
polarizing directions have the same orien-
tation, but (b) they block most of the light
when they are crossed.

lv] Checkpoint 4

The figure shows four pairs of polarizing sheets, seen face-on. Each
pair is mounted in the path of initially unpolarized light. The polariz~
ing direction of each sheet (indicated by the dashed line) is refer-
enced to either a horizontal x axis or a vertical y axis. Rank the pairs
according to the fraction of the initial intensity that they pass, great-

est first.

CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Two Polarizing Sheets. Figure 33-13 shows an arrangement in which ini-
tially unpolarized light is sent through two polarizing sheets P; and P5. (Often,
the first sheet is called the polarizer, and the second the analyzer.) Because the
polarizing direction of P, is vertical, the light transmitted by P; to P) is polar-
ized vertically. If the polarizing direction of P, is also vertical, then all the light
transmitted by P, is transmitted by P,. If the polarizing direction of P, is horizontal,
none of the light transmitted by P; is transmitted by P:. We reach the same conclu-
sions by considering only the relative orientations of the two sheets: If their polariz-
ing directions are parallel, all the light passed by the first sheet is passed by the sec-
ond sheet (Fig. 33-14a). If those directions are perpendicular (the sheets are said to
be crossed), no light is passed by the second sheet (Fig. 33-14b). Finally, if the two
polarizing directions of Fig. 33-13 make an angle between 0° and 90°, some of the
light transmitted by P, will be transmitted by P>, as set by Eq. 33-38.

Other Means. Light can be polarized by means other than polarizing sheets,
such as by reflection (discussed in Module 33-7) and by scattering from atoms or
molecules. In scattering, light that is intercepted by an object, such as a molecule, is
sent off in many, perhaps random, directions. An example is the scattering of sun-
light by molecules in the atmosphere, which gives the sky its general glow.

Although direct sunlight is unpolarized, light from much of the sky is at
least partially polarized by such scattering. Bees use the polarization of sky
light in navigating to and from their hives. Similarly, the Vikings used it to navi-
gate across the North Sea when the daytime Sun was below the horizon (be-
cause of the high latitude of the North Sea). These early seafarers had discov-
ered certain crystals (now called cordierite) that changed color when rotated in
polarized light. By looking at the sky through such a crystal while rotating it
about their line of sight, they could locate the hidden Sun and thus determine
which way was south.

 

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs
(a) (2)

 
