970

applied magnetic field B (this will be the case if Zi is due to the spin
of a single electron). According to statistical mechanics, the proba-
bility of an atom being in a state with energy U is proportional to
e UT where T is the temperature and k is Boltzmann’s constant.
Thus, because energy Uis —j/- B, the fraction of atoms whose dipole
momentis parallel to B is proportional to e#’*" and the fraction of
atoms whose dipole moment is antiparallel to B is proportional to
e-#B/kT. (a) Show that the magnitude of the magnetization of this
solid is M = Nw tanh(uB/kT). Here tanh is the hyperbolic tangent
function: tanh(x) = (e* — e“)/(e* + e~*). (b) Show that the result
given in (a) reduces to M = N,2B/kT for 4B <kT. (c) Show
that the result of (a) reduces to M = Nu for uB > kT. (d) Show
that both (b) and (c) agree qualitatively with Fig. 32-14.

Module 32-8 Ferromagnetism

46 @ You place a magnetic compass on a horizontal surface, al-
low the needle to settle, and then give the compass a gentle wiggle
to cause the needle to oscillate about its equilibrium position. The
oscillation frequency is 0.312 Hz. Earth’s magnetic field at the
location of the compass has a horizontal component of 18.0 uT.
The needle has a magnetic moment of 0.680 mJ/T. What is the
needle’s rotational inertia about its (vertical) axis of rotation?

47 SSM ILW WwW The magnitude of the magnetic dipole
moment of Earth is 8.0 x 10” J/T. (a) If the origin of this magne-
tism were a magnetized iron sphere at the center of Earth, what
would be its radius? (b) What fraction of the volume of Earth
would such a sphere occupy? Assume complete alignment of the
dipoles. The density of Earth’s inner core is 14 g/cm*. The magnetic
dipole moment of an iron atom is 2.1 x 10° J/T. (Note: Earth’s
inner core is in fact thought to be in both liquid and solid forms
and partly iron, but a permanent magnet as the source of Earth’s
magnetism has been ruled out by several considerations. For one,
the temperature is certainly above the Curie point.)

°°48 The magnitude of the dipole moment associated with an
atom of iron in an iron bar is 2.1 x 10-73 J/T. Assume that all the
atoms in the bar, which is 5.0 cm long and has a cross-sectional
area of 1.0 cm’, have their dipole moments aligned. (a) What is the
dipole moment of the bar? (b) What torque must be exerted to
hold this magnet perpendicular to an external field of magnitude
1.5 T? (The density of iron is 7.9 g/cm}.)

°*49 SSM The exchange coupling mentioned in Module 32-8 as
being responsible for ferromagnetism is not the mutual magnetic
interaction between two elementary magnetic dipoles. To show
this, calculate (a) the magnitude of the magnetic field a distance of
10 nm away, along the dipole axis, from an atom with magnetic
dipole moment 1.5 X 10-5 J/T (cobalt), and (b) the minimum
energy required to turn a second identical dipole end for end in
this field. (c) By comparing the latter with the mean translational
kinetic energy of 0.040 eV, what can you conclude?

*50 A magnetic rod with length 6.00 cm, radius 3.00 mm, and
(uniform) magnetization 2.70 x 10° A/m can turn about its center
like a compass needle. It is placed in a uniform magnetic field B of
magnitude 35.0 mT, such that the directions of its dipole moment
and B make an angle of 68.0°. (a) What is the magnitude of the
torque on the rod due to B? (b) What is the change in the orienta-
tion energy of the rod if the angle changes to 34.0°?

°°51 The saturation magnetization M,,,, of the ferromagnetic
metal nickel is 4.70 X 10° A/m. Calculate the magnetic dipole mo-
ment of a single nickel atom. (The density of nickel is 8.90 g/cm},
and its molar mass is 58.71 g/mol.)

CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

*°52 Measurements in mines and boreholes indicate that Earth’s
interior temperature increases with depth at the average rate of
30 C°/km. Assuming a surface temperature of 10°C, at what depth
does iron cease to be ferromagnetic? (The Curie temperature of
iron varies very little with pressure.)

“53 A Rowland ring is formed of ferromagnetic material. It is
circular in cross section, with an inner radius of 5.0 cm and an outer
radius of 6.0 cm, and is wound with 400 turns of wire. (a) What cur-
rent must be set up in the windings to attain a toroidal field of mag-
nitude By = 0.20mT? (b) A secondary coil wound around the
toroid has 50 turns and resistance 8.0 ©. If, for this value of Bo, we
have By = 800By, how much charge moves through the secondary
coil when the current in the toroid windings is turned on?

Additional Problems

54 Using the approximations given in Problem 61, find (a) the al-
titude above Earth’s surface where the magnitude of its magnetic
field is 50.0% of the surface value at the same latitude; (b) the
maximum magnitude of the magnetic field at the core—mantle
boundary, 2900 km below Earth’s surface; and the (c) magnitude
and (d) inclination of Earth’s magnetic field at the north geo-
graphic pole. (e) Suggest why the values you calculated for (c) and
(d) differ from measured values.

55 Earth has a magnetic dipole moment of 8.0 x 102J/T.
(a) What current would have to be produced in a single turn of
wire extending around Earth at its geomagnetic equator if we
wished to set up such a dipole? Could such an arrangement
be used to cancel out Earth’s magnetism (b) at points in space well
above Earth’s surface or (c) on Earth’s surface?

56 Acharge q is distributed uniformly around a thin ring of ra-
dius r. The ring is rotating about an axis through its center and per-
pendicular to its plane, at an angular speed w. (a) Show that the
magnetic moment due to the rotating charge has magnitude
#4 = 3qor’. (b) What is the direction of this magnetic moment if
the charge is positive?

57 A magnetic compass has its needle, of mass 0.050 kg and
length 4.0 cm, aligned with the horizontal component of Earth’s
magnetic field at a place where that component has the value B, =
16 wT. After the compass is given a momentary gentle shake, the
needle oscillates with angular frequency w = 45 rad/s. Assuming
that the needle is a uniform thin rod mounted at its center, find the
magnitude of its magnetic dipole moment.

58 The capacitor in Fig. 32-7 is being charged with a 2.50 A cur-
rent. The wire radius is 1.50 mm, and the plate radius is 2.00 cm.
Assume that the current iin the wire and the displacement current
i, in the capacitor gap are both uniformly distributed. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field due to i at the following radial
distances from the wire’s center: (a) 1.00 mm (inside the wire),
(b) 3.00 mm (outside the wire), and (c) 2.20 cm (outside the wire)?
What is the magnitude of the magnetic field due to i, at the follow-
ing radial distances from the central axis between the plates:
(d) 1.00 mm (inside the gap), (e) 3.00 mm (inside the gap), and
(f) 2.20 cm (outside the gap)? (g) Explain why the fields at the two
smaller radii are so different for the wire and the gap but the fields
at the largest radius are not.

59 A parallel-plate capacitor with circular plates of radius
R = 16mm and gap width d = 5.0 mm has a uniform electric field
between the plates. Starting at time f = 0, the potential difference
between the two plates is V = (100 V)e~"’, where the time con-
stant r= 12 ms. At radial distance r = 0.80R from the central axis,
