942 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

 

Richard Megna/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 32-2 A bar magnet is a magnetic dipole.
The iron filings suggest the magnetic field
lines. (Colored light fills the background.)

 

Figure 32-4 The field lines for the magnetic
field B of a short bar magnet. The red
curves represent cross sections of closed,
three-dimensional Gaussian surfaces.

Gauss’ Law for Magnetic Fields

Figure 32-2 shows iron powder that has been sprinkled onto a transparent sheet
placed above a bar magnet. The powder grains, trying to align themselves with
the magnet’s magnetic field, have fallen into a pattern that reveals the field. One
end of the magnet is a source of the field (the field lines diverge from it) and the
other end is a sink of the field (the field lines converge toward it). By convention,
we call the source the north pole of the magnet and the sink the south pole, and
we say that the magnet, with its two poles, is an example of a magnetic dipole.

Suppose we break a bar magnet into pieces the way we can break a piece of
chalk (Fig. 32-3). We should, it seems, be able to isolate a single magnetic pole,
called a magnetic monopole. However, we cannot—not even if we break the
magnet down to its individual atoms and then to its electrons and nuclei. Each
fragment has a north pole and a south pole. Thus:

oO The simplest magnetic structure that can exist is a magnetic dipole. Magnetic
monopoles do not exist (as far as we know).

Gauss’ law for magnetic fields is a formal way of saying that magnetic
monopoles do not exist. The law asserts that the net magnetic flux ®, through
any closed Gaussian surface is zero:

®; = $a +dA =0 (Gauss’ law for magnetic fields). (32-1)

Contrast this with Gauss’ law for electric fields,

O,= $ E-dA= fee. (Gauss’ law for electric fields).
0
In both equations, the integral is taken over a
closed Gaussian surface. Gauss’ law for electric
fields says that this integral (the net electric flux
through the surface) is proportional to the net
electric charge deg. enclosed by the surface.
Gauss’ law for magnetic fields says that there
can be no net magnetic flux through the surface
because there can be no net “magnetic charge”
(individual magnetic poles) enclosed by the sur-
face. The simplest magnetic structure that can
exist and thus be enclosed by a Gaussian surface
is a dipole, which consists of both a source and a
sink for the field lines. Thus, there must always
be as much magnetic flux into the surface as out Figure $2-3 If you break a magnet,

of it, and the net magnetic flux must always be each fragment becomes a sepa-
rate magnet, with its own north

and south poles.

ca) c=) cp

zero.

Gauss’ law for magnetic fields holds for
structures more complicated than a magnetic di-
pole, and it holds even if the Gaussian surface does not enclose the entire struc-
ture. Gaussian surface II near the bar magnet of Fig. 32-4 encloses no poles, and
we can easily conclude that the net magnetic flux through it is zero. Gaussian sur-
face I is more difficult. It may seem to enclose only the north pole of the magnet
because it encloses the label N and not the label S. However, a south pole must be
associated with the lower boundary of the surface because magnetic field lines
enter the surface there. (The enclosed section is like one piece of the broken bar
magnet in Fig. 32-3.) Thus, Gaussian surface I encloses a magnetic dipole, and the
net flux through the surface is zero.
