998 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Incident
unpolarized Reflected

   

© Component perpendicular to page
<-> Component parallel to page

Figure 33-25 A ray of unpolarized light in

air is incident ona glass surface at the
Brewster angle 6. The electric fields along
that ray have been resolved into compo-
nents perpendicular to the page (the plane
of incidence, reflection, and refraction) and
components parallel to the page. The
reflected light consists only of components
perpendicular to the page and is thus polar-
ized in that direction. The refracted light
consists of the original components parallel
to the page and weaker components per-
pendicular to the page; this light is partially
polarized.

Polarization by Reflection

You can vary the glare you see in sunlight that has been reflected from, say, water
by looking through a polarizing sheet (such as a polarizing sunglass lens) and
then rotating the sheet’s polarizing axis around your line of sight. You can do
so because any light that is reflected from a surface is either fully or partially
polarized by the reflection.

Figure 33-25 shows a ray of unpolarized light incident on a glass surface. Let
us resolve the electric field vectors of the light into two components. The per-
pendicular components are perpendicular to the plane of incidence and thus also
to the page in Fig. 33-25; these components are represented with dots (as if we
see the tips of the vectors). The parallel components are parallel to the plane
of incidence and the page; they are represented with double-headed arrows.
Because the light is unpolarized, these two components are of equal magnitude.

In general, the reflected light also has both components but with unequal mag-
nitudes. This means that the reflected light is partially polarized—the electric
fields oscillating along one direction have greater amplitudes than those oscillating
along other directions. However, when the light is incident at a particular incident
angle, called the Brewster angle @g, the reflected light has only perpendicular com-
ponents, as shown in Fig. 33-25. The reflected light is then fully polarized perpendi-
cular to the plane of incidence. The parallel components of the incident light do not
disappear but (along with perpendicular components) refract into the glass.

Polarizing Sunglasses. Glass, water, and the other dielectric materials
discussed in Module 25-5 can partially and fully polarize light by reflection. When
you intercept sunlight reflected from such a surface, you see a bright spot (the
glare) on the surface where the reflection takes place. If the surface is horizontal
as in Fig. 33-25, the reflected light is partially or fully polarized horizontally. To
eliminate such glare from horizontal surfaces, the lenses in polarizing sunglasses
are mounted with their polarizing direction vertical. =

Brewster's Law

For light incident at the Brewster angle @:, we find experimentally that the
reflected and refracted rays are perpendicular to each other. Because the
reflected ray is reflected at the angle 6g in Fig. 33-25 and the refracted ray is at an
angle 6,,we have

63 + 6, = 90°. (33-46)

 

These two angles can also be related with Eq. 33-40. Arbitrarily assigning sub-
script 1 in Eq. 33-40 to the material through which the incident and reflected rays
travel, we have, from that equation,

ny Sin Og = no sin 6,. (33-47)
Combining these equations leads to
Ny Sin Og = Ny sin(90° — Og) = no cos Bg, (33-48)
which gives us
63 = tan? a (Sreneterereleyy (33-49)

1

(Note carefully that the subscripts in Eq. 33-49 are not arbitrary because of our
decision as to their meanings.) If the incident and reflected rays travel in air, we
can approximate n, as unity and let n represent m in order to write Eq. 33-49 as

63 = tan-!n  (Brewster’s law). (33-50)

This simplified version of Eq. 33-49 is known as Brewster’s law. Like x, it is
named after Sir David Brewster, who found both experimentally in 1812.
