Four Important DNA-Binding
Motifs

The Helix-Turn-Helix Motif

The most common DNA-binding motif is the helix-turn-
helix, constructed from two @-helical segments of the pro-
tein linked by a short nonhelical segment, the “turn” (fig-
ure 16.3). The first DNA-binding motif recognized, the
helix-turn-helix motif has since been identified in hundreds
of DNA-binding proteins.

A close look at the structure of a helix-turn-helix motif
reveals how proteins containing such motifs are able to in-
teract with the major groove of DNA. Interactions between
the helical segments of the motif hold them at roughly right
angles to each other. When this motif is pressed against
DNA, one of the helical segments (called the recognition
helix) fits snugly in the major groove of the DNA molecule,
while the other butts up against the outside of the DNA
molecule, helping to ensure the proper positioning of the
recognition helix. Most DNA regulatory sequences recog-
nized by helix-turn-helix motifs occur in symmetrical pairs.
Such sequences are bound by proteins containing two helix-
turn-helix motifs separated by 3.4 nm, the distance required
for one turn of the DNA helix (figure 16.4). Having two
protein/DNA-binding sites doubles the zone of contact be-
tween protein and DNA and so greatly strengthens the
bond that forms between them.

3.4nm

   

CAP fragment

FIGURE 16.4

 

Tryptophan repressor

Recognition helix

 

FIGURE 16.3

The helix-turn-helix motif. One helical region, called the
recognition helix, actually fits into the major groove of DNA.
There it contacts the edges of base-pairs, enabling it to recognize
specific sequences of DNA bases.

3.41nm

 

Lambda (A) repressor
fragment

How the helix-turn-helix binding motif works. The three regulatory proteins illustrated here all bind to DNA using a pair of helix-
turn-helix binding motifs. In each case, the two copies of the motif (red) are separated by 3.4 nm, precisely the spacing of one turn of the
DNA helix. This allows the regulatory proteins to slip into two adjacent portions of the major groove in DNA, providing a strong

attachment.

316 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics
