31-3 FORCED OSCILLATIONS OF THREE SIMPLE CIRCUITS 915

write this as
Vr = Vp sin gt. (31-30)

From the definition of resistance (R =V li), we can now write the current IR in the
resistance as
= 28 = SR sin ent (31-31)
L SIN @gl. -.
eR OR a

From Eq. 31-29, we can also write this current as
ig = Ipsin(wyt — 4), (31-32)

where Ip is the amplitude of the current ig in the resistance. Comparing Eqs.
31-31 and 31-32, we see that for a purely resistive load the phase constant ¢ = 0°.
We also see that the voltage amplitude and current amplitude are related by

Vp =IpR (resistor). (31-33)

Although we found this relation for the circuit of Fig. 31-8, it applies to any
resistance in any ac circuit.

By comparing Eqs. 31-30 and 31-31, we see that the time-varying quantities
vr and ig are both functions of sin wt with ¢ = 0°. Thus, these two quantities are
in phase, which means that their corresponding maxima (and minima) occur at
the same times. Figure 31-9a, which is a plot of va(t) and ig(t), illustrates this fact.
Note that vg and ig do not decay here because the generator supplies energy to
the circuit to make up for the energy dissipated in R.

The time-varying quantities vp and ig can also be represented geometrically
by phasors. Recall from Module 16-6 that phasors are vectors that rotate around
an origin. Those that represent the voltage across and current in the resistor of
Fig. 31-8 are shown in Fig. 31-9b at an arbitrary time ¢. Such phasors have the
following properties:

Angular speed: Both phasors rotate counterclockwise about the origin with an
angular speed equal to the angular frequency w, of vp and i.

Length: The length of each phasor represents the amplitude of the alternating
quantity: Vp for the voltage and Jp for the current.

Projection: The projection of each phasor on the vertical axis represents the
value of the alternating quantity at time f: vp for the voltage and ip for
the current.

Rotation angle: The rotation angle of each phasor is equal to the phase of the

For a resistive load,
the current and potential
difference are in phase. Rotation of

phasors at
rate @;

Tn

Vas in 0=0°=0rad

  
  

 

“In phase” means
that they peak at
the same time.

 

(@ represented in (5) (b)
Figure 31-9 (a) The current ig and the potential difference vg across the resistor are plotted
on the same graph, both versus time f. They are in phase and complete one cycle in one
period T. (b) A phasor diagram shows the same thing as (a).
