however, are not all aligned. For the crystal as a whole, the domains are so ori-
ented that they largely cancel with one another as far as their external magnetic
effects are concerned.

Figure 32-17 is a magnified photograph of such an assembly of domains in a
single crystal of nickel. It was made by sprinkling a colloidal suspension of finely
powdered iron oxide on the surface of the crystal. The domain boundaries, which
are thin regions in which the alignment of the elementary dipoles changes from a
certain orientation in one of the domains forming the boundary to a different
orientation in the other domain, are the sites of intense, but highly localized and
nonuniform, magnetic fields. The suspended colloidal particles are attracted to
these boundaries and show up as the white lines (not all the domain boundaries
are apparent in Fig. 32-17). Although the atomic dipoles in each domain are
completely aligned as shown by the arrows, the crystal as a whole may have only
a very small resultant magnetic moment.

Actually, a piece of iron as we ordinarily find it is not a single crystal but an
assembly of many tiny crystals, randomly arranged; we call it a polycrystalline
solid. Each tiny crystal, however, has its array of variously oriented domains, just
as in Fig. 32-17. If we magnetize such a specimen by placing it in an external
magnetic field of gradually increasing strength, we produce two effects; together
they produce a magnetization curve of the shape shown in Fig. 32-16. One effect
is a growth in size of the domains that are oriented along the external field at the
expense of those that are not. The second effect is a shift of the orientation of the
dipoles within a domain, as a unit, to become closer to the field direction.

Exchange coupling and domain shifting give us the following result:

] A ferromagnetic material placed in an external magnetic field B,,, develops a
strong magnetic dipole moment in the direction of B,.. If the field is nonuniform,
the ferromagnetic material is attracted toward a region of greater magnetic field
froma region of lesser field.

Hysteresis

Magnetization curves for ferromagnetic materials are not retraced as we increase
and then decrease the external magnetic field Bp. Figure 32-18 is a plot of By
versus By during the following operations with a Rowland ring: (1) Starting with
the iron unmagnetized (point a), increase the current in the toroid until
Bo (= moin) has the value corresponding to point b; (2) reduce the current in the
toroid winding (and thus Bo) back to zero (point c); (3) reverse the toroid current
and increase it in magnitude until By has the value corresponding to point d;
(4) reduce the current to zero again (point e); (5) reverse the current once more
until point b is reached again.

The lack of retraceability shown in Fig. 32-18 is called hysteresis, and the
curve bedeb is called a hysteresis loop. Note that at points c and e the iron core is
magnetized, even though there is no current in the toroid windings; this is the
familiar phenomenon of permanent magnetism.

Hysteresis can be understood through the concept of magnetic domains.
Evidently the motions of the domain boundaries and the reorientations of the
domain directions are not totally reversible. When the applied magnetic field Bo
is increased and then decreased back to its initial value, the domains do not
return completely to their original configuration but retain some “memory” of
their alignment after the initial increase. This memory of magnetic materials is
essential for the magnetic storage of information.

This memory of the alignment of domains can also occur naturally. When
lightning sends currents along multiple tortuous paths through the ground,
the currents produce intense magnetic fields that can suddenly magnetize any

32-8 FERROMAGNETISM 963

 

Courtesy Ralph W. DeBlois
Figure 32-17 A photograph of domain
patterns within a single crystal of nickel;
white lines reveal the boundaries of the
domains. The white arrows superimposed
on the photograph show the orientations
of the magnetic dipoles within the domains
and thus the orientations of the net mag-
netic dipoles of the domains. The crystal

as a whole is unmagnetized if the net mag-
netic field (the vector sum over all the
domains) is zero.

 

Figure 32-18 A magnetization curve (ab) for
a ferromagnetic specimen and an associated
hysteresis loop (bedeb).
