Maxwell’s Equations; Magnetism of Matter

32-1 Gauss’ LAW FOR MAGNETIC FIELDS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

32.01 Identify that the simplest magnetic structure is a B andthe area vector dA (for patch elements) over the
magnetic dipole. surface.

32.02 Calculate the magnetic flux ® through a surface by 32.03 Identify that the net magnetic flux through a Gaussian
integrating the dot product of the magnetic field vector surface (which is a closed surface) is zero.

Key Idea

 

@ The simplest magnetic structures are magnetic dipoles. Magnetic monopoles do not exist (as far as we know). Gauss’ law for
magnetic fields,

=f B-di=o,

states that the net magnetic flux through any (closed) Gaussian surface is zero. It implies that magnetic monopoles do not exist.

 

What Is Physics?

This chapter reveals some of the breadth of physics because it ranges from the
basic science of electric and magnetic fields to the applied science and engi-
neering of magnetic materials. First, we conclude our basic discussion of elec-
tric and magnetic fields, finding that most of the physics principles in the last
11 chapters can be summarized in only four equations, known as Maxwell’s
equations.

Second, we examine the science and engineering of magnetic materials. The
careers of many scientists and engineers are focused on understanding why some
materials are magnetic and others are not and on how existing magnetic materi-
als can be improved. These researchers wonder why Earth has a magnetic field
but you do not. They find countless applications for inexpensive magnetic materi-
als in cars, kitchens, offices, and hospitals, and magnetic materials often show up
in unexpected ways. For example, if you have a tattoo (Fig. 32-1) and undergo an
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan, the large magnetic field used in the
scan may noticeably tug on your tattooed skin because some tattoo inks contain
magnetic particles. In another example, some breakfast cereals are advertised as
being “iron fortified” because they contain small bits of iron for you to ingest.
Because these iron bits are magnetic, you can collect them by passing a magnet
over a slurry of water and cereal. ee

Our first step here is to revisit Gauss’ law, but this time for magnetic fields.

 

 

g
z
g
a
3

Figure 32-1 Some of the inks used for tattoos contain magnetic particles.

941
