930 CHAPTER 31 ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT

31-6 TRANSFORMERS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

31.49 For power transmission lines, identify why the
transmission should be at low current and high voltage.

31.50 Identify the role of transformers at the two ends of a
transmission line.

31.51 Calculate the energy dissipation in a transmission line.

31.52 Identify a transformer's primary and secondary.

31.53 Apply the relationship between the voltage and
number of tums on the two sides of a transformer.

31.54 Distinguish between a step-down transformer and a
step-up transformer.

Key Ideas

31.55 Apply the relationship between the current and number
of turns on the two sides of a transformer.

31.56 Apply the relationship between the power into and out
of an ideal transformer.

31.57 Identify the equivalent resistance as seen from the
primary side of a transformer.

31.58 Apply the relationship between the equivalent
resistance and the actual resistance.

31.59 Explain the role of a transformer in impedance
matching.

 

@ A transformer (assumed to be ideal) is an iron core on
which are wound a primary coil of N, turns and a secondary
coil of N, turns. If the primary coil is connected across an
alternating-current generator, the primary and secondary
voltages are related by

Y=, ny (transformation of voltage).
a

@ The currents through the coils are related by

N,
J, = 1,—2 (transformation of currents).

's

@ The equivalent resistance of the secondary circuit, as seen

by the generator, is
NY
Reg = DN R,

's
where R is the resistive load in the secondary circuit. The
ratio N,,/N, is called the transformer’s turns ratio.

 

Transformers

Energy Transmission Requirements

‘When an ac circuit has only a resistive load, the power factor in Eq. 31-76 is
cos 0° = 1 and the applied rms emf @,,,, is equal to the rms voltage V,m; across the
load. Thus, with an rms current J,,,, in the load, energy is supplied and dissipated
at the average rate of

Pay = 61 = IV. (31-77)

(In Eq. 31-77 and the rest of this module, we follow conventional practice and drop
the subscripts identifying rms quantities. Engineers and scientists assume that all
time-varying currents and voltages are reported as rms values; that is what the me-
ters read.) Equation 31-77 tells us that, to satisfy a given power requirement, we
have a range of choices for J and V, provided only that the product JV is as required.

In electrical power distribution systems it is desirable for reasons of safety
and for efficient equipment design to deal with relatively low voltages at both the
generating end (the electrical power plant) and the receiving end (the home or
factory). Nobody wants an electric toaster to operate at, say, 10 kV. However, in
the transmission of electrical energy from the generating plant to the consumer,
we want the lowest practical current (hence the largest practical voltage) to mini-
mize ?R losses (often called ohmic losses) in the transmission line.

As an example, consider the 735 kV line used to transmit electrical energy
from the La Grande 2 hydroelectric plant in Quebec to Montreal, 1000 km away.
Suppose that the current is 500 A and the power factor is close to unity. Then
from Eq. 31-77, energy is supplied at the average rate

Py = €1 = (7.35 x 105 V)(500 A) = 368 MW.
