982 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

The energy emitted by light
source S must pass through
the sphere of radius r.

\ /

x \

Figure 33-8 A point source S emits electro-
magnetic waves uniformly in all directions.
The spherical wavefronts pass through an
imaginary sphere of radius r that is
centered on S.

We can then rewrite Eq. 33-24 as

i=, (33-26)
Cu

Because E = cB and c is such a very large number, you might conclude that
the energy associated with the electric field is much greater than that associated
with the magnetic field. That conclusion is incorrect; the two energies are exactly
equal. To show this, we start with Eq. 25-25, which gives the energy density
u(= 3e0E*) within an electric field, and substitute cB for E; then we can write

up= 380E? = 3e(cB)?.
If we now substitute for c with Eq. 33-3, we get
1 RB B

-1 =
Ur = 380 = :
Hoeo 20

 

However, Eq. 30-55 tells us that B7/2 is the energy density ug of a magnetic
field B;so we see that uz = ug everywhere along an electromagnetic wave.

Variation of Intensity with Distance

How intensity varies with distance from a real source of electromagnetic radia-
tion is often complex—especially when the source (like a searchlight at a
movie premier) beams the radiation in a particular direction. However, in some
situations we can assume that the source is a point source that emits the light
isotropically —that is, with equal intensity in all directions. The spherical wave-
fronts spreading from such an isotropic point source S at a particular instant are
shown in cross section in Fig. 33-8.

Let us assume that the energy of the waves is conserved as they spread from this
source. Let us also center an imaginary sphere of radius r on the source, as shown in
Fig. 33-8. All the energy emitted by the source must pass through the sphere. Thus, the
rate at which energy passes through the sphere via the radiation must equal the rate
at which energy is emitted by the source—that is, the source power P,.The intensity J
(power per unit area) measured at the sphere must then be, from Eq. 33-23,

_ power BP,
area Amr?’

 

 

i (33-27)

where 477’? is the area of the sphere. Equation 33-27 tells us that the intensity of
the electromagnetic radiation from an isotropic point source decreases with the
square of the distance r from the source.

Iv] Checkpoint 2 |

The figure here gives the electric field of an electromagnetic wave at,
acertain point and a certain instant. The wave is transporting energy

in the negative z direction. What is the direction of the magnetic field

of the wave at that point and instant?

Sample Problem 33.01 Light wave: rms values of the electric and magnetic fields

When you look at the North Star (Polaris), you intercept 10° W). Neglecting any atmospheric absorption, find the
light from a star at a distance of 431 ly and emitting energy rms values of the electric and magnetic fields when the
at a rate of 2.2 x 10° times that of our Sun (Pou, = 3.90 X starlight reaches you.
