996 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

point B with a known angle at point A. Because the inter- _ we write Eq. 33-40 as

face through point B is parallel to that through point A, Bo a pe 33-43
the incident angle at B must be equal to the angle of re- . BESS as )
fraction 6, as shown in Fig. 33-22b. Then for reflection, Solving for 4, then leads to

 

we again use the law of reflection. Thus, the angle of re- _3i(m. pr eee
FlecHOnalis 6; = sin"! |—sin @]} = sin 00 Sit 28.88°
ny az
05 = 0) = 28.88° ~ 29°. (Answer) = 58.75° = 59°, (Answer)
Next, the light that passes from material 2 into the air Thus, the beam swings away from the normal (it was at 29°
undergoes refraction at point B, with refraction angle ;. _ to the normal and is now at 59°) because it moves into a ma-

Thus, we again apply Snell’s law of refraction, but this time terial (air) with a lower index of refraction.

RWiLey

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

33-6 TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

 

33.45 With sketches, explain total internal reflection and 33.46 Identify the angle of refraction for incidence at a
include the angle of incidence, the critical angle, and the critical angle.
relative values of the indexes of refraction on the two sides 33.47 For a given pair of indexes of refraction, calculate the
of the interface. critical angle.

Key Idea

@ A wave encountering a boundary across which the index of refraction decreases will experience total internal reflection if the
angle of incidence exceeds a critical angle 6, where

. 1
9. = sin! a (critical angle).
1

Total Internal Reflection

Figure 33-23a shows rays of monochromatic light from a point source S in glass
incident on the interface between the glass and air. For ray a, which is perpendi-
cular to the interface, part of the light reflects at the interface and the rest travels
through it with no change in direction.

For rays b through e, which have progressively larger angles of incidence at
the interface, there are also both reflection and refraction at the interface. As the
angle of incidence increases, the angle of refraction increases; for ray e it is 90°,
which means that the refracted ray points directly along the interface. The angle
of incidence giving this situation is called the critical angle 6. For angles of inci-
dence larger than @,,such as for rays f and g, there is no refracted ray and all the
light is reflected; this effect is called total internal reflection because all the light
remains inside the glass.

To find 6, we use Eq. 33-40; we arbitrarily associate subscript | with the glass
and subscript 2 with the air, and then we substitute @. for @, and 90° for @, which
leads to

ny sin 9. = nz sin 90°, (33-44)
