16.1

An Overview of
Transcriptional Control

Control of gene expression is essential to all organisms.
In bacteria, it allows the cell to take advantage of chang-
ing environmental conditions. In multicellular organisms,
it is critical for directing development and maintaining
homeostasis.

Regulating Promoter Access

One way to control transcription is to regulate the initia-
tion of transcription. In order for a gene to be tran-
scribed, RNA polymerase must have access to the DNA
helix and must be capable of binding to the gene’s pro-
moter, a specific sequence of nucleotides at one end of
the gene that tells the polymerase where to begin tran-
scribing. How is the initiation of transcription regulated?
Protein-binding nucleotide sequences on the DNA regu-
late the initiation of transcription by modulating the abil-
ity of RNA polymerase to bind to the promoter. These
protein-binding sites are usually only 10 to 15 nucleotides
in length (even a large regulatory protein has a “foot-
print,” or binding area, of only about 20 nucleotides).
Hundreds of these regulatory sequences have been char-
acterized, and each provides a binding site for a specific
protein able to recognize the sequence. Binding the pro-
tein to the regulatory sequence either b/ocks transcription
by getting in the way of RNA polymerase, or stimulates
transcription by facilitating the binding of RNA poly-
merase to the promoter.

Transcriptional Control in Prokaryotes

Control of gene expression is accomplished very differently
in bacteria than in the cells of complex multicellular organ-
isms. Bacterial cells have been shaped by evolution to grow
and divide as rapidly as possible, enabling them to exploit
transient resources. In bacteria, the primary function of
gene control is to adjust the cell’s activities to its immediate
environment. Changes in gene expression alter which en-
zymes are present in the cell in response to the quantity
and type of available nutrients and the amount of oxygen
present. Almost all of these changes are fully reversible, al-
lowing the cell to adjust its enzyme levels up or down as the
environment changes.

Transcriptional Control in Eukaryotes

The cells of multicellular organisms, on the other hand, have
been shaped by evolution to be protected from transient
changes in their immediate environment. Most of them ex-
perience fairly constant conditions. Indeed, homeostasis-

Gene expression is controlled by regulating transcription.

the maintenance of a constant internal environment—is
considered by many to be the hallmark of multicellular or-
ganisms. Although cells in such organisms still respond to
signals in their immediate environment (such as growth
factors and hormones) by altering gene expression, in
doing so they participate in regulating the body as a
whole. In multicellular organisms with relatively constant
internal environments, the primary function of gene con-
trol in a cell is not to respond to that cell’s immediate en-
vironment, but rather to participate in regulating the body
as a whole.

Some of these changes in gene expression compensate
for changes in the physiological condition of the body.
Others mediate the decisions that produce the body, en-
suring that the right genes are expressed in the right cells
at the right time during development. The growth and
development of multicellular organisms entail a long se-
ries of biochemical reactions, each catalyzed by a specific
enzyme. Once a particular developmental change has oc-
curred, these enzymes cease to be active, lest they disrupt
the events that must follow. To produce these enzymes,
genes are transcribed in a carefully prescribed order, each
for a specified period of time. In fact, many genes are ac-
tivated only once, producing irreversible effects. In many
animals, for example, stem cells develop into differenti-
ated tissues like skin cells or red blood cells, following a
fixed genetic program that often leads to programmed
cell death. The one-time expression of the genes that
guide this program is fundamentally different from the
reversible metabolic adjustments bacterial cells make to
the environment. In all multicellular organisms, changes
in gene expression within particular cells serve the needs
of the whole organism, rather than the survival of indi-
vidual cells.

Posttranscriptional Control

Gene expression can be regulated at many levels. By far
the most common form of regulation in both bacteria and
cukaryotes is transcriptional control, that is, control of
the transcription of particular genes by RNA polymerase.
Other less common forms of control occur after transcrip-
tion, influencing the mRNA that is produced from the
genes or the activity of the proteins encoded by the
mRNA. These controls, collectively referred to as post-
transcriptional controls, will be discussed briefly later in
this chapter.

 

Gene expression is controlled at the transcriptional and
posttranscriptional levels. Transcriptional control,
more common, is effected by the binding of proteins to
regulatory sequences within the DNA.

 

314 =PartV_ Molecular Genetics
