KEY IDEAS

 

1. The rms value E,,,, of the electric field in light is re-
lated to the intensity J of the light via Eq. 33-26
(= Exley).

2. Because the source is so far away and emits light with
equal intensity in all directions, the intensity J at any
distance r from the source is related to the source’s
power P, via Eq. 33-27 (I = P,/477).

3. The magnitudes of the electric field and magnetic field
of an electromagnetic wave at any instant and at any
point in the wave are related by the speed of light c
according to Eq. 33-5 (E/B = c). Thus, the rms values of
those fields are also related by Eq. 33-5.

Electric field: Putting the first two ideas together gives us

 

 

__F _ Efus
4a? Cho

and

 

33-3 RADIATION PRESSURE

Learning Objectives

33-3 RADIATION PRESSURE 983

By substituting P, = (2.2 x 108)(3.90 x 10°° W), r=431 ly=
4.08 x 10!8 m, and values for the constants, we find

Eqs = 1.24 X 107 Vim ~1.2mV/m. (Answer)

Magnetic field: From Eq. 33-5, we write

Egns 1.24 X 1073 Vim
c 3.00 X 10° m/s
= 41 x 10-? T = 4.1 pT.

 

Bens =

Cannot compare the fields: Note that E,ms (= 1.2 mV/m) is
small as judged by ordinary laboratory standards, but Brms
(= 4.1 pT) is quite small. This difference helps to explain why
most instruments used for the detection and measurement of
electromagnetic waves are designed to respond to the electric
component. It is wrong, however, to say that the electric com-
ponent of an electromagnetic wave is “stronger” than the
magnetic component. You cannot compare quantities that are
measured in different units. However, these electric and mag-
netic components are on an equal basis because their average
energies, which can be compared, are equal.

S$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

33.24 Distinguish between force and pressure.

33.25 Identify that an electromagnetic wave transports
momentum and can exert a force and a pressure on
a target.

33.26 For a uniform electromagnetic beam that is perpendi-
cular to a target area, apply the relationships between that

Key Ideas

area, the wave's intensity, and the force on the target, for
both total absorption and total backward reflection.

33.27 For a uniform electromagnetic beam that is perpendi-
cular to a target area, apply the relationships between the
wave’'s intensity and the pressure on the target, for both
total absorption and total backward reflection.

 

@ When a surface intercepts electromagnetic radiation, a
force and a pressure are exerted on the surface.

@ If the radiation is totally absorbed by the surface, the force is

IA
P= ~ (total absorption),

in which J is the intensity of the radiation and A is the area of
the surface perpendicular to the path of the radiation.

@ If the radiation is totally reflected back along its original

path, the force is

2IA
F = — (total reflection back along path).
c
@ The radiation pressure p, is the force per unit area:
I
P, = — (total absorption)
c
21
and P= ~ (total reflection back along path).

 

Radiation Pressure

Electromagnetic waves have linear momentum and thus can exert a pressure on
an object when shining on it. However, the pressure must be very small because,
for example, you do not feel a punch during a camera flash.
