948 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

replace the electric flux ®; in that equation with EA.Then Eq. 32-10 becomes

d®; d(EA) dE

a= 80g, ~ 80 P04

 

(32-14)

Same Value. Comparing Eqs. 32-13 and 32-14, we see that the real current i
charging the capacitor and the fictitious displacement current i; between the
plates have the same value:

ig =i (displacement current in a capacitor). (32-15)

Thus, we can consider the fictitious displacement current i; to be simply a con-
tinuation of the real current i from one plate, across the capacitor gap, to the
other plate. Because the electric field is uniformly spread over the plates,
the same is true of this fictitious displacement current iy, as suggested by the
spread of current arrows in Fig. 32-7b. Although no charge actually moves across
the gap between the plates, the idea of the fictitious current i, can help us to
quickly find the direction and magnitude of an induced magnetic field, as follows.

Finding the Induced Magnetic Field

In Chapter 29 we found the direction of the magnetic field produced by a real
current i by using the right-hand rule of Fig. 29-5. We can apply the same rule to
find the direction of an induced magnetic field produced by a fictitious displace-
ment current iz, as is shown in the center of Fig. 32-7c for a capacitor.

We can also use i, to find the magnitude of the magnetic field induced by
a charging capacitor with parallel circular plates of radius R. We simply consider
the space between the plates to be an imaginary circular wire of radius R carrying
the imaginary current i;. Then, from Eq. 29-20, the magnitude of the magnetic
field at a point inside the capacitor at radius r from the center is

 

a ( aera )r (inside a circular capacitor). (32-16)

Similarly, from Eq. 29-17, the magnitude of the magnetic field at a point outside
the capacitor at radius r is

Pola

B=
2ar

 

(outside a circular capacitor). (32-17)

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure is a view of one plate of a parallel-plate
capacitor from within the capacitor. The dashed lines
show four integration paths (path b follows the edge of
the plate). Rank the paths according to the magnitude
of § B- ds along the paths during the discharging of
the capacitor, greatest first.

 

Y Sample Problem 32.02 Treating a changing electric field as a displacement current

A circular parallel-plate capacitor with plate radius Ris KEY IDEA

being charged with a current i.

(a) Between the plates, what is the magnitude of ¢ B dsin
terms of jp and i, at aradius r = R/S from their center?

A magnetic field can be set up by a current and by induction
due to a changing electric flux (Eq. 32-5). Between the
plates in Fig. 32-5, the current is zero and we can account for
