factured, it is stretched to align the molecules in parallel rows, like rows in a
plowed field. When light is then sent through the sheet, electric field components
along one direction pass through the sheet, while components perpendicular to
that direction are absorbed by the molecules and disappear.

‘We shall not dwell on the molecules but, instead, shall assign to the sheet a
polarizing direction, along which electric field components are passed:

Oo An electric field component parallel to the polarizing direction is passed
(transmitted) by a polarizing sheet; a component perpendicular to it is absorbed.

Thus, the electric field of the light emerging from the sheet consists of only the
components that are parallel to the polarizing direction of the sheet; hence the
light is polarized in that direction. In Fig. 33-11, the vertical electric field compo-
nents are transmitted by the sheet; the horizontal components are absorbed. The
transmitted waves are then vertically polarized.

Intensity of Transmitted Polarized Light

‘We now consider the intensity of light transmitted by a polarizing sheet. We start
with unpolarized light, whose electric field oscillations we can resolve into y and
z components as represented in Fig. 33-10b. Further, we can arrange for the y axis
to be parallel to the polarizing direction of the sheet.Then only the y components
of the light’s electric field are passed by the sheet; the z components are
absorbed. As suggested by Fig. 33-10b, if the original waves are randomly ori-
ented, the sum of the y components and the sum of the z components are equal.
When the z components are absorbed, half the intensity Jp of the original light is
lost. The intensity / of the emerging polarized light is then

 

3h (one-halfrule). (33-36)
Let us call this the one-half rule; we can use it only when the light reaching a
polarizing sheet is unpolarized.

Suppose now that the light reaching a polarizing sheet is already polar-
ized. Figure 33-12 shows a polarizing sheet in the plane of the page and the
electric field E of such a polarized light wave traveling toward the sheet (and
thus prior to any absorption). We can resolve E into two components relative
to the polarizing direction of the sheet: parallel component E, is transmitted
by the sheet, and perpendicular component E, is absorbed. Since @is the an-
gle between E and the polarizing direction of the sheet, the transmitted paral-
lel component is

E, = Ecos 6. (33-37)

Recall that the intensity of an electromagnetic wave (such as our light wave)
is proportional to the square of the electric field’s magnitude (Eq. 33-26,
I = E2,,/cup). In our present case then, the intensity / of the emerging wave is
proportional to E> and the intensity Jp of the original wave is proportional to E*.
Hence, from Eq. 33-37 we can write I/Iy = cos* 6, or

I =Ipcos* @ (cosine-squared rule). (33-38)
Let us call this the cosine-squared rule; we can use it only when the light reaching
a polarizing sheet is already polarized. Then the transmitted intensity J is a maxi-
mum and is equal to the original intensity J) when the original wave is polarized
parallel to the polarizing direction of the sheet (when 6 in Eq. 33-38 is 0° or 180°).
The transmitted intensity is zero when the original wave is polarized perpendicu-
lar to the polarizing direction of the sheet (when @is 90°).

33-4 POLARIZATION 987

The sheet's polarizing axis
is vertical, so only vertically
polarized light emerges.

Incident light ray

 
 
  
  
  

Unpolarized light
Polarizing sheet

Vertically polarized light

Figure 33-11 Unpolarized light becomes po-
larized when it is sent through a polarizing
sheet. Its direction of polarization is then
parallel to the polarizing direction of the
sheet, which is represented here by the
vertical lines drawn in the sheet.

The sheet's polarizing
axis is vertical, so
only vertical
components of

the electric fields

pass.

 

Figure 33-12 Polarized light approaching a
polarizing sheet.The electric field E of the
light can be resolved into components Ey
(parallel to the polarizing direction of the
sheet) and E, (perpendicular to that direc-
tion). Component £, will be transmitted by
the sheet;component E, will be absorbed.
