33-1 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 977

from the Sun to maintain Earth’s temperature, without this result we could not
even exist.

A Most Curious Wave

The waves we discussed in Chapters 16 and 17 require a medium (some material)
through which or along which to travel. We had waves traveling along a string,
through Earth, and through the air. However, an electromagnetic wave (let’s use
the term light wave or light) is curiously different in that it requires no medium
for its travel. It can, indeed, travel through a medium such as air or glass, but it
can also travel through the vacuum of space between a star and us.

Once the special theory of relativity became accepted, long after Einstein
published it in 1905, the speed of light waves was realized to be special. One rea-
son is that light has the same speed regardless of the frame of reference from
which it is measured. If you send a beam of light along an axis and ask several
observers to measure its speed while they move at different speeds along that
axis, either in the direction of the light or opposite it, they will all measure the
same speed for the light. This result is an amazing one and quite different from
what would have been found if those observers had measured the speed of any
other type of wave; for other waves, the speed of the observers relative to the
wave would have affected their measurements.

The meter has now been defined so that the speed of light (any electromag-
netic wave) in vacuum has the exact value

c = 299 792 458 m/s,

which can be used as a standard. In fact, if you now measure the travel time of a
pulse of light from one point to another, you are not really measuring the speed
of the light but rather the distance between those two points.

The Traveling Electromagnetic Wave, Quantitatively

We shall now derive Eqs. 33-3 and 33-4 and, even more important, explore the
dual induction of electric and magnetic fields that gives us light.

Equation 33-4 and the Induced Electric Field

The dashed rectangle of dimensions dx and h in Fig. 33-6 is fixed at point P on the
Xx axis and in the xy plane (it is shown on the right in Fig. 33-5). As the electro-
magnetic wave moves rightward past the rectangle, the magnetic flux ®, through
the rectangle changes and—according to Faraday’s law of induction —induced
electric fields appear throughout the region of the rectangle. We take E and
E + dE to be the induced fields along the two long sides of the rectangle. These
induced electric fields are, in fact, the electrical component of the electro-
magnetic wave.

Note the small red portion of the magnetic field component curve far from
the y axis in Fig. 33-5. Let’s consider the induced electric fields at the instant
when this red portion of the magnetic component is passing through the rectan-
gle. Just then, the magnetic field through the rectangle points in the positive z
direction and is decreasing in magnitude (the magnitude was greater just before
the red section arrived). Because the magnetic field is decreasing, the magnetic
flux ®, through the rectangle is also decreasing. According to Faraday’s law, this
change in flux is opposed by induced electric fields, which produce a magnetic
field B in the positive z direction.

According to Lenz’s law, this in turn means that if we imagine the boundary
of the rectangle to be a conducting loop, a counterclockwise induced current
would have to appear in it. There is, of course, no conducting loop; but this
analysis shows that the induced electric field vectors E and E + dE are indeed

The oscillating magnetic field
induces an oscillating and
perpendicular electric field.

 

Figure 33-6 As the electromagnetic wave
travels rightward past point P in Fig. 33-5b,
the sinusoidal variation of the magnetic
field B through a rectangle centered at P
induces electric fields along the rectangle.
At the instant shown, B is decreasing in
magnitude and the induced electric field is
therefore greater in magnitude on the right
side of the rectangle than on the left.
