32-3 DISPLACEMENT CURRENT

Displacement Current

If you compare the two terms on the right side of Eq. 32-5, you will see that the
product e9(d®,/dt) must have the dimension of a current. In fact, that product has
been treated as being a fictitious current called the displacement current i,:

ren we (displacement current). (32-10)

 

“Displacement” is poorly chosen in that nothing is being displaced, but we are
stuck with the word. Nevertheless, we can now rewrite Eq. 32-5 as

$a +d = pugigenc + Molenc (Ampere-Maxwelllaw), (32-11)

in which ij... is the displacement current that is encircled by the integration loop.
Let us again focus on a charging capacitor with circular plates, as in
Fig. 32-7a. The real current i that is charging the plates changes the electric field E
between the plates. The fictitious displacement current i, between the plates is
associated with that changing field E. Let us relate these two currents.
The charge q on the plates at any time is related to the magnitude E of the
field between the plates at that time and the plate area A by Eq. 25-4:

q = AE. (32-12)
To get the real current i, we differentiate Eq. 32-12 with respect to time, finding
d dE
4 jaya. (32-13)

 

 

dt dt
To get the displacement current ig, we can use Eq. 32-10. Assuming that the elec-
tric field E between the two plates is uniform (we neglect any fringing), we can

Before charging, there
is no magnetic field.

i

During charging, magnetic
field is created by both
the real and fictional currents.

 

(a)

‘1h

During charging, the
right-hand rule works for both
the real and fictional currents.

 

Figure 32-7 (a) Before and (d) after the plates
are charged, there is no magnetic field. (b)
During the charging, magnetic field is created te f i
by both the real current and the (fictional) (9 + = -
displacement current. (c) The same right- ‘ }
hand rule works for both currents to give the
B B B

direction of the magnetic field.

 

id
() + i =

B

After charging, there
is no magnetic field.

o__ Ah
vv

947

 
