976 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Figure 33-5 (a) An electromagnetic wave
represented with a ray and two wavefronts;
the wavefronts are separated by one wave-
length A. (b) The same wave represented in
a “snapshot” of its electric field E and mag-
netic field B at points on the x axis, along
which the wave travels at speed c. As it
travels past point P,the fields vary as

shown in Fig. 33-4. The electric component
of the wave consists of only the electric
fields; the magnetic component consists of
only the magnetic fields. The dashed rec-
tangle at Pis used in Fig. 33-6.

magnetic fields are related by
E,

‘m

Bn

If we divide Eq. 33-1 by Eq. 33-2 and then substitute with Eq. 33-4, we find that
the magnitudes of the fields at every instant and at any point are related by

=Cc (amplitude ratio). (33-4)

= =C (magnitude ratio). (33-5)

Rays and Wavefronts. We can represent the electromagnetic wave as in Fig. 33-
5a, with a ray (a directed line showing the wave’s direction of travel) or with wave-
fronts (imaginary surfaces over which the wave has the same magnitude of electric
field), or both. The two wavefronts shown in Fig. 33-5a are separated by one wave-
length A (= 2z/k) of the wave. (Waves traveling in approximately the same direction
form a beam, such as a laser beam, which can also be represented with a ray.)

Drawing the Wave. We can also represent the wave as in Fig. 33-5, which
shows the electric and magnetic field vectors in a “snapshot” of the wave at a
certain instant. The curves through the tips of the vectors represent the sinu-
soidal oscillations given by Eqs. 33-1 and 33-2; the wave components E and B
are in phase, perpendicular to each other, and perpendicular to the wave’s
direction of travel.

Interpretation of Fig. 33-5b requires some care. The similar drawings for a
transverse wave on a taut string that we discussed in Chapter 16 represented the
up and down displacement of sections of the string as the wave passed (some-
thing actually moved ). Figure 33-5b is more abstract. At the instant shown, the
electric and magnetic fields each have a certain magnitude and direction (but
always perpendicular to the x axis) at each point along the x axis. We choose to
represent these vector quantities with a pair of arrows for each point, and so we
must draw arrows of different lengths for different points, all directed away from
the x axis, like thorns on a rose stem. However, the arrows represent field values
only at points that are on the x axis. Neither the arrows nor the sinusoidal curves
represent a sideways motion of anything, nor do the arrows connect points on the
x axis with points off the axis.

Feedback. Drawings like Fig. 33-5 help us visualize what is actually a very
complicated situation. First consider the magnetic field. Because it varies sinu-
soidally, it induces (via Faraday’s law of induction) a perpendicular electric
field that also varies sinusoidally. However, because that electric field is vary-
ing sinusoidally, it induces (via Maxwell’s law of induction) a perpendicular
magnetic field that also varies sinusoidally. And so on. The two fields continu-
ously create each other via induction, and the resulting sinusoidal variations
in the fields travel as a wave—the electromagnetic wave. Without this amaz-
ing result, we could not see; indeed, because we need electromagnetic waves

‘Wavefronts: Ray

(a)

 

component component
