VI Checkpoint 1

32-2 INDUCED MAGNETIC FIELDS 943

The figure here shows four closed surfaces with flat top and bottom faces and curved
sides. The table gives the areas A of the faces and the magnitudes B of the uniform
and perpendicular magnetic fields through those faces; the units of A and B are arbi-
trary but consistent. Rank the surfaces according to the magnitudes of the magnetic

flux through their curved sides, greatest first.

Surface Avop Buop Avot ibe
a 2 6, outward 4 3, inward
b 2 1, inward 4 2, inward
c 2 6, inward B} 8, outward
d B} 3, outward 3 2, outward

4.4.1.6

32-2 INDUCED MAGNETIC FIELDS

 

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to. . .

32.04 Identify that a changing electric flux induces a magnetic field.

32.05 Apply Maxwell's law of induction to relate the magnetic
field induced around a closed loop to the rate of change of
electric flux encircled by the loop.

32.06 Draw the field lines for an induced magnetic field inside

Key Ideas
@ A changing electric flux induces a magnetic field B.
Maxwell's law,

d®,
B+ ds = =
$ Moe dt

relates the magnetic field induced along a closed loop to the
changing electric flux ®; through the loop.

 

(Maxwell’s law of induction),

Induced Magnetic Fields

a capacitor with parallel circular plates that are being
charged, indicating the orientations of the vectors for the
electric field and the magnetic field.

32.07 For the general situation in which magnetic fields can
be induced, apply the Ampere—Maxwell (combined) law.

e@ Ampere’s law, $B + dS = Liens gives the magnetic field
generated by a current i,,, encircled by a closed loop.
Maxwell's law and Ampere's law can be written as the single
equation

d®,
$ B-ds= Moto + Loiene  (Ampere—Maxwell law).

In Chapter 30 you saw that a changing magnetic flux induces an electric field, and

we ended up with Faraday’s law of induction in the form

= d®,
$ E-ds = a (Faraday’s law of induction).

(32-2)

Here Eis the electric field induced along a closed loop by the changing magnetic
flux ®, encircled by that loop. Because symmetry is often so powerful in physics,
we should be tempted to ask whether induction can occur in the opposite sense;

that is, can a changing electric flux induce a magnetic field?

The answer is that it can; furthermore, the equation governing the induction
of a magnetic field is almost symmetric with Eq. 32-2. We often call it Maxwell’s
