33-5 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION 995

is wider and dimmer than a primary rainbow and thus is more difficult to see.
Also, the order of colors in a secondary rainbow is reversed from the order in
a primary rainbow, as you can see by comparing parts a and d of Fig, 33-21.
Rainbows involving three or four reflections occur in the direction of the
Sun and cannot be seen against the glare of sunshine in that part of the sky but

have been photographed with special techniques.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

Which of the three drawings here (if any) show
physically possible refraction?

(a)

 

Sample Problem 33.03 Reflection and refraction of a monochromatic beam

(a) In Fig. 33-22a, a beam of monochromatic light reflects
and refracts at point A on the interface between material 1
with index of refraction n, = 1.33 and material 2 with index
of refraction nj = 1.77. The incident beam makes an angle
of 50° with the interface. What is the angle of reflection at
point A? What is the angle of refraction there?

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence,
and both angles are measured relative to the normal to the
surface at the point of reflection. (2) When light reaches the
interface between two materials with different indexes of
refraction (call them n; and ny), part of the light can be re-
fracted by the interface according to Snell’s law, Eq. 33-40:

(33-42)

where both angles are measured relative to the normal at
the point of refraction.

ny sin & = nj, sin A,

Calculations: In Fig. 33-22a, the normal at point A is drawn
as a dashed line through the point. Note that the angle of in-
cidence @ is not the given 50° but is 90° — 50° = 40°. Thus,
the angle of reflection is

O = G = 40°. (Answer)

The light that passes from material 1 into material 2
undergoes refraction at point A on the interface between
the two materials. Again we measure angles between light
rays and a normal, here at the point of refraction. Thus, in
Fig. 33-22a, the angle of refraction is the angle marked 6).
Solving Eq. 33-42 for @ gives us

aval Bs oe
@ = sin (= sin 0) = sin! (2 sin 40) )

= 28.88° = 29°. (Answer)

 

 

(a) (d)

Figure 33-22 (a) Light reflects and refracts at point A on the inter-
face between materials 1 and 2. (b) The light that passes through
material 2 reflects and refracts at point B on the interface between
materials 2 and 3 (air). Each dashed line is a normal. Each dotted
line gives the incident direction of travel.

This result means that the beam swings toward the normal
(it was at 40° to the normal and is now at 29°). The reason is
that when the light travels across the interface, it moves into
a material with a greater index of refraction. Caution: Note
that the beam does not swing through the normal so that it
appears on the left side of Fig. 33-22a.

(b) The light that enters material 2 at point A then reaches
point B on the interface between material 2 and material 3,
which is air, as shown in Fig. 33-22b. The interface through B
is parallel to that through A. At B, some of the light reflects
and the rest enters the air. What is the angle of reflection?
What is the angle of refraction into the air?

Calculations: We first need to relate one of the angles at

 
