Combinations of Switches

By combining ON and OFF switches,
bacteria can create sophisticated transcrip-
tional control systems. A particularly well-
studied example is the Jac operon of E.
coli (figure 16.9). This operon is responsi-
ble for producing three proteins that im-
port the disaccharide lactose into the cell
and break it down into two monosaccha-
rides: glucose and galactose.

The Activator Switch. The Jac operon
possesses two regulatory sites. One is a
CAP site located adjacent to the Jac pro-
moter. It ensures that the /ac genes are not
transcribed effectively when ample
amounts of glucose are already present. In
the absence of glucose, a high level of

      
 
  

 
  
 

   

Gene for
repressor protein CAP binding Operator Gene for
site permease
Promoter
for I gene Promoter for / Gene for Gene for
lac operon B-galactosidase transacetylase

Regulatory region Coding region

lac control system

FIGURE 16.9

The Jac region of the Escherichia coli chromosome. The Jac operon consists of a
promoter, an operator, and three genes that code for proteins required for the
metabolism of lactose. In addition, there is a binding site for the catabolite activator
protein (CAP), which affects whether or not RNA polymerase will bind to the
promoter. Gene J codes for a repressor protein, which will bind to the operator and
block transcription of the /ac genes. The genes Z, Y, and A encode the two enzymes and

cAMP builds up in the cell. Consequently,
cAMP is available to bind to CAP and
allow it to change shape, bind to the
DNA, and activate the Jac promoter (figure 16.10). In the
presence of glucose, cAMP levels are low, CAP is unable to
bind to the DNA, and the /ac promoter is not activated.

The Repressor Switch. Whether the /ac genes are actu-
ally transcribed in the absence of glucose is determined by
the second regulatory site, the operator, which is located
adjacent to the promoter. A protein called the Jac repressor
is capable of binding to the operator, but only when lactose
is absent. Because the operator and the promoter are close
together, the repressor covers part of the promoter when it
binds to the operator, preventing RNA polymerase from
proceeding and so blocking transcription of the Jac genes.
These genes are then said to be “repressed” (figure 16.11).
As a result, the cell does not transcribe genes whose prod-
ucts it has no use for. However, when lactose is present, a
lactose isomer binds to the repressor, twisting its binding
motif away from the major groove of the DNA. This pre-
vents the repressor from binding to the operator and so al-
lows RNA polymerase to bind to the promoter and tran-
scribe the Jac genes. Transcription of the Jac operon is said
to have been “induced” by lactose.

This two-switch control mechanism thus causes the cell
to produce lactose-utilizing proteins whenever lactose is
present but glucose is not, enabling it to make a metabolic
decision to produce only what the cell needs, conserving its
resources (figure 16.12).

 

Bacteria regulate gene expression transcriptionally
through the use of repressor and activator “switches,”
such as the rp repressor and the CAP activator. The
transcription of some clusters of genes, such as the /ac
operon, is regulated by both repressors and activators.

 

320 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

the permease involved in the metabolism of lactose.

CAP binding RNA polymerase

site =

 

Promoter for Jac operon

__,
cAMP CAP

(a) Glucose low, promoter activated

RNA polymerase

 

 

Promoter for fac operon

CAP
(b) Glucose high, promoter not activated

FIGURE 16.10

How the CAP site works. The CAP molecule can attach to the
CAP binding site only when the molecule is bound to cAMP.

(a) When glucose levels are low, cAMP is abundant and binds to
CAP. The cAMP-CAP complex binds to the CAP site, bends in
the DNA, and gives RNA polymerase access to the promoter.
(b) When glucose levels are high, cAMP is scarce, and CAP is
unable to activate the promoter.
