16

Control of Gene

Expression

Concept Outline

16.1 Gene expression is controlled by regulating
transcription.

An Overview of Transcriptional Control. In bacteria
transcription is regulated by controlling access of RNA.
polymerase to the promoter in a flexible and reversible way;
eukaryotes by contrast regulate many of their genes by
turning them on and off in a more permanent fashion.

16.2 Regulatory proteins read DNA without
unwinding it.
How to Read a Helix without Unwinding It.
Regulatory proteins slide special segments called DNA-
binding motifs along the major groove of the DNA helix,
reading the sides of the bases.
Four Important DNA-Binding Motifs. DNA-binding
proteins contain structural motifs such as the helix-turn-
helix which fit into the major groove of the DNA helix.

16.3 Bacteria limit transcription by blocking RNA
polymerase.
Controlling Transcription Initiation. Repressor
proteins inhibit RNA polymerase’s access to the promoter,
while activators facilitate its binding.

16.4 Transcriptional control in eukaryotes operates at
a distance.

Designing a Complex Gene Control System.
Eukaryotic genes use a complex collection of transcription
factors and enhancers to aid the polymerase in
transcription.

The Effect of Chromosome Structure on Gene
Regulation. The tight packaging of eukaryotic DNA into
nucleosomes does not interfere with gene expression.
Posttranscriptional Control in Eukaryotes. Gene
expression can be controlled at a variety of levels after
transcription.

 

FIGURE 16.1

Chromosome puffs. In this chromosome of the fly Drosophila
melanogaster, individual active genes can be visualized as “puffs”
on the chromosomes. The RNA being transcribed from the DNA
template has been radioactively labeled, and the dark specks
indicate its position on the chromosome.

L an orchestra, all of the instruments do not play all the
time; if they did, all they would produce is noise. In-
stead, a musical score determines which instruments in the
orchestra play when. Similarly, all of the genes in an organ-
ism are not expressed at the same time, each gene produc-
ing the protein it encodes full tilt. Instead, different genes
are expressed at different times, with a genetic score writ-
ten in regulatory regions of the DNA determining which
genes are active when (figure 16.1).

313
