Chapter 2

Summary

2.1 Atoms are nature’s building material.

zi

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

http://www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

 

¢ The smallest stable particles of matter are protons, neutrons,
and electrons, which associate to form atoms.

¢ The core, or nucleus, of an atom consists of protons and
neutrons; the electrons orbit around the nucleus in a cloud.
The farther an electron is from the nucleus, the faster it

1. An atom of nitrogen has 7
protons and 7 neutrons. What is
its atomic number? What is its
atomic mass? How many elec-
trons does it have?

2. How do the isotopes of a sin-

2 * Atomic Structure
ee

Basic Chemistry

 

 

ve * Atoms
moves and the more energy it possesses. gle element differ from each er
* The chemical behavior of an atom is largely determined by other?
the distribution of its electrons and in particular by thenum- 3, ‘The half-life of radium-226 is
ber of electrons in its outermost (highest) energy level. 1620 years. If a sample of mate-
There is a strong tendency for atoms to have a completely rial contains 16 milligrams of ra-
filled outer level; electrons are lost, gained, or shared until dium-226, how much will it con-
this condition is reached. tain in 1620 years? How much
will it contain in 3240 years?
How long will it take for the
sample to contain 1 milligram of
radium-226?
2.2 The atoms of living things are among the smallest.
¢ More than 95% of the weight of an organism consists 4. What is the octet rule, and
of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen, all of how does it affect the chemical
which form strong covalent bonds with one another. behavior of atoms?
2.3. Chemical bonds hold molecules together.
* Tonic bonds form when electrons transfer from one 5. What is the difference be- * Bonds

atom to another, and the resulting oppositely charged
ions attract one another.

* Covalent bonds form when two atoms share elec-

tween an ionic bond and a cova-
lent bond? Give an example of
each.

i)

Tonic Bonds

 

trons. They are responsible for the formation of most * Bonds
biologically important molecules. er

2.4 Water is the cradle of life.

¢ The chemistry of life is the chemistry of water (H2O). 6. What types of atoms partici- © Water
The central oxygen atom in water attracts the elec- pate in the formation of hydro- G * ph Scale

trons it shares with the two hydrogen atoms. This
charge separation makes water a polar molecule.

* Ahydrogen bond is formed between the partial posi-
tive charge of a hydrogen atom in one molecule and
the partial negative charge of another atom, either in
another molecule or in a different portion of the same
molecule.

© Water is cohesive and adhesive, has a great capacity
for storing heat, is a good solvent for other polar
molecules, and tends to exclude nonpolar molecules.

¢ The H* concentration in a solution is expressed by
the pH scale, in which pH equals the negative loga-
rithm of the H* concentration.

34 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

gen bonds? How do hydrogen
bonds contribute to water’s high
specific heat?

7. What types of molecules are
hydrophobic? What types are
hydrophilic? Why do these two
types of molecules behave differ-
ently in water?

8. What is the pH of a solution
that has a hydrogen ion concen-
tration of 10- mole/liter?
Would such a solution be acidic
or basic?
