33-1 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Because the dipole moment varies in magnitude and direction, the electric
field produced by the dipole varies in magnitude and direction. Also, because the
current varies, the magnetic field produced by the current varies in magnitude
and direction. However, the changes in the electric and magnetic fields do not
happen everywhere instantaneously; rather, the changes travel outward from the
antenna at the speed of light c. Together the changing fields form an electromag-
netic wave that travels away from the antenna at speed c. The angular frequency
of this wave is w, the same as that of the LC oscillator.

Electromagnetic Wave. Figure 33-4 shows how the electric field E and the
magnetic field B change with time as one wavelength of the wave sweeps past the
distant point P of Fig. 33-3; in each part of Fig. 33-4, the wave is traveling directly
out of the page. (We choose a distant point so that the curvature of the waves
suggested in Fig. 33-3 is small enough to neglect. At such points, the wave is said
to be a plane wave, and discussion of the wave is much simplified.) Note several
key features in Fig. 33-4; they are present regardless of how the wave is created:

1. The electric and magnetic fields E and B are always perpendicular to the
direction in which the wave is traveling. Thus, the wave is a transverse wave, as
discussed in Chapter 16.

2. The electric field is always perpendicular to the magnetic field.
3. The cross product E' x B always gives the direction in which the wave travels.

4. The fields always vary sinusoidally, just like the transverse waves discussed
in Chapter 16. Moreover, the fields vary with the same frequency and in phase
(in step) with each other.

In keeping with these features, we can assume that the electromagnetic wave
is traveling toward P in the positive direction of an x axis, that the electric field in
Fig. 33-4 is oscillating parallel to the y axis, and that the magnetic field is then
oscillating parallel to the z axis (using a right-handed coordinate system, of
course). Then we can write the electric and magnetic fields as sinusoidal functions
of position x (along the path of the wave) and time ¢:

E = E,sin(kx — of), (33-1)

B=B,,sin(kx — ot), (33-2)
in which £,,, and B,, are the amplitudes of the fields and, as in Chapter 16, w and k
are the angular frequency and angular wave number of the wave, respectively.
From these equations, we note that not only do the two fields form the electro-
magnetic wave but each also forms its own wave. Equation 33-1 gives the electric
wave component of the electromagnetic wave, and Eq. 33-2 gives the magnetic
wave component. As we shall discuss below, these two wave components cannot
exist independently.

Wave Speed. From Eq. 16-13, we know that the speed of the wave is w/k.
However, because this is an electromagnetic wave, its speed (in vacuum) is given
the symbol c rather than v. In the next section you will see that c has the value

i
VFOFO

which is about 3.0 x 10° m/s. In other words,

 

e= (wave speed),

(33-3)

oO Alll electromagnetic waves, including visible light, have the same speed c in vacuum.

You will also see that the wave speed c and the amplitudes of the electric and

975

 

rel

Greatest
_. magnitudes .
— aE (a) = aE
54 id
P P
(a) ®

t ow 4

/——— magnitudes ——,

Pe ‘eP

(g) (C)

 

Greatest

magnitudes

(@)

Figure 33-4 (a)—(h) The variation in the
electric field E and the magnetic field B at
the distant point P of Fig.33-3 as one wave-
length of the electromagnetic wave travels
past it. In this perspective, the wave is
traveling directly out of the page. The two
fields vary sinusoidally in magnitude and
direction. Note that they are always per-
pendicular to each other and to the wave’s
direction of travel.
