986 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Unpolarized light
headed toward
you-the electric
fields are in all
directions in the
plane.

 

This is a quick
way to symbolize
unpolarized light.

 

(b)

Figure 33-10 (a) Unpolarized light consists
of waves with randomly directed electric
fields. Here the waves are all traveling
along the same axis, directly out of the
page, and all have the same amplitude E.
(b) A second way of representing unpolar-
ized light—the light is the superposition
of two polarized waves whose planes of

oscillation are perpendicular to each other.

» -F Plane of Vertically polarized

oscillation a

light headed toward
you-the electric fields
are all vertical.

    

 

(a) (b)

Figure 33-9 (a) The plane of oscillation of a polarized electromagnetic wave. (b) To
represent the polarization, we view the plane of oscillation head-on and indicate the direc-
tions of the oscillating electric field with a double arrow.

electric field of the incident television waves to drive a current along an antenna
(and provide a signal to a television set), the antenna must be vertical. In North
America, the waves are polarized horizontally.

Figure 33-9a shows an electromagnetic wave with its electric field oscillating
parallel to the vertical y axis. The plane containing the E vectors is called the
plane of oscillation of the wave (hence, the wave is said to be plane-polarized in
the y direction). We can represent the wave’s polarization (state of being polar-
ized) by showing the directions of the electric field oscillations in a head-on view
of the plane of oscillation, as in Fig. 33-9b. The vertical double arrow in that figure
indicates that as the wave travels past us, its electric field oscillates vertically —it
continuously changes between being directed up and down the y axis.

Polarized Light

The electromagnetic waves emitted by a television station all have the same
polarization, but the electromagnetic waves emitted by any common source of light
(such as the Sun or a bulb) are polarized randomly, or unpolarized (the two terms
mean the same thing). That is, the electric field at any given point is always perpen-
dicular to the direction of travel of the waves but changes directions randomly.
Thus, if we try to represent a head-on view of the oscillations over some time pe-
riod, we do not have a simple drawing with a single double arrow like that of Fig.
33-9b; instead we have a mess of double arrows like that in Fig. 33-10a.

In principle, we can simplify the mess by resolving each electric field of
Fig. 33-10a into y and z components. Then as the wave travels past us, the net
y component oscillates parallel to the y axis and the net z component oscillates
parallel to the z axis. We can then represent the unpolarized light with a pair of
double arrows as shown in Fig. 33-10b. The double arrow along the y axis
represents the oscillations of the net y component of the electric field. The dou-
ble arrow along the z axis represents the oscillations of the net z component of
the electric field. In doing all this, we effectively change unpolarized light into
the superposition of two polarized waves whose planes of oscillation are
perpendicular to each other—one plane contains the y axis and the other con-
tains the z axis. One reason to make this change is that drawing Fig. 33-10 is a
lot easier than drawing Fig. 33-10a.

‘We can draw similar figures to represent light that is partially polarized (its
field oscillations are not completely random as in Fig. 33-10a, nor are they paral-
lel to a single axis as in Fig. 33-9b). For this situation, we draw one of the double
arrows in a perpendicular pair of double arrows longer than the other one.

Polarizing Direction. We can transform unpolarized visible light into polar-
ized light by sending it through a polarizing sheet, as is shown in Fig. 33-11. Such
sheets, commercially known as Polaroids or Polaroid filters, were invented in
1932 by Edwin Land while he was an undergraduate student. A polarizing sheet
consists of certain long molecules embedded in plastic. When the sheet is manu-
