is connected to a source of emf € = €,, sin wf, where €,, = 220 V
and w = 130 rad/s. The maximum value of the displacement cur-
rent is iy = 7.60 wA. Neglect fringing of the electric field at the
edges of the plates. (a) What is the maximum value of the current i
in the circuit? (b) What is the maximum value of d®,/dt, where By
is the electric flux through the region between the plates? (c) What
is the separation d between the plates? (d) Find the maximum
value of the magnitude of B between the plates at a distance
r = 11.0 cm from the center.

Module 32-4 Magnets

°30 Assume the average value of the vertical component
of Earth’s magnetic field is 43 ¢T (downward) for all of Arizona,
which has an area of 2.95 X 10° km’. What then are the (a) magni-
tude and (b) direction (inward or outward) of the net magnetic
flux through the rest of Earth’s surface (the entire surface exclud-
ing Arizona)?

°31 In New Hampshire the average horizontal component of
Earth’s magnetic field in 1912 was 16 ,/T, and the average inclina-
tion or “dip” was 73°. What was the corresponding magnitude of
Earth’s magnetic field?

Module 32-5 Magnetism and Electrons
°32 Figure 32-37a is a one-axis
graph along which two of the allowed
energy values (levels) of an atom are jy,
plotted. When the atom is placedina =~
magnetic field of 0.500 T, the graph
changes to that of Fig. 32-37b be-
cause of the energy associated with 4
How * B. (We neglect 7i,.) Level Ey is
unchanged, but level E> splits into a (@ 0)
(closely spaced) triplet of levels Figure 32-37 Problem 32.
What are the allowed values of my

associated with (a) energy level E; and (b) energy level Ey? (c) In
joules, what amount of energy is represented by the spacing
between the triplet levels?

— A

°33 SSM WWW If an electron in an atom has an orbital angular
momentum with m = 0, what are the components (a) L,,,- and
(b) ornz? If the atom is in an external magnetic field B that has
magnitude 35 mT and is directed along the z axis, what are (c) the
energy U,,, associated with /i,,, and (d) the energy U,)i, associated
with é,? If, instead, the electron has m = —3, what are (e) Loy...
(£) Morzs (8) Uornand (h) Uspin?

*34 What is the energy difference between parallel and
antiparallel alignment of the z component of an electron’s spin
magnetic dipole moment with an external magnetic field of magni-
tude 0.25 T, directed parallel to the z axis?

°35 What is the measured component of the orbital magnetic di-
pole moment of an electron with (a) m, = 1 and (b) m, = —2?
*36 An electron is placed in a magnetic field B that is directed
along a z axis. The energy difference between parallel and antipar-

allel alignments of the z component of the electron’s spin magnetic
moment with B is 6.00 X 10-5 J. What is the magnitude of B?

wa.

Figure 32-38
Problems 37 and 71.

Module 32-6 Diamagnetism

37. Figure 32-38 shows a loop
model (loop L) for a diamagnetic
material. (a) Sketch the magnetic
field lines within and about the ma-
terial due to the bar magnet. What is

PROBLEMS 969

the direction of (b) the loop’s net magnetic dipole moment £,
(c) the conventional current i in the loop (clockwise or counter-
clockwise in the figure), and (d) the magnetic force on the loop?

38 Assume that an electron of mass m and charge magnitude e
moves in a circular orbit of radius r about a nucleus. A uniform
magnetic field B is then established perpendicular to the plane of
the orbit. Assuming also that the radius of the orbit does not
change and that the change in the speed of the electron due to field
Bis small, find an expression for the change in the orbital magnetic
dipole moment of the electron due to the field.

Module 32-7. Paramagnetism

°39 Asample of the paramagnetic salt to which the magnetization
curve of Fig. 32-14 applies is to be tested to see whether it obeys
Curie’s law. The sample is placed in a uniform 0.50 T magnetic field
that remains constant throughout the experiment. The magnetiza-
tion M is then measured at temperatures ranging from 10 to 300 K.
Will it be found that Curie’s law is valid under these conditions?

°40 A sample of the paramagnetic salt to which the magnetization
curve of Fig. 32-14 applies is held at room temperature (300 K).
At what applied magnetic field will the degree of magnetic satura-
tion of the sample be (a) 50% and (b) 90%? (c) Are these fields
attainable in the laboratory?

°41 SSM ILW A magnet in the form of a cylindrical rod has a
length of 5.00 cm and a diameter of 1.00 cm. It has a uniform mag-
netization of 5.30 X 10° A/m. What is its magnetic dipole moment?

°42 A 0.50T magnetic field is applied to a paramagnetic gas
whose atoms have an intrinsic magnetic dipole moment of 1.0 x
10- J/T. At what temperature will the mean kinetic energy of
translation of the atoms equal the energy required to reverse such
a dipole end for end in this magnetic field?

#43 An electron with kinetic energy K, travels in a circular path
that is perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field, which is in the
positive direction of a z axis. The electron’s motion is subject only
to the force due to the field. (a) Show that the magnetic dipole mo-
ment of the electron due to its orbital motion has magnitude w =
K./B and that it is in the direction opposite that of B.What are the
(b) magnitude and (c) direction of the magnetic dipole moment of
a positive ion with kinetic energy K; under the same circum-
stances? (d) An ionized gas consists of 5.3 X 10! electrons/m} and
the same number density of ions. Take the average electron kinetic
energy to be 6.2 X 10-?? J and the average ion kinetic energy to be
7.6 X 10-7! J. Calculate the magnetization of the gas when it is ina
magnetic field of 1.2 T.

44 Figure 32-39 gives the magne-
tization curve for a paramagnetic
material. The vertical axis scale is set
by a = 0.15, and the horizontal axis
scale is set by b = 0.2 TIK. Let foam
be the measured net magnetic mo-
ment of a sample of the material and 0 b
Pmax be the maximum possible net Bex,/T (T/K)
magnetic moment of that sample. Figure 32-39 Problem 44.
According to Curie’s law, what would

be the ratio fam/Mmax Were the sample placed in a uniform mag-
netic field of magnitude 0.800 T, at a temperature of 2.00 K?

 

45 SSM Consider a solid containing N atoms per unit volume,
each atom having a magnetic dipole moment 7. Suppose the direc-
tion of @ can be only parallel or antiparallel to an externally
