958 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

 

Courtesy A.K. Geim, University of

Manchester, UK
Figure 32-13 An overhead view of a frog that
is being levitated in a magnetic field
produced by current ina vertical solenoid
below the frog.

Now let’s turn on the nonuniform field B.,, of Fig. 32-12a, in which B... is
directed upward but is diverging (the magnetic field lines are diverging). We
could do this by increasing the current through an electromagnet or by moving
the north pole of a bar magnet closer to, and below, the orbits. As the magni-
tude of Ba increases from zero to its final maximum, steady-state value, a clock-
wise electric field is induced around each electron’s orbital loop according to
Faraday’s law and Lenz’s law. Let us see how this induced electric field affects the
orbiting electrons in Figs. 32-12b and d.

In Fg. 32-12b, the counterclockwise electron is accelerated by the clockwise
electric field. Thus, as the magnetic field Box increases to its maximum value, the elec-
tron speed increases to a maximum value. This means that the associated conventional
current i and the downward magnetic dipole moment / due to i also increase.

In Fig. 32-12d, the clockwise electron is decelerated by the clockwise electric
field. Thus, here, the electron speed, the associated current i, and the upward
magnetic dipole moment #4 due to i all decrease. By turning on field Bae, we have
given the atom a net magnetic dipole moment that is downward. This would also
be so if the magnetic field were uniform.

Force. The nonuniformity of field Bux also affects the atom. Because the cur-
rent i in Fig. 32-12b increases, the upward magnetic forces dF in Fig. 32-12c also
increase, as does the net upward force on the current loop. Because current jin
Fig. 32-12d decreases, the downward magnetic forces dF in Fig. 32-12e also
decrease, as does the net downward force on the current loop. Thus, by turning on
the nonuniform field Bay, we have produced a net force on the atom; moreover,
that force is directed away from the region of greater magnetic field.

We have argued with fictitious electron orbits (current loops), but we have
ended up with exactly what happens to a diamagnetic material: If we apply
the magnetic field of Fig. 32-12, the material develops a downward magnetic
dipole moment and experiences an upward force. When the field is removed,
both the dipole moment and the force disappear. The external field need not be
positioned as shown in Fig. 32-12; similar arguments can be made for other orien-
tations of Boxt- In general,

) A diamagnetic material placed in an external magnetic field B,.. develops a magnetic
dipole moment directed opposite B,.. If the field is nonuniform, the diamagnetic mate-
rial is repelled from a region of greater magnetic field roward a region of lesser field.

The frog in Fig. 32-13 is diamagnetic (as is any other animal). When the frog
was placed in the diverging magnetic field near the top end of a vertical current-
carrying solenoid, every atom in the frog was repelled upward, away from the
region of stronger magnetic field at that end of the solenoid. The frog moved
upward into weaker and weaker magnetic field until the upward magnetic force
balanced the gravitational force on it, and there it hung in midair. The frog is not
in discomfort because every atom is subject to the same forces and thus there is
no force variation within the frog. The sensation is similar to the “weightless” sit-
uation of floating in water, which frogs like very much. If we went to the expense
of building a much larger solenoid, we could similarly levitate a person in midair

due to the person’s diamagnetism. aS
lv] Checkpoint 5
The figure shows two diamagnetic sphereslocated @ ° z= _ az
near the south pole of a barmagnet.Are(a) the 1 2

magnetic forces on the spheres and (b) the
magnetic dipole moments of the spheres directed toward or away from the bar magnet?
(c) Is the magnetic force on sphere 1 greater than, less than, or equal to that on sphere 2?
