974 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

 

20

Relative sensiti
$

{100 450 500 550 600 650 700
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 33-2 The relative sensitivity of the av-
erage human eye to electromagnetic waves
at different wavelengths. This portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum to which the eye
is sensitive is called visible light.

Figure 33-3 An arrangement for generating a
traveling electromagnetic wave in the
shortwave radio region of the spectrum: an
LCoscillator produces a sinusoidal current
in the antenna, which generates the wave.
Pisa distant point at which a detector can
monitor the wave traveling past it.

In the wavelength scale in Fig. 33-1 (and similarly the corresponding
frequency scale), each scale marker represents a change in wavelength (and
correspondingly in frequency) by a factor of 10. The scale is open-ended; the
wavelengths of electromagnetic waves have no inherent upper or lower bound.

Certain regions of the electromagnetic spectrum in Fig. 33-1 are identified by
familiar labels, such as x rays and radio waves. These labels denote roughly defined
wavelength ranges within which certain kinds of sources and detectors of electro-
magnetic waves are in common use. Other regions of Fig. 33-1, such as those
labeled TV channels and AM radio, represent specific wavelength bands assigned
by law for certain commercial or other purposes. There are no gaps in the electro-
magnetic spectrum —and all electromagnetic waves, no matter where they lie in
the spectrum, travel through free space (vacuum) with the same speed c.

The visible region of the spectrum is of course of particular interest to us.
Figure 33-2 shows the relative sensitivity of the human eye to light of various
wavelengths. The center of the visible region is about 555 nm, which produces the
sensation that we call yellow-green.

The limits of this visible spectrum are not well defined because the eye
sensitivity curve approaches the zero-sensitivity line asymptotically at both long
and short wavelengths. If we take the limits, arbitrarily, as the wavelengths at
which eye sensitivity has dropped to 1% of its maximum value, these limits are
about 430 and 690 nm; however, the eye can detect electromagnetic waves some-
what beyond these limits if they are intense enough.

The Traveling Electromagnetic Wave, Qualitatively

Some electromagnetic waves, including x rays, gamma rays, and visible light,
are radiated (emitted) from sources that are of atomic or nuclear size, where
quantum physics rules. Here we discuss how other electromagnetic waves are
generated. To simplify matters, we restrict ourselves to that region of the spec-
trum (wavelength A~ 1m) in which the source of the radiation (the emitted
waves) is both macroscopic and of manageable dimensions.

Figure 33-3 shows, in broad outline, the generation of such waves. At its heart
is an LC oscillator, which establishes an angular frequency w (= 1/VLC).
Charges and currents in this circuit vary sinusoidally at this frequency, as de-
picted in Fig. 31-1. An external source—possibly an ac generator—must be
included to supply energy to compensate both for thermal losses in the circuit
and for energy carried away by the radiated electromagnetic wave.

The LC oscillator of Fig. 33-3 is coupled by a transformer and a transmission
line to an antenna, which consists essentially of two thin, solid, conducting rods.
Through this coupling, the sinusoidally varying current in the oscillator causes
charge to oscillate sinusoidally along the rods of the antenna at the
angular frequency w of the LC oscillator. The current in the rods associated with
this movement of charge also varies sinusoidally, in magnitude and direction, at an-
gular frequency w. The antenna has the effect of an electric dipole whose electric
dipole moment varies sinusoidally in magnitude and direction along the antenna.

y\\
/Tansformer \ \maveling wave

line ] ] pome
preci / /
dipole
antenna

  

 

 

 

 

 

LC oscillator
