954 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

For an electron, the spin
is opposite the magnetic
dipole moment.

 

Figure 32-10 The spin S’,spin magnetic dipole
moment 7i,,and magnetic dipole field B of
an electron represented as a microscopic
sphere.

Spin magnetic dipole moments of electrons and other elementary particles can
be expressed in terms of yg. For an electron, the magnitude of the measured z
component of 7, is

lesz] = Lae. (32-26)

(The quantum physics of the electron, called quantum electrodynamics, or QED,
reveals that j4,, is actually slightly greater than 12g, but we shall neglect that fact.)

Energy. When an electron is placed in an external magnetic field Ba, an
energy U can be associated with the orientation of the electron’s spin magnetic
dipole moment /, just as an energy can be associated with the orientation of the
magnetic dipole moment 7 of a current loop placed in Bax. From Eg. 28-38, the
orientation energy for the electron is

a Ra eae (32-27)

where the z axis is taken to be in the direction of Baw

If we imagine an electron to be a microscopic sphere (which it is not), we can
represent the spin S, the spin magnetic dipole moment 7,, and the associated
magnetic dipole field as in Fig. 32-10. Although we use the word “spin” here, elec-
trons do not spin like tops. How, then, can something have angular momentum
without actually rotating? Again, we would need quantum physics to provide the
answer.

Protons and neutrons also have an intrinsic angular momentum called spin
and an associated intrinsic spin magnetic dipole moment. For a proton those two
vectors have the same direction, and for a neutron they have opposite directions.
We shall not examine the contributions of these dipole moments to the magnetic
fields of atoms because they are about a thousand times smaller than that due to
an electron.

lv] Checkpoint 4 =

The figure here shows the spin orientations of two particles

in an external magnetic field B,.. (a) If the particles are z z
electrons, which spin orientation is at lower energy? (b) If,

instead, the particles are protons, which spin orientation is at

lower energy? @ @

Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment

When it is in an atom, an electron has an additional angular momentum called
its orbital angular momentum Low Associated with Loew i is an orbital magnetic
dipole moment //,,,; the two are related by

How = ~ 5 Loto (32-28)

The minus sign means that ,,, and Low have opposite directions.

Orbital angular momentum [,,, cannot be measured; only its component
along any axis can be measured, and that component is quantized. The compo-
nent along, say,a z axis can have only the values given by

Lowz = mez

, for my = 0, +1, #2,..., + (limit), (32-29)
Qn

in which m, is called the orbital magnetic quantum number and “limit” refers to
some largest allowed integer value for m,¢. The signs in Eq. 32-29 have to do with
the direction of Lo, along the z axis.
