Mid-Atlantic Ridge

 

Figure 32-9 A magnetic profile of the seafloor on either side of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The
seafloor, extruded through the ridge and spreading out as part of the tectonic drift system,
displays a record of the past magnetic history of Earth’s core. The direction of the mag-
netic field produced by the core reverses about every million years.

The direction of the magnetic field at any location on Earth’s surface is com-
monly specified in terms of two angles. The field declination is the angle (left or
right) between geographic north (which is toward 90° latitude) and the horizon-
tal component of the field. The field inclination is the angle (up or down) be-
tween a horizontal plane and the field’s direction.

Measurement. Magnetometers measure these angles and determine the field
with much precision. However, you can do reasonably well with just a compass
and a dip meter. A compass is simply a needle-shaped magnet that is mounted so
it can rotate freely about a vertical axis. When it is held in a horizontal plane, the
north-pole end of the needle points, generally, toward the geomagnetic north
pole (really a south magnetic pole, remember). The angle between the needle and
geographic north is the field declination. A dip meter is a similar magnet that can
rotate freely about a horizontal axis. When its vertical plane of rotation is aligned
with the direction of the compass, the angle between the meter’s needle and the
horizontal is the field inclination.

At any point on Earth’s surface, the measured magnetic field may differ
appreciably, in both magnitude and direction, from the idealized dipole field of
Fig. 32-8. In fact, the point where the field is actually perpendicular to Earth’s
surface and inward is not located at the geomagnetic north pole off Greenland as
we would expect; instead, this so-called dip north pole is located in the Queen
Elizabeth Islands in northern Canada, far from Greenland.

In addition, the field observed at any location on the surface of Earth varies
with time, by measurable amounts over a period of a few years and by substantial
amounts over, say, 100 years. For example, between 1580 and 1820 the direction
indicated by compass needles in London changed by 35°.

In spite of these local variations, the average dipole field changes only slowly
over such relatively short time periods. Variations over longer periods can be
studied by measuring the weak magnetism of the ocean floor on either side of the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge (Fig. 32-9). This floor has been formed by molten magma
that oozed up through the ridge from Earth’s interior, solidified, and was pulled
away from the ridge (by the drift of tectonic plates) at the rate of a few centime-
ters per year. As the magma solidified, it became weakly magnetized with its
magnetic field in the direction of Earth’s magnetic field at the time of solidifica-
tion. Study of this solidified magma across the ocean floor reveals that Earth’s
field has reversed its polarity (directions of the north pole and south pole) about
every million years. Theories explaining the reversals are still in preliminary
stages. In fact, the mechanism that produces Earth’s magnetic field is only
vaguely understood.

32-4 MAGNETS

951
