33-7 POLARIZATION BY REFLECTION 997

 
   
  

Critical case

   

If the next index is lower
and the incident angle is
large enough, the light
can be trapped inside.

 

(a
Ken Kay/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 33-23 (a) Total internal reflection of light from a point source S in glass occurs
for all angles of incidence greater than the critical angle @,.At the critical angle, the
refracted ray points along the air—glass interface. (b) A source ina tank of water.

which gives us

6. = sin" a (cnreaererey (33-45)
‘A

Because the sine of an angle cannot exceed unity, n) cannot exceed n, in this
equation. This restriction tells us that total internal reflection cannot occur when
the incident light is in the medium of lower index of refraction. If source S were
in the air in Fig. 33-23a, all its rays that are incident on the air—glass interface
(including f and g) would be both reflected and refracted at the interface.

Total internal reflection has found many applications in medical technology.
For example, a physician can view the interior of an artery of a patient by running
two thin bundles of optical fibers through the chest wall and into an artery
(Fig. 33-24). Light introduced at the outer end of one bundle undergoes repeated
total internal reflection within the fibers so that,even though the bundle provides
a curved path, most of the light ends up exiting the other end and illuminating the
interior of the artery. Some of the light reflected from the interior then comes

 

back up the second bundle in a similar way, to be detected and converted to an ©Laurent/Phototake
image on a monitor’s screen for the physician to view. The physician can then _ Figure 33-24 An endoscope used to inspect an
perform a surgical procedure, such as the placement of a stent. ee artery.

33-7 POLARIZATION BY REFLECTION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

33.48 With sketches, explain how unpolarized light can be 33.50 Apply the relationship between Brewster's angle and
converted to polarized light by reflection from an interface. the indexes of refraction on the two sides of an interface.

33.49 Identify Brewster's angle. 33.51 Explain the function of polarizing sunglasses.

Key Idea

@ A reflected wave will be fully polarized, with its E vectors perpendicular to the plane of incidence, if it strikes a boundary at the
Brewster angle 4, where

1 Ia
— (Brewster angle).

nm

63 = tan™

 
