21
and Pr = — _ (total reflection back along path). (33-35)
Cc

Be careful not to confuse the symbol p, for radiation pressure with the symbol p
for momentum. Just as with fluid pressure in Chapter 14, the SI unit of radiation
pressure is the newton per square meter (N/m), which is called the pascal (Pa).
The development of laser technology has permitted researchers to achieve
radiation pressures much greater than, say, that due to a camera flashlamp. This
comes about because a beam of laser light— unlike a beam of light from a small
lamp filament—can be focused to a tiny spot. This permits the delivery of great

33-4 POLARIZATION 985

amounts of energy to small objects placed at that spot.

Iv] Checkpoint 3

Light of uniform intensity shines perpendicularly on a totally absorbing surface, fully
illuminating the surface. If the area of the surface is decreased, do (a) the radiation
pressure and (b) the radiation force on the surface increase, decrease, or stay the same?

33-4 povarization

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

33.28 Distinguish between polarized light and unpolarized light.

33.29 For a light beam headed toward you, sketch represen-
tations of polarized light and unpolarized light.

33.30 When a beam is sent into a polarizing sheet, explain
the function of the sheet in terms of its polarizing direction
(or axis) and the electric field component that is absorbed
and the component that is transmitted.

33.31 For light that emerges from a polarizing sheet, identify
its polarization relative to the sheet’s polarizing direction.

33.32 For a light beam incident perpendicularly on a polariz-
ing sheet, apply the one-half rule and the cosine-squared
tule, distinguishing their uses.

33.33 Distinguish between a polarizer and an analyzer.

33.34 Explain what is meant if two sheets are crossed.

33.35 When a beam is sent into a system of polarizing
sheets, work through the sheets one by one, finding the
transmitted intensity and polarization.

 

Key Ideas
@ Electromagnetic waves are polarized if their electric field
vectors are all in a single plane, called the plane of oscillation.
Light waves from common sources are not polarized; thatis,
they are unpolarized, or polarized randomly.

@ When a polarizing sheet is placed in the path of light, only
electric field components of the light parallel to the sheets
polarizing direction are transmitted by the sheet; components
perpendicular to the polarizing direction are absorbed. The
light that emerges from a polarizing sheet is polarized parallel
to the polarizing direction of the sheet.

@ If the original light is initially unpolarized, the transmitted
intensity J is half the original intensity Jp:

1= 5h.

@ If the original light is initially polarized, the transmitted
intensity depends on the angle @ between the polarization
direction of the original light and the polarizing direction of
the sheet:

I= Incos? 6.

 

Polarization

VHF (very high frequency) television antennas in England are oriented
vertically, but those in North America are horizontal. The difference is due to the
direction of oscillation of the electromagnetic waves carrying the TV signal. In
England, the transmitting equipment is designed to produce waves that are
polarized vertically; that is, their electric field oscillates vertically. Thus, for the
