962

Iron core

    
  

Yy,

Figure 32-15 A Rowland ring. A primary coil
P has a core made of the ferromagnetic
material to be studied (here iron). The core
is magnetized by a current ip sent through
coil P. (The turns of the coil are represented
by dots.) The extent to which the core is
magnetized determines the total magnetic
field B within coil P. Field B can be mea-
sured by means ofa secondary coil S.

 

0 2 4 6 8 10
By (10 T)

12 14

Figure 32-16 A magnetization curve fora
ferromagnetic core material in the Rowland
ring of Fig. 32-15. On the vertical axis,

1.0 corresponds to complete alignment
(saturation) of the atomic dipoles within
the material.

CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

permanent magnetism, and not a diamagnetic or paramagnetic material having
weak, temporary magnetism.

Tron, cobalt, nickel, gadolinium, dysprosium, and alloys containing these
elements exhibit ferromagnetism because of a quantum physical effect called
exchange coupling in which the electron spins of one atom interact with those
of neighboring atoms. The result is alignment of the magnetic dipole moments
of the atoms, in spite of the randomizing tendency of atomic collisions due to
thermal agitation. This persistent alignment is what gives ferromagnetic materials
their permanent magnetism.

Thermal Agitation. If the temperature of a ferromagnetic material is raised
above a certain critical value, called the Curie temperature, the exchange coupling
ceases to be effective. Most such materials then become simply paramagnetic;
that is, the dipoles still tend to align with an external field but much more weakly,
and thermal agitation can now more easily disrupt the alignment. The Curie tem-
perature for iron is 1043 K (= 770°C).

Measurement. The magnetization of a ferromagnetic material such as iron can
be studied with an arrangement called a Rowland ring (Fig, 32-15). The material is
formed into a thin toroidal core of circular cross section. A primary coil P having n
turns per unit length is wrapped around the core and carries current ip. (The coil is
essentially a long solenoid bent into a circle.) If the iron core were not present, the
magnitude of the magnetic field inside the coil would be, from Eq. 29-23,

Bo = poipn. (32-40)

However, with the iron core present, the magnetic field B inside the coil is greater
than By, usually by a large amount. We can write the magnitude of this field as

B= By + By, (32-41)

where By is the magnitude of the magnetic field contributed by the iron core.
This contribution results from the alignment of the atomic dipole moments
within the iron, due to exchange coupling and to the applied magnetic field Bo,
and is proportional to the magnetization M of the iron. That is, the contribution
By is proportional to the magnetic dipole moment per unit volume of the iron.
To determine By we use a secondary coil S to measure B, compute Bo with
Eq. 32-40, and subtract as suggested by Eq. 32-41.

Figure 32-16 shows a magnetization curve for a ferromagnetic material in
a Rowland ring: The ratio By/Byjmax, Where By max is the maximum possible value
of By, corresponding to saturation, is plotted versus Bp. The curve is like
Fig. 32-14, the magnetization curve for a paramagnetic substance: Both curves
show the extent to which an applied magnetic field can align the atomic dipole
moments of a material.

For the ferromagnetic core yielding Fig. 32-16, the alignment of the dipole
moments is about 70% complete for By ~ 1 x 10? T. If By were increased to 1 T,
the alignment would be almost complete (but By = 1 T, and thus almost complete
saturation, is quite difficult to obtain).

Magnetic Domains

Exchange coupling produces strong alignment of adjacent atomic dipoles in
a ferromagnetic material at a temperature below the Curie temperature. Why,
then, isn’t the material naturally at saturation even when there is no applied
magnetic field By? Why isn’t every piece of iron a naturally strong magnet?

To understand this, consider a specimen of a ferromagnetic material such as
iron that is in the form of a single crystal; that is, the arrangement of the atoms
that make it up—its crystal lattice —extends with unbroken regularity through-
out the volume of the specimen. Such a crystal will, in its normal state, be made
up of a number of magnetic domains. These are regions of the crystal throughout
which the alignment of the atomic dipoles is essentially perfect. The domains,
