Review & Summary

Electromagnetic Waves An electromagnetic wave consists
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. The various possible fre-
quencies of electromagnetic waves form a spectrum, a small part of
which is visible light. An electromagnetic wave traveling along an x
axis has an electric field E and a magnetic field B with magnitudes
that depend on x andr:

E = E, sin(kx — of)

and B= B,, sin(kx — ot), (33-1, 33-2)
where E,, and B,, are the amplitudes of E and B. The oscillating
electric field induces the magnetic field, and the oscillating mag-
netic field induces the electric field. The speed of any electromag-
netic wave in vacuum is c, which can be written as

E 1

c= =

Bo VBE”

where E and B are the simultaneous (but nonzero) magnitudes of
the two fields.

 

(33-5, 33-3)

Energy Flow The rate per unit area at which energy is trans-
ported via an electromagnetic wave is given by the Poynting
vector S:

1
Ho

S=—EXB (33-19)
The direction of S (and thus of the wave’s travel and the energy
transport) is perpendicular to the directions of both E and B. The
time-averaged rate per unit area at which energy is transported is

‘Saye, Which is called the intensity I of the wave:

1
1=— Ens,

om (33-26)

in which Eyns = Em/V2.A point source of electromagnetic waves
emits the waves isotropically —that is, with equal intensity in all di-
rections. The intensity of the waves at distance r from a point
source of power P, is
P
s, (33-27)

J=—
4ar

Radiation Pressure When a surface intercepts electro-
magnetic radiation, a force and a pressure are exerted on the
surface. If the radiation is totally absorbed by the surface,
the force is

TA

F = — (total absorption), (33-32)

c

in which / is the intensity of the radiation and A is the area of the

surface perpendicular to the path of the radiation. If the radiation
is totally reflected back along its original path, the force is

2I1A
F= — (total reflection back along path). (33-33)
The radiation pressure p, is the force per unit area:
I ‘
P, =— (total absorption) (33-34)
c

REVIEW & SUMMARY 999

and P= a (total reflection back along path). (33-35)
Polarization Electromagnetic waves are polarized if their
electric field vectors are all ina single plane, called the plane of os-
cillation. From a head-on view, the field vectors oscillate parallel to
a single axis perpendicular to the path taken by the waves. Light
waves from common sources are not polarized; that is, they are un-
polarized, or polarized randomly. From a head-on view, the vectors
oscillate parallel to every possible axis that is perpendicular to the
path taken by the waves.

Polarizing Sheets When a polarizing sheet is placed in the
path of light, only electric field components of the light parallel to
the sheet’s polarizing direction are transmitted by the sheet; com-
ponents perpendicular to the polarizing direction are absorbed.
The light that emerges from a polarizing sheet is polarized parallel
to the polarizing direction of the sheet.

If the original light is initially unpolarized, the transmitted
intensity / is half the original intensity Jo:

I=3h.

If the original light is initially polarized, the transmitted intensity
depends on the angle @ between the polarization direction of the
original light (the axis along which the fields oscillate) and the po-
larizing direction of the sheet:

(33-36)

I= ly cos? 0. (33-38)
Geometrical Optics Geometrical optics is an approximate
treatment of light in which light waves are represented as straight-
line rays.

Reflection and Refraction When a light ray encounters a
boundary between two transparent media, a reflected ray and a
refracted ray generally appear. Both rays remain in the plane of
incidence. The angle of reflection is equal to the angle of incidence,
and the angle of refraction is related to the angle of incidence by
Snell’s law,

m sin 6) = n; sin 0; (33-40)

(refraction),

where n and np are the indexes of refraction of the media in which
the incident and refracted rays travel.

Total Internal Reflection A wave encountering a boundary
across which the index of refraction decreases will experience total
internal reflection if the angle of incidence exceeds a critical angle
6.,where

(33-45)

n

@, = sin“! (critical angle).

le 2
nh

Polarization by Reflection A reflected wave will be fully
polarized, with its E vectors perpendicular to the plane of
incidence, if the incident, unpolarized wave strikes a boundary at
the Brewster angle 6, where

0, = tan (33-49)

ny
— (Brewster angle).
ny
