The resistance of the transmission line is about 0.220 Q/km; thus, there is a total
resistance of about 220 © for the 1000 km stretch. Energy is dissipated due to that
resistance at a rate of about

Pay = PR = (500 A)?(220 0) = 55.0 MW,

which is nearly 15% of the supply rate.

Imagine what would happen if we doubled the current and halved the volt-
age. Energy would be supplied by the plant at the same average rate of 368 MW
as previously, but now energy would be dissipated at the rate of about

Pyyy = PR = (1000 A)*(220 Q) = 220 MW,

which is almost 60% of the supply rate. Hence the general energy transmission
rule: Transmit at the highest possible voltage and the lowest possible current.

The Ideal Transformer

The transmission rule leads to a fundamental mismatch between the requirement
for efficient high-voltage transmission and the need for safe low-voltage gener-
ation and consumption. We need a device with which we can raise (for trans-
mission) and lower (for use) the ac voltage in a circuit, keeping the product
current X voltage essentially constant. The transformer is such a device. It has
no moving parts, operates by Faraday’s law of induction, and has no simple
direct-current counterpart.

The ideal transformer in Fig. 31-18 consists of two coils, with different num-
bers of turns, wound around an iron core. (The coils are insulated from the core.)
In use, the primary winding, of N, turns, is connected to an alternating-current
generator whose emf @ at any time fis given by

€ =, sin w. (31-78)

The secondary winding, of N, turns, is connected to load resistance R, but its
circuit is an open circuit as long as switch S is open (which we assume for the
present). Thus, there can be no current through the secondary coil. We assume
further for this ideal transformer that the resistances of the primary and second-
ary windings are negligible. Well-designed, high-capacity transformers can have
energy losses as low as 1 %; so our assumptions are reasonable.

For the assumed conditions, the primary winding (or primary) is a pure
inductance and the primary circuit is like that in Fig. 31-12. Thus, the (very small)
primary current, also called the magnetizing current Inag, lags the primary voltage
V, by 90°; the primary’s power factor (= cos ¢ in Eq. 31-76) is zero; so no power
is delivered from the generator to the transformer.

However, the small sinusoidally changing primary current Imag produces a
sinusoidally changing magnetic flux ®g in the iron core. The core acts to
strengthen the flux and to bring it through the secondary winding (or secondary).
Because ®, varies, it induces an emf €jum (= d®,/dt) in each turn of the
secondary. In fact, this emf per turn €,y., is the same in the primary and the
secondary. Across the primary, the voltage V, is the product of €jy¢, and the num-
ber of turns N,; that is, V, = € tur). Similarly, across the secondary the voltage is

 

 

V, = €tueqV,-Thus, we can write
yu _\
bum = = Xe,
wa = NW,
Ns
on V, = Vp ay (transformation of voltage). (31-79)

P

If N, > N,, the device is a step-up transformer because it steps the primary’s voltage
V, up to a higher voltage V,. Similarly, if N, < N,, it is a step-down transformer.

31-6 TRANSFORMERS 931

 

 

Primary Secondary

Figure 31-18 An ideal transformer (two coils
wound onan iron core) ina basic trans-
former circuit. An ac generator produces
current in the coil at the left (the primary).
The coil at the right (the secondary) is con-
nected to the resistive load R when switch S
is closed.
