 

FIGURE 16.7

3.41nm

How the tryptophan repressor works. The binding of tryptophan to the repressor increases the distance between the two recognition
helices in the repressor, allowing the repressor to fit snugly into two adjacent portions of the major groove in DNA.

RNA polymerase from binding to the trp promoter. The
trp genes are transcribed, and the cell proceeds to manufac-
ture tryptophan from other molecules. On the other hand,
when tryptophan is present in the environment, it binds to
the repressor, which is then able to bind to the tp pro-
moter. This blocks transcription of the #rp genes, and the
cell’s synthesis of tryptophan halts.

Activators Are ON Switches

Not all regulatory switches shut genes off—some turn
them on. In these instances, bacterial promoters are delib-
erately constructed to be poor binding sites for RNA poly-
merase, and the genes these promoters govern are thus
rarely transcribed—aunless something happens to improve
the promoter’s ability to bind RNA polymerase. This can
happen if a regulatory protein called a transcriptional ac-
tivator binds to the DNA nearby. By contacting the poly-
merase protein itself, the activator protein helps hold the
polymerase against the DNA promoter site so that tran-
scription can begin.

A well-understood transcriptional activator is the
catabolite activator protein (CAP) of E. coli, which initiates
the transcription of genes that allow E. coli to use other
molecules as food when glucose is not present. Falling lev-
els of glucose lead to higher intracellular levels of the sig-
naling molecule, cyclic AMP (cAMP), which binds to the

 

 

 

FIGURE 16.8

How CAP works. Binding of the catabolite activator protein
(CAP) to DNA causes the DNA to bend around it. This increases
the activity of RNA polymerase.

CAP protein. When cAMP binds to it, the CAP protein
changes shape, enabling its helix-turn-helix motif to bind
to the DNA near any of several promoters. Consequently,
those promoters are activated and their genes can be tran-

scribed (figure 16.8).

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression 319
