33-5 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION

Reflection and Refraction

Although a light wave spreads as it moves away from its source, we can often
approximate its travel as being in a straight line; we did so for the light wave in
Fig. 33-5a. The study of the properties of light waves under that approximation is
called geometrical optics. For the rest of this chapter and all of Chapter 34, we
shall discuss the geometrical optics of visible light.

The photograph in Fig. 33-16a shows an example of light waves traveling in
approximately straight lines. A narrow beam of light (the incident beam), angled
downward from the left and traveling through air, encounters a plane (flat) water
surface. Part of the light is reflected by the surface, forming a beam directed
upward toward the right, traveling as if the original beam had bounced from the
surface. The rest of the light travels through the surface and into the water, form-
ing a beam directed downward to the right. Because light can travel through it,
the water is said to be transparent; that is, we can see through it. (In this chapter
we shall consider only transparent materials and not opaque materials, through
which light cannot travel.)

The travel of light through a surface (or interface) that separates two media is
called refraction, and the light is said to be refracted. Unless an incident beam of
light is perpendicular to the surface, refraction changes the light’s direction
of travel. For this reason, the beam is said to be “bent” by the refraction. Note in
Fig. 33-16a that the bending occurs only at the surface; within the water, the light
travels in a straight line.

In Figure 33-16, the beams of light in the photograph are represented with
an incident ray, a reflected ray, and a refracted ray (and wavefronts). Each ray is
oriented with respect to a line, called the normal, that is perpendicular to the sur-
face at the point of reflection and refraction. In Fig. 33-16), the angle of incidence
is 0, the angle of reflection is @, and the angle of refraction is 6), all measured
relative to the normal. The plane containing the incident ray and the normal is the
plane of incidence, which is in the plane of the page in Fig. 33-16b.

Experiment shows that reflection and refraction are governed by two laws:

Law of reflection: A reflected ray lies in the plane of incidence and has an
angle of reflection equal to the angle of incidence (both relative to the normal).
In Fig. 33-16, this means that

6 = A (reflection). (33-39)

(We shall now usually drop the prime on the angle of reflection.)

Normal
1

Incident | Reflected

ray ray

     
 

Wavefront Air

 

(@) (0)

©1974 FP/Fundamental Photographs

Figure 33-18 (a) A photograph showing an incident beam of light reflected and refracted by
a horizontal water surface. (b) A ray representation of (a). The angles of incidence (6,), re-
flection (6,),and refraction (4) are marked.

991
