950 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

32-4 magnets

Learning Objectives

explain a diverse range of phenomena, from why a compass needle points north
to why a car starts when you turn the ignition key. They are the basis for the func-
tioning of such electromagnetic devices as electric motors, television transmitters
and receivers, telephones, scanners, radar, and microwave ovens.

Maxwell’s equations are the basis from which many of the equations you
have seen since Chapter 21 can be derived. They are also the basis of many of the
equations you will see in Chapters 33 through 36 concerning optics.

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

32.16 Identify lodestones.

which hemisphere the north geomagnetic pole is

32.17 In Earth's magnetic field, identify that the field located.
is approximately that of a dipole and also identify in 32.18 Identify field declination and field inclination.
Key Ideas
@ Earth is approximately a magnetic dipole with a dipole @ The local field direction is given by the field declination
axis somewhat off the rotation axis and with the south pole (the angle left or right from geographic north) and the field

in the Northern Hemisphere.

For Earth, the south pole
of the dipole is actually
in the north.

 

Figure 32-8 Earth’s magnetic field repre-
sented as a dipole field. The dipole axis

MM makes an angle of 11.5° with Earth’s
rotational axis RR.The south pole of the
dipole is in Earth’s Northern Hemisphere.

inclination (the angle up or down from the horizontal).

Magnets

The first known magnets were lodestones, which are stones that have been mag-
netized (made magnetic) naturally. When the ancient Greeks and ancient Chinese
discovered these rare stones, they were amused by the stones’ ability to attract
metal over a short distance, as if by magic. Only much later did they learn to use
lodestones (and artificially magnetized pieces of iron) in compasses to determine
direction. eS

Today, magnets and magnetic materials are ubiquitous. Their magnetic prop-
erties can be traced to their atoms and electrons. In fact, the inexpensive magnet
you might use to hold a note on the refrigerator door is a direct result of the
quantum physics taking place in the atomic and subatomic material within the
magnet. Before we explore some of this physics, let’s briefly discuss the largest
magnet we commonly use — namely, Earth itself.

The Magnetism of Earth

Earth is a huge magnet; for points near Earth’s surface, its magnetic field can be
approximated as the field of a huge bar magnet—a magnetic dipole —that strad-
dles the center of the planet. Figure 32-8 is an idealized symmetric depiction of
the dipole field, without the distortion caused by passing charged particles from
the Sun.

Because Earth’s magnetic field is that of a magnetic dipole, a magnetic dipole
moment 7 is associated with the field. For the idealized field of Fig. 32-8, the mag-
nitude of 7 is 8.0 x 10” J/T and the direction of 7 makes an angle of 11.5° with
the rotation axis (RR) of Earth. The dipole axis (MM in Fig. 32-8) lies along @ and
intersects Earth’s surface at the geomagnetic north pole off the northwest coast of
Greenland and the geomagnetic south pole in Antarctica. The lines of the mag-
netic field B generally emerge in the Southern Hemisphere and reenter Earth in
the Northern Hemisphere. Thus, the magnetic pole that is in Earth’s Northern
Hemisphere and known as a “north magnetic pole” is really the south pole of
Earth’s magnetic dipole.
