Images

34-1 imaGeEs AND PLANE MIRRORS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

34.01 Distinguish virtual images from real images.

34,02 Explain the common roadway mirage.

34.03 Sketch a ray diagram for the reflection of a point
source of light by a plane mirror, indicating the object
distance and image distance.

Key Ideas

34.04 Using the proper algebraic sign, relate the object
distance p to the image distance i.

34.05 Give an example of the apparent hallway that you can
see in a mirror maze based on equilateral triangles.

 

@ Animage is a reproduction of an object via light. If the
image can form ona surface, it is a real image and can exist
even if no observer is present. If the image requires the visual
system of an observer, it is a virtual image.

@ A plane (flat) mirror can form a virtual image of a light

source (said to be the object) by redirecting light rays emerg-
ing from the source. The image can be seen where backward

extensions of reflected rays pass through one another. The
object's distance p from the mirror is related to the (apparent)
image distance i from the mirror by

i= —p (plane mirror).

Object distance p is a positive quantity. Image distance i fora
virtual image is a negative quantity.

1010

 

What Is Physics?

One goal of physics is to discover the basic laws governing light, such as the law
of refraction. A broader goal is to put those laws to use, and perhaps the most
important use is the production of images. The first photographic images, made in
1824, were only novelties, but our world now thrives on images. Huge industries
are based on the production of images on television, computer, and theater
screens. Images from satellites guide military strategists during times of conflict
and environmental strategists during times of blight. Camera surveillance can
make a subway system more secure, but it can also invade the privacy of unsus-
pecting citizens. Physiologists and medical engineers are still puzzled by how im-
ages are produced by the human eye and the visual cortex of the brain, but they
have managed to create mental images in some sightless people by electrical
stimulation of the brain’s visual cortex.

Our first step in this chapter is to define and classify images. Then we exam-
ine several basic ways in which they can be produced.

Two Types of Image

For you to see, say, a penguin, your eye must intercept some of the light rays
spreading from the penguin and then redirect them onto the retina at the rear of
the eye. Your visual system, starting with the retina and ending with the visual
cortex at the rear of your brain, automatically and subconsciously processes the
information provided by the light. That system identifies edges, orientations,
