16.3 Bacteria limit transcription by blocking RNA polymerase.

Controlling Transcription Initiation

How do organisms use regulatory DNA sequences and the
proteins that bind them to control when genes are tran-
scribed? The same basic controls are used in bacteria and
eukaryotes, but eukaryotes employ several additional ele-
ments that reflect their more elaborate chromosomal struc-
ture. We will begin by discussing the relatively simple con-
trols found in bacteria.

Repressors Are OFF Switches

A typical bacterium possesses genes encoding several thou-
sand proteins, but only some are transcribed at any one
time; the others are held in reserve until needed. When the
cell encounters a potential food source, for example, it be-
gins to manufacture the enzymes necessary to metabolize
that food. Perhaps the best-understood example of this
type of transcriptional control is the regulation of
tryptophan-producing genes (#p genes), which was investi-
gated in the pioneering work of Charles Yanofsky and his
students at Stanford University.

Operons. The bacterium Escherichia coli uses proteins en-
coded by a cluster of five genes to manufacture the amino
acid tryptophan. All five genes are transcribed together as a

unit called an operon, producing a single, long piece of
mRNA. RNA polymerase binds to a promoter located at
the beginning of the first gene, and then proceeds down
the DNA, transcribing the genes one after another. Regu-
latory proteins shut off transcription by binding to an oper-
ator site immediately in front of the promoter and often
overlapping it.

When tryptophan is present in the medium surround-
ing the bacterium, the cell shuts off transcription of the
trp genes by means of a tryptophan repressor, a helix-
turn-helix regulatory protein that binds to the operator
site located within the t7p promoter (figure 16.6). Binding
of the repressor to the operator prevents RNA polymerase
from binding to the promoter. The key to the functioning
of this control mechanism is that the tryptophan repressor
cannot bind to DNA unless it has first bound to two mol-
ecules of tryptophan. The binding of tryptophan to the
repressor alters the orientation of a pair of helix-turn-
helix motifs in the repressor, causing their recognition
helices to fit into adjacent major grooves of the DNA
(figure 16.7).

Thus, the bacterial cell’s synthesis of tryptophan de-
pends upon the absence of tryptophan in the environment.
When the environment lacks tryptophan, there is nothing
to activate the repressor, so the repressor cannot prevent

    
 

 

 

 

 

 

Inactive RNA polymerase
repressor
Tryptophan 7
absent & =) .
Prdmcier L mRNA synthesis
=) Tryptophan i
oS co — of ; beislnaka synthesized
aoe ranscription
Tryptophan
present lee Tortophan
se Co»
wee

 

FIGURE 16.6

~\(/A®NA polymerase cannot bind
=

 

Tryptophan is

Genes are OFF not synthesized

 

 

 

How the trp operon is controlled. The tryptophan repressor cannot bind the operator (which is located within the promoter) unless
tryptophan first binds to the repressor. Therefore, in the absence of tryptophan, the promoter is free to function and RNA polymerase
transcribes the operon. In the presence of tryptophan, the tryptophan-repressor complex binds tightly to the operator, preventing RNA.

polymerase from initiating transcription.

318 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics
