980 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

lv] Checkpoint 1

The magnetic field B through the rectangle of Fig, 33-6 is shown at a different instant
in part 1 of the figure here; B is directed in the xz plane, parallel to the z axis,and its
magnitude is increasing. (a) Complete part 1 by drawing the induced electric fields,
indicating both directions and relative magnitudes (as in Fig. 33-6). (b) For the same
instant, complete part 2 of the figure by drawing the electric field of the electromag-
netic wave. Also draw the induced magnetic fields, indicating both directions and
relative magnitudes (as in Fig. 33-7).

bl

qd) (2)

33-2 ENERGY TRANSPORT AND THE POYNTING VECTOR

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

33.13 Identify that an electromagnetic wave transports
energy.

33.14 For a target, identify that an EM wave's rate of energy
transport per unit area is given by the Poynting vector S,
which is related to the cross product of the electric field
E and magnetic field B.

33.15 Determine the direction of travel (and thus energy
transport) of an electromagnetic wave by applying
the cross product for the corresponding Poynting
vector.

33.16 Calculate the instantaneous rate S of energy flow of
an EM wave in terms of the instantaneous electric field
magnitude E.

33.17 For the electric field component of an electromag-
netic wave, relate the rms value E,ms to the amplitude E,,,.

Key Ideas

@ The rate per unit area at which energy is transported
via an electromagnetic wave is given by the Poynting
vector S:

The direction of S (and thus of the wave's travel and the
energy transport) is perpendicular to the directions of both
EandB.

@ The time-averaged rate per unit area at which energy

is transported is S.y,, which is called the intensity J of

33.18 Identify an EM wave's intensity J in terms of energy
transport.

33.19 Apply the relationships between an EM wave's
intensity J and the electric field's rms value E,, and ampli-
tude E,,,.

33.20 Apply the relationship between average power Pays,
energy transfer AE, and the time Af taken by that transfer,
and apply the relationship between the instantaneous
power P and the rate of energy transfer dE/dt.

33.21 Identify an isotropic point source of light.

33.22 For an isotropic point source of light, apply the relation-
ship between the emission power P, the distance r toa
point of measurement, and the intensity / at that point.

33.23 In terms of energy conservation, explain why the intensity
from an isotropic point source of light decreases as 1/r?.

the wave:

in which E,n, = E,,/V 2.

@A point source of electromagnetic waves emits the waves
isotropically—that is, with equal intensity in all directions. The
intensity of the waves at distance r from a point source of
power P, is

B

l= :
Ann?

 
