loop. The idea of a displacement current allows us to retain the
notion of continuity of current through a capacitor. However, dis-
placement current is nota transfer of charge.

Maxwell’s Equations Maxwell’s equations, displayed in
Table 32-1, summarize electromagnetism and form its foundation,
including optics.

Earth’s Magnetic Field Earth’s magnetic field can be
approximated as being that of a magnetic dipole whose dipole mo-
ment makes an angle of 11.5° with Earth’s rotation axis, and with the
south pole of the dipole in the Northern Hemisphere. The direction
of the local magnetic field at any point on Earth’s surface is given by
the field declination (the angle left or right from geographic north)
and the field inclination (the angle up or down from the horizontal).

Spin Magnetic Dipole Moment An electron has an intrinsic
angular momentum called spin angular momentum (or spin) S,with
which an intrinsic spin magnetic dipole moment ji, is associated:

7 es
i =-—S.

a (32-22)

For a measurement along a z axis, the component S- can have only
the values given by

 

S.=

 

(32-23)

m5,
2a

where h (= 6.63 X 10-4 J-s) is the Planck constant. Similarly,

_ eh

.=t = tu,
Msz = 2G = Sun.

 

(32-24, 32-26)

where jug is the Bohr magneton:

h
py = ~~ = 9.27 x 104 5/T.

= -25;
4am (2-25)

The energy U associated with the orientation of the spin magnetic
dipole moment in an external magnetic field B,. is

U = Tig Baw = ~ ey Bow (32-27)
Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment An electron in an atom
has an additional angular momentum called its orbital angular
momentum L,,,, with which an orbital magnetic dipole moment
Bor is associated:

eo

Tian = So To

7" (32-28)

<Questions

1 Figure 32-19a shows a capacitor, with circular plates, that is be-
ing charged. Point a (near one of the connecting wires) and point b
(inside the capacitor gap) are equidistant from the central axis, as
are point c (not so near the wire) and point d (between the plates
but outside the gap). In Fig. 32-195, one curve gives the variation
with distance r of the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and
outside the wire. The other curve gives the variation with distance r
of the magnitude of the magnetic field inside and outside the gap.
The two curves partially overlap. Which of the three points on the
curves correspond to which of the four points of Fig. 32-194?

QUESTIONS 965

Orbital angular momentum is quantized and can have only measured
values given by

Lorb.2 = Mes
‘orb “Sp

for m, = 0, £1, £2,

 

(limit). (32-29)

The associated magnetic dipole moment is given by

eh
Mois = MG = Mab (32-30, 32-31)

The energy U associated with the orientation of the orbital mag-
netic dipole moment in an external magnetic field B,. is

U = Hows * Bext = — Mord. zBext- (32-32)
Diamagnetism Diamagnetic materials exhibit magnetism
only when placed in an external magnetic field; there they form
magnetic dipoles directed opposite the external field. In a
nonuniform field, they are repelled from the region of greater
magnetic field.

Paramagnetism Paramagnetic materials have atoms with a
permanent magnetic dipole moment but the moments are ran-
domly oriented unless the material is in an external magnetic field
By, where the dipoles tend to align with the external field. The
extent of alignment within a volume V is measured as the magneti-
zation M, given by

___ measured magnetic moment

——
Complete alignment (saturation) of all N dipoles in the volume gives
a maximum value My, = Nw/V. At low values of the ratio B./T,

(32-38)

Bex
M= ce (Carie’s law), (32-39)
where T is the temperature (kelvins) and C is a material’s Curie
constant.

In a nonuniform external field, a paramagnetic material is
attracted to the region of greater magnetic field.

Ferromagnetism The magnetic dipole moments in a ferro-
magnetic material can be aligned by an external magnetic field and
then, after the external field is removed, remain partially aligned in
regions (domains). Alignment is eliminated at temperatures above
a material's Curie temperature. In a nonuniform external field,
a ferromagnetic material is attracted to the region of greater
magnetic field.

b 1
ae °
3
—_ [— I
ce de I
0 r
(a (b)

Figure 32-19 Question 1.
