H A P T R 3 3

Electromagnetic Waves

33-1 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

33.01 In the electromagnetic spectrum, identify the relative
wavelengths (longer or shorter) of AM radio, FM radio,
television, infrared light, visible light, ultraviolet light, x rays,
and gamma rays.

33.02 Describe the transmission of an electromagnetic wave
by an LC oscillator and an antenna.

33.03 For a transmitter with an LC oscillator, apply the
relationships between the oscillator's inductance L,
capacitance C, and angular frequency «, and the
emitted wave's frequency f and wavelength A.

33.04 Identify the speed of an electromagnetic wave in
vacuum (and approximately in air).

33.05 Identify that electromagnetic waves do not require a
medium and can travel through vacuum.

33.06 Apply the relationship between the speed of an
electromagnetic wave, the straight-line distance traveled
by the wave, and the time required for the travel.

33.07 Apply the relationships between an electromagnetic

wave's frequency f wavelength A, period 7, angular
frequency w, and speed c.

33.08 Identify that an electromagnetic wave consists of an
electric component and a magnetic component that are
(a) perpendicular to the direction of travel, (b) perpendicu-
lar to each other, and (c) sinusoidal waves with the same
frequency and phase.

33.09 Apply the sinusoidal equations for the electric and
magnetic components of an EM wave, written as functions
of position and time.

33.10 Apply the relationship between the speed of light c, the
permittivity constant 29, and the permeability constant pip.

33.11 For any instant and position, apply the relationship
between the electric field magnitude E, the magnetic field
magnitude B, and the speed of light c.

33.12 Describe the derivation of the relationship between the
speed of light c and the ratio of the electric field amplitude
E to the magnetic field amplitude B.

 

Key Ideas
@ An electromagnetic wave consists of oscillating electric
and magnetic fields.

@ The various possible frequencies of electromagnetic waves
form a spectrum, a small part of which is visible light.

@ An electromagnetic wave traveling along an x axis has an
electric field E anda magnetic field Bwith magnitudes that
depend on x and ¢:

E=E,,sin(kx — of)

and B=B,,sin(kx — a),

where E,,, and B,,, are the amplitudes of E and B. The electric
field induces the magnetic field and vice versa.
@ The speed of any electromagnetic wave in vacuum is c,
which can be written as
E 1
c=—=

Bo Veo”

where E and B are the simultaneous magnitudes of the fields.

 

What Is Physics?

The information age in which we live is based almost entirely on the physics of
electromagnetic waves. Like it or not, we are now globally connected by televi-
sion, telephones, and the web. And like it or not, we are constantly immersed in
those signals because of television, radio, and telephone transmitters.

Much of this global interconnection of information processors was not
imagined by even the most visionary engineers of 40 years ago. The challenge for

972
