33-5 REFLECTION AND REFRACTION

2. If m is greater than nj, then @, is less than @,. In this case, refraction bends the
light beam away from the undeflected direction and toward the normal, as in
Fig. 33-17b.

3. If m is less than m,, then 6 is greater than @,. In this case, refraction bends the
light beam away from the undeflected direction and away from the normal, as
in Fig. 33-17c.

Refraction cannot bend a beam so much that the refracted ray is on the same side
of the normal as the incident ray.

Chromatic Dispersion

The index of refraction n encountered by light in any medium except vacuum
depends on the wavelength of the light. The dependence of n on wavelength
implies that when a light beam consists of rays of different wavelengths, the
rays will be refracted at different angles by a surface; that is, the light will be
spread out by the refraction. This spreading of light is called chromatic disper-
sion, in which “chromatic” refers to the colors associated with the individual
wavelengths and “dispersion” refers to the spreading of the light according to
its wavelengths or colors. The refractions of Figs. 33-16 and 33-17 do not show
chromatic dispersion because the beams are monochromatic (of a single wave-
length or color).

Generally, the index of refraction of a given medium is greater for a shorter
wavelength (corresponding to, say, blue light) than for a longer wavelength (say,
red light). As an example, Fig. 33-18 shows how the index of refraction of fused
quartz depends on the wavelength of light. Such dependence means that when a
beam made up of waves of both blue and red light is refracted through a surface,
such as from air into quartz or vice versa, the blue component (the ray corre-
sponding to the wave of blue light) bends more than the red component.

A beam of white light consists of components of all (or nearly all) the colors
in the visible spectrum with approximately uniform intensities. When you see
such a beam, you perceive white rather than the individual colors. In Fig. 33-194,
a beam of white light in air is incident on a glass surface. (Because the pages of
this book are white, a beam of white light is represented with a gray ray here.
Also, a beam of monochromatic light is generally represented with a red ray.)
Of the refracted light in Fig. 33-19a, only the red and blue components are shown.
Because the blue component is bent more than the red component, the angle of
refraction @y, for the blue component is smaller than the angle of refraction 6,
for the red component. (Remember, angles are measured relative to the normal.)
In Fig. 33-19b, a ray of white light in glass is incident on a glass—air interface.
Again, the blue component is bent more than the red component, but now 6), is
greater than @,,.

Normal
i Reflected
white light

Incident

white light t

  
    
 

      
  

4, 4,

Figure 33-19 Chromatic dispersion of white light. The blue
component is bent more than the red component. (a)
Passing from air to glass, the blue component ends up
with the smaller angle of refraction. (b) Passing from
glass to air, the blue component ends up with the greater
angle of refraction. Each dotted line represents the di-
rection in which the light would continue to travel if it
were not bent by the refraction.

(@)

az s
3 &

s
&

Index of refraction

1.45
300 400 500 600 700

Wavelength (nm)

800

Figure 33-18 The index of refraction asa
function of wavelength for fused quartz.
The graph indicates that a beam of short-
wavelength light, for which the index of
refraction is higher, is bent more upon
entering or leaving quartz than a beam of
long-wavelength light.

Normal

Incident
white light

Reflected
white light

  
     

Glass m
Air nm

“Refracted

Blue is always
light

bent more '
than red. (%)

 

993
