1. Diamagnetism is exhibited by all common materials but is so feeble that it is
masked if the material also exhibits magnetism of either of the other two
types. In diamagnetism, weak magnetic dipole moments are produced in the
atoms of the material when the material is placed in an external magnetic field
Buxts the combination of all those induced dipole moments gives the material
as a whole only a feeble net magnetic field. The dipole moments and thus their
net field disappear when B,y is removed. The term diamagnetic material
usually refers to materials that exhibit only diamagnetism.

2. Paramagnetism is exhibited by materials containing transition elements, rare
earth elements, and actinide elements (see Appendix G). Each atom of such a ma-
terial has a permanent resultant magnetic dipole moment, but the moments are
randomly oriented in the material and the material as a whole lacks a net mag-
netic field. However, an external magnetic field By. can partially align the atomic
magnetic dipole moments to give the material a net magnetic field. The alignment
and thus its field disappear when B, is removed. The term paramagnetic material
usually refers to materials that exhibit primarily paramagnetism.

3. Ferromagnetism is a property of iron, nickel, and certain other elements (and
of compounds and alloys of these elements). Some of the electrons in these
materials have their resultant magnetic dipole moments aligned, which pro-
duces regions with strong magnetic dipole moments. An external field B,., can
then align the magnetic moments of such regions, producing a strong magnetic
field for a sample of the material; the field partially persists when Bi is
removed. We usually use the terms ferromagnetic material and magnetic mate-
rial to refer to materials that exhibit primarily ferromagnetism.

The next three modules explore these three types of magnetism.

32-6 DIAMAGNETISM

Learning Objectives

32-6 DIAMAGNETISM

957

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

32.36 For a diamagnetic sample placed in an external 32.37 For a diamagnetic sample in a nonuniform magnetic
magnetic field, identify that the field produces a magnetic field, describe the force on the sample and the resulting
dipole moment in the sample, and identify the relative motion.

orientations of that moment and the field.

Key Ideas
@ Diamagnetic materials exhibit magnetism only when placed @ In anonuniform field, diamagnetic materials are repelled
in an external magnetic field; there they form magnetic from the region of greater magnetic field.

dipoles directed opposite the external field.

 

Diamagnetism

We cannot yet discuss the quantum physical explanation of diamagnetism, but we
can provide a classical explanation with the loop model of Figs. 32-11 and 32-12.
To begin, we assume that in an atom of a diamagnetic material each electron can
orbit only clockwise as in Fig. 32-12d or counterclockwise as in Fig. 32-12b. To
account for the lack of magnetism in the absence of an external magnetic field B..,,
we assume the atom lacks a net magnetic dipole moment. This implies that before
Bx is applied, the number of electrons orbiting in one direction is the same as that
orbiting in the opposite direction, with the result that the net upward magnetic di-
pole moment of the atom equals the net downward magnetic dipole moment.
