984

CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

To find an expression for the pressure, let us shine a beam of electromagnetic
radiation—light, for example— on an object for a time interval At. Further, let us
assume that the object is free to move and that the radiation is entirely absorbed
(taken up) by the object. This means that during the interval Ar, the object gains
an energy AU from the radiation. Maxwell showed that the object also gains
linear momentum. The magnitude Ap of the momentum change of the object is
related to the energy change AU by

Ap = Us (total absorption), (33-28)
@

where c is the speed of light. The direction of the momentum change of the object
is the direction of the incident (incoming) beam that the object absorbs.

Instead of being absorbed, the radiation can be reflected by the object; that
is, the radiation can be sent off in a new direction as if it bounced off the object. If
the radiation is entirely reflected back along its original path, the magnitude of
the momentum change of the object is twice that given above, or

2 AU
Ap = a (total reflection back along path). (33-29)

In the same way, an object undergoes twice as much momentum change when a
perfectly elastic tennis ball is bounced from it as when it is struck by a perfectly
inelastic ball (a lump of wet putty, say) of the same mass and velocity. If the inci-
dent radiation is partly absorbed and partly reflected, the momentum change of
the object is between AU/c and 2 AU/c.
Force. From Newton’s second law in its linear momentum form (Module 9-3),
we know that a change in momentum is related to a force by
Ap
F=—. 33-30,
Ar (33-30)
To find expressions for the force exerted by radiation in terms of the intensity J of
the radiation, we first note that intensity is
__ power _ energy/time
area area
Next, suppose that a flat surface of area A, perpendicular to the path of the radiation,
intercepts the radiation. In time interval At, the energy intercepted by area A is
AU =IA At. (33-31)

If the energy is completely absorbed, then Eq. 33-28 tells us that Ap = JA Adc,
and, from Eq. 33-30, the magnitude of the force on the area A is
F= iA (total absorption). (33-32)
c

Similarly, if the radiation is totally reflected back along its original path, Eq. 33-29
tells us that Ap = 2JA At/c and, from Eq. 33-30,

21A
F= ~~ (total reflection back along path). (33-33)

If the radiation is partly absorbed and partly reflected, the magnitude of the force
on area A is between the values of [A/c and 2IA/c.

Pressure. The force per unit area on an object due to radiation is the
radiation pressure p,. We can find it for the situations of Eqs. 33-32 and 33-33 by
dividing both sides of each equation by A. We obtain

I
P= (total absorption) (33-34)
