16.2 Regulatory proteins read DNA without unwinding it.

How to Read a Helix without
Unwinding It

It is the ability of certain proteins to bind to specific DNA
regulatory sequences that provides the basic tool of gene
regulation, the key ability that makes transcriptional con-
trol possible. To understand how cells control gene expres-
sion, it is first necessary to gain a clear picture of this mole-
cular recognition process.

Looking into the Major Groove

Molecular biologists used to think that the DNA helix had
to unwind before proteins could distinguish one DNA se-
quence from another; only in this way, they reasoned,
could regulatory proteins gain access to the hydrogen
bonds between base-pairs. We now know it is unnecessary
for the helix to unwind because proteins can bind to its
outside surface, where the edges of the base-pairs are ex-
posed. Careful inspection of a DNA molecule reveals two
helical grooves winding round the molecule, one deeper
than the other. Within the deeper groove, called the major

Major groove

a

N-H

&

Minor groove

  

Key:
(CO= Hydrogen bond donors
@= Hydrogen bond acceptors
QO= Hydrophobic methyl group

FIGURE 16.2

groove, the nucleotides’ hydrophobic methyl groups, hy-
drogen atoms, and hydrogen bond donors and acceptors
protrude. The pattern created by these chemical groups is
unique for each of the four possible base-pair arrange-
ments, providing a ready way for a protein nestled in the
groove to read the sequence of bases (figure 16.2).

DNA-Binding Motifs

Protein-DNA recognition is an area of active research; so
far, the structures of over 30 regulatory proteins have been
analyzed. Although each protein is unique in its fine details,
the part of the protein that actually binds to the DNA is
much less variable. Almost all of these proteins employ one
of a small set of structural, or DNA-binding, motifs, par-
ticular bends of the protein chain that permit it to interlock
with the major groove of the DNA helix.

 

Regulatory proteins identify specific sequences on the
DNA double helix, without unwinding it, by inserting
DNA-binding motifs into the major groove of the
double helix where the edges of the bases protrude.

 

Major groove

bos J H-N 1 \

o

Minor groove

 

Sugar

Ne

O= Hydrogen atoms unable to form hydrogen bonds

Reading the major groove of DNA. Looking down into the major groove of a DNA helix, we can see the edges of the bases protruding
into the groove. Each of the four possible base-pair arrangements (two are shown here) extends a unique set of chemical groups into the
groove, indicated in this diagram by differently colored balls. A regulatory protein can identify the base-pair arrangement by this

characteristic signature.

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression 315
