956 CHAPTER 32 MAXWELLS EQUATIONS; MAGNETISM OF MATTER

eh

 

 

aL (C) aL

Figure 32-12 (a) A loop model for an electron
orbiting in an atom while in a nonuniform
magnetic field B,,.. (b) Charge —e moves
counterclockwise; the associated conven-
tional current i is clockwise. (c) The mag-
netic forces dF on the left and right sides of
the loop, as seen from the plane of the loop.
The net force on the loop is upward. (d)
Charge —e now moves clockwise. (e) The
net force on the loop is now downward.

Eggs. 32-35 and 32-36, generalizing to a vector formulation, and indicating the
opposite directions of the vectors with a minus sign yield

eu

Hots = Zp, Low

which is Eq. 32-28. Thus, by “classical” (nonquantum) analysis we have ob-
tained the same result, in both magnitude and direction, given by quantum
physics. You might wonder, seeing as this derivation gives the correct result for
an electron within an atom, why the derivation is invalid for that situation. The
answer is that this line of reasoning yields other results that are contradicted by
experiments.

Loop Model in a Nonuniform Field

We continue to consider an electron orbit as a current loop, as we did in
Fig, 32-11. Now, however, we draw the loop in a nonuniform magnetic field B.., as
shown in Fig. 32-12a. (This field could be the diverging field near the north pole
of the magnet in Fig. 32-4.) We make this change to prepare for the next several
modules, in which we shall discuss the forces that act on magnetic materials when
the materials are placed in a nonuniform magnetic field. We shall discuss these
forces by assuming that the electron orbits in the materials are tiny current loops
like that in Fig. 32-12a.

Here we assume that the magnetic field vectors all around the electron’s
circular path have the same magnitude and form the same angle with the verti-
cal, as shown in Figs. 32-12b and d. We also assume that all the electrons in an
atom move either counterclockwise (Fig. 32-12b) or clockwise (Fig. 32-12d).
The associated conventional current i around the current loop and the orbital
magnetic dipole moment /4,,, produced by i are shown for each direction of
motion.

Figures 32-12c and e show diametrically opposite views of a length element
dL of the loop that has the same direction as i, as seen from the plane of the orbit.
Also shown are the field Bec and the resulting magnetic fo force dF on dL. Recall
that a current along an element dL ina magnetic field Bux experiences a mag-
netic force dF as given by Eq. 28-28:

dF = idl. X Bay. (32-37)

On the left side of Fig. 32-12c, Eq. 32-37 tells us that the force dF is directed
upward and rightward. On the right side, the force dF is just as large and is directed
upward and leftward. Because their angles are the same, the horizontal compo-
nents of these two forces cancel and the vertical components add. The same is true
at any other two symmetric points on the loop. Thus, the net force on the current
loop of Fig. 32-12b must be upward. The same reasoning leads to a downward net
force on the loop in Fig. 32-12d. We shall use these two results shortly when we ex-
amine the behavior of magnetic materials in nonuniform magnetic fields.

Magnetic Materials

Each electron in an atom has an orbital magnetic dipole moment and a spin
magnetic dipole moment that combine vectorially. The resultant of these two
vector quantities combines vectorially with similar resultants for all other elec-
trons in the atom, and the resultant for each atom combines with those for all
the other atoms in a sample of a material. If the combination of all these mag-
netic dipole moments produces a magnetic field, then the material is magnetic.
There are three general types of magnetism: diamagnetism, paramagnetism, and
ferromagnetism.
