The Homeodomain Motif

A special class of helix-turn-helix motifs plays a critical role
in development in a wide variety of eukaryotic organisms,
including humans. These motifs were discovered when re-
searchers began to characterize a set of homeotic mutations
in Drosophila (mutations that alter how the parts of the
body are assembled). They found that the mutant genes en-
coded regulatory proteins whose normal function was to
initiate key stages of development by binding to develop-
mental switch-point genes. More than 50 of these regula-
tory proteins have been analyzed, and they all contain a
nearly identical sequence of 60 amino acids, the homeo-
domain (figure 16.5). The center of the homeodomain is
occupied by a helix-turn-helix motif that binds to the
DNA. Surrounding this motif within the homeodomain is a
region that always presents the motif to the DNA in the
same way.

The Zinc Finger Motif

A different kind of DNA-binding motif uses one or more
zinc atoms to coordinate its binding to DNA. Called zine
fingers (figure 16.5c), these motifs exist in several forms. In
one form, a zinc atom links an o-helical segment to a
B sheet segment so that the helical segment fits into the
major groove of DNA. This sort of motif often occurs in
clusters, the B sheets spacing the helical segments so that
each helix contacts the major groove. The more zine fin-
gers in the cluster, the stronger the protein binds to the
DNA. In other forms of the zine finger motif, the B sheet’s
place is taken by another helical segment.

The Leucine Zipper Motif

In yet another DNA-binding motif, two different protein
subunits cooperate to create a single DNA-binding site.
This motif is created where a region on one of the subunits
containing several hydrophobic amino acids (usually
leucines) interacts with a similar region on the other sub-
unit. This interaction holds the two subunits together at
those regions, while the rest of the subunits are separated.
Called a leucine zipper, this structure has the shape of a
“Y,” with the two arms of the Y being helical regions that
fit into the major groove of DNA (figure 16.5d). Because
the two subunits can contribute quite different helical re-
gions to the motif, leucine zippers allow for great flexibility
in controlling gene expression.

 

Regulatory proteins bind to the edges of base-pairs
exposed in the major groove of DNA. Most contain
structural motifs such as the helix-turn-helix,
homeodomain, zinc finger, or leucine zipper.

 

  
  
    

(a) Helix-turn-helix motif

(b) Homeodomain

Zn

(0) Zinc finger

FIGURE 16.5
Major DNA-binding motifs.

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression

317
