32-5 MAGNETISM AND ELECTRONS

Magnetism and Electrons

Magnetic materials, from lodestones to tattoos, are magnetic because of the elec-
trons within them. We have already seen one way in which electrons can generate
a magnetic field: Send them through a wire as an electric current, and their motion
produces a magnetic field around the wire. There are two more ways, each involving
a magnetic dipole moment that produces a magnetic field in the surrounding space.
However, their explanation requires quantum physics that is beyond the physics
presented in this book, and so here we shall only outline the results.

Spin Magnetic Dipole Moment

An electron has an intrinsic angular momentum called its spin angular momen-
tum (or just spin) S; associated with this spin is an intrinsic spin magnetic
dipole moment /,. (By intrinsic, we mean that Sand Hs are basic characteristics
of an electron, like its mass and electric charge.) Vectors S and ji, are related by

é
H =-<, (32-22)

in which ¢ is the elementary charge (1.60 X 10~!? C) and mis the mass of an electron
(9.11 X 10-3! kg). The minus sign means that Z, and S are oppositely directed.
Spin S is different from the angular momenta of Chapter 11 in two respects:

1. Spin S itself cannot be measured. However, its component along any axis can
be measured.

2. A measured component of S is quantized, which is a general term that means
it is restricted to certain values. A measured component of S can have only
two values, which differ only in sign.

Let us assume that the component of spin S is measured along the z axis of a
coordinate system. Then the measured component S. can have only the two
values given by

S,

= Ma form, = +4, (32-23)

 

where m, is called the spin magnetic quantum number and h (= 6.63 X 10-™ J-s)
is the Planck constant, the ubiquitous constant of quantum physics. The signs
given in Eq. 32-23 have to do with the direction of S, along the z axis. When S, is
parallel to the z axis, m, is +4 and the electron is said to be spin up. When S- is
antiparallel to the z axis, m, is —} and the electron is said to be spin down.

The spin magnetic dipole moment 7, of an electron also cannot be measured;
only its component along any axis can be measured, and that component too is
quantized, with two possible values of the same magnitude but different signs. We
can relate the component yu; - measured on the z axis to S, by rewriting Eq. 32-22
in component form for the z axis as

 

Substituting for S, from Eq. 32-23 then gives us
eh

~ 4am”

 

 

Bs: (32-24)
where the plus and minus signs correspond to yu, , being parallel and antiparallel
to the z axis, respectively. The quantity on the right is the Bohr magneton pp:

eh

by = —— = 9.27 X 10-4 IT (Bohr magneton). (32-25)
4am

953
