922 CHAPTER 31 ELECTROMAGNETIC OSCILLATIONS AND ALTERNATING CURRENT

Figure 31-14 (a) A phasor representing the
alternating current in the driven RLC cir-
cuit of Fig. 31-7 at time ¢. The amplitude /,
the instantaneous value i,and the phase
(ct — #) are shown. (b) Phasors repre-
senting the voltages across the inductor,
resistor, and capacitor, oriented with re-
spect to the current phasor in (a).(c) A
phasor representing the alternating emf
that drives the current of (a).(d) The emf
phasor is equal to the vector sum of the
three voltage phasors of (b). Here, voltage
phasors V; and V¢ have been added vecto-
rially to yield their net phasor (V; — Vc).

The Current Amplitude

We start with Fig. 31-14a, which shows the phasor representing the current of
Eg. 31-56 at an arbitrary time ¢. The length of the phasor is the current ampli-
tude J, the projection of the phasor on the vertical axis is the current i at time t,and
the angle of rotation of the phasor is the phase w,t — ¢ of the current at time f.

Figure 31-14b shows the phasors representing the voltages across R, L,and C
at the same time ¢. Each phasor is oriented relative to the angle of rotation of
current phasor J in Fig. 31-14a, based on the information in Table 31-2:

Resistor: Here current and voltage are in phase; so the angle of rotation of volt-
age phasor Vp is the same as that of phasor J.

Capacitor: Here current leads voltage by 90°; so the angle of rotation of voltage
phasor V¢ is 90° less than that of phasor J.

Inductor: Here current lags voltage by 90°; so the angle of rotation of voltage
phasor v; is 90° greater than that of phasor J.

Figure 31-14b also shows the instantaneous voltages vp, vc, and v;, across R, C,
and L at time ¢; those voltages are the projections of the corresponding phasors
on the vertical axis of the figure.

Figure 31-14c shows the phasor representing the applied emf of Eq. 31-55.
The length of the phasor is the emf amplitude @,,,, the projection of the phasor
on the vertical axis is the emf € at time ¢, and the angle of rotation of the phasor is
the phase wgt of the emf at time ft.

From the loop rule we know that at any instant the sum of the voltages vp, Vc,
and v; is equal to the applied emf €:

E=vrtvet vy. (31-57)

Thus, at time ¢ the projection @ in Fig. 31-14c is equal to the algebraic sum of the
projections vp, Vc, and v;, in Fig. 31-14b. In fact, as the phasors rotate together, this
equality always holds. This means that phasor ©,,, in Fig. 31-14c must be equal to
the vector sum of the three voltage phasors Vp, Vc, and V, in Fig. 31-14).

That requirement is indicated in Fig. 31-14d, where phasor €,,, is drawn as the
sum of phasors Vp, V;, and V¢. Because phasors V; and V¢ have opposite direc-
tions in the figure, we simplify the vector sum by first combining V; and V¢ to
form the single phasor V; — Vc. Then we combine that single phasor with Vp to
find the net phasor. Again, the net phasor must coincide with phasor €,,,,as shown.

  

   
   
  

TE
oy
-= This is in This @ is the angle
This is ahead phase with /. € between / and the
of /by 90°. vy Vp fs~_| driving emf.
, / “ay
/ ope

@,t- 6

 

() This is behind
I by 90°, (a)
