1002 CHAPTER 33 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES

intensity J versus the inverse square r~? of that distance. The verti-
cal axis scale is set by J, = 200 W/m’, and the horizontal axis scale is
set byr,? = 8.0m ~~. Whatis the power of the source?

Module 33-3 Radiation Pressure

°19 ssm High-power lasers are used to compress a plasma (a gas
of charged particles) by radiation pressure. A laser generating
radiation pulses with peak power 1.5 X 10° MW is focused onto
1.0mm? of high-electron-density plasma. Find the pressure
exerted on the plasma if the plasma reflects all the light beams
directly back along their paths.

°20 Radiation from the Sun reaching Earth (just outside the at-
mosphere) has an intensity of 1.4 kW/m”. (a) Assuming that Earth
(and its atmosphere) behaves like a flat disk perpendicular to the
Sun’s rays and that all the incident energy is absorbed, calculate
the force on Earth due to radiation pressure. (b) For comparison,
calculate the force due to the Sun’s gravitational attraction.

21 ILW What is the radiation pressure 1.5 m away from a 500 W
lightbulb? Assume that the surface on which the pressure is
exerted faces the bulb and is perfectly absorbing and that the bulb
radiates uniformly in all directions.

+22 A black, totally absorbing piece of cardboard of area
A =2.0 cm’ intercepts light with an intensity of 10 W/m? from a
camera strobe light. What radiation pressure is produced on the
cardboard by the light?

**23 Someone plans to float a small, totally absorbing sphere
0.500 m above an isotropic point source of light, so that the upward
radiation force from the light matches the downward gravitational
force on the sphere. The sphere’s density is 19.0 g/cm}, and its
radius is 2.00 mm. (a) What power would be required of the light
source? (b) Even if such a source were made, why would the
support of the sphere be unstable?

+24 © It has been proposed that a spaceship might be pro-
pelled in the solar system by radiation pressure, using. a large sail
made of foil. How large must the surface area of the sail be if the
radiation force is to be equal in magnitude to the Sun’s gravita-
tional attraction? Assume that the mass of the ship + sail is
1500 kg, that the sail is perfectly reflecting, and that the sail is ori-
ented perpendicular to the Sun’s rays. See Appendix C for
needed data. (With a larger sail, the ship is continuously driven
away from the Sun.)

**25 SSM Prove, for a plane electromagnetic wave that is nor-
mally incident on a flat surface, that the radiation pressure on the
surface is equal to the energy density in the incident beam. (This
relation between pressure and energy density holds no matter
what fraction of the incident energy is reflected.)

26 In Fig. 33-38, a laser beam of power
4.60 W and diameter D = 2.60 mm is di-
rected upward at one circular face (of
diameter d <2.60mm) of a perfectly re-
flecting cylinder. The cylinder is levitated
because the upward radiation force
matches the downward gravitational force.
If the cylinder’s density is 1.20 g/cm’, what
is its height H?

27 SSM WWW A plane electromag-
netic wave, with wavelength 3.0 m, travels
in vacuum in the positive direction of an
x axis, The electric field, of amplitude 300 V/m, oscillates parallel to

-}—— » ——|

44

 

|
|

 

 

 

tt

Figure 33-38
Problem 26.

the y axis. What are the (a) frequency, (b) angular frequency, and
(c) angular wave number of the wave? (d) What is the amplitude of
the magnetic field component? (e) Parallel to which axis does the
magnetic field oscillate? (f) What is the time-averaged rate of
energy flow in watts per square meter associated with this wave?
The wave uniformly illuminates a surface of area 2.0 m’. If the
surface totally absorbs the wave, what are (g) the rate at which mo-
mentum is transferred to the surface and (h) the radiation pressure
on the surface?

28 The average intensity of the solar radiation that strikes nor-
mally on a surface just outside Earth’s atmosphere is 1.4 kW/m’.
(a) What radiation pressure p, is exerted on this surface, assuming
complete absorption? (b) For comparison, find the ratio of p, to
Earth’s sea-level atmospheric pressure, which is 1.0 X 10° Pa.

“29 SSM A small spaceship with a mass of only 1.5 X 10° kg
(including an astronaut) is drifting in outer space with negligible
gravitational forces acting on it. If the astronaut turns on a 10 kW
laser beam, what speed will the ship attain in 1.0 day because of the
momentum carried away by the beam?

30 A small laser emits light at power 5.00mW and
wavelength 633 nm. The laser beam is focused (narrowed) until
its diameter matches the 1266 nm diameter of a sphere placed in
its path. The sphere is perfectly absorbing and has density 5.00 x
103 kg/m. What are (a) the beam intensity at the sphere’s location,
(b) the radiation pressure on the sphere, (c) the magnitude of the
corresponding force, and (d) the magnitude of the acceleration
that force alone would give the sphere?

31 @ Asa comet swings around
the Sun, ice on the comet's surface
vaporizes, releasing trapped dust
particles and ions. The ions, because
they are electrically charged, are
forced by the electrically charged
solar wind into a straight ion tail
that points radially away from the
Sun (Fig, 33-39). The (electrically
neutral) dust particles are pushed
radially outward from the Sun by the radiation force on them from
sunlight. Assume that the dust particles are spherical, have density
3.5 X 105 kg/m, and are totally absorbing, (a) What radius must a
particle have in order to follow a straight path, like path 2 in the
figure? (b) If its radius is larger, does its path curve away from the
Sun (like path 1) or toward the Sun (like path 3)?

Module 33-4 Polarization
°32 In Fig. 33-40, initially unpolarized light is sent into a system
of three polarizing sheets whose polarizing directions make angles

   
 

Sec Dust tail

6
Comet
Ton tail

Figure 33-39 Problem 31.

 

Figure 33-40 Problems 32 and 33.
