Review & Summary

Diffraction When waves encounter an edge, an obstacle, or an
aperture the size of which is comparable to the wavelength of the
waves, those waves spread out as they travel and, as a result,
undergo interference. This is called diffraction.

Single-Slit Diffraction Waves passing through a long narrow
slit of width a produce, on a viewing screen, a single-slit diffraction
pattern that includes a central maximum and other maxima, sepa-
rated by minima located at angles @ to the central axis that satisfy

asin @=md, for m=1,2,3,... (minima). (36-3)

 

The intensity of the diffraction pattern at any given angle dis

sina

 

a
) + where a=" sin@ (36-5, 36-6)

KA = In
and J,, is the intensity at the center of the pattern.

Circular-Aperture Diffraction Diffraction by a circular
aperture or a lens with diameter d produces a central maximum
and concentric maxima and minima, with the first minimum at an
angle @ given by

(36-12)

A
sin @= 1.227 (first minimum —cireular aperture).

Rayleigh’s Criterion Rayleigh’s criterion suggests that two
objects are on the verge of resolvability if the central diffraction
maximum of one is at the first minimum of the other. Their angular
separation can then be no less than
A
Ox = 1.22] (Rayleigh’s criterion), (36-14)
in which d is the diameter of the aperture through which the light
passes.

<Questions

1 You are conducting a single-slit diffraction experiment
with light of wavelength A. What appears, on a distant viewing
screen, at a point at which the top and bottom rays through
the slit have a path length difference equal to (a) 5A and
(b) 45a?

2 Ina single-slit diffraction experiment, the top and bottom rays
through the slit arrive at a certain point on the viewing screen with
a path length difference of 4.0 wavelengths. In a phasor representa-
tion like those in Fig 36-7, how many overlapping circles does the
chain of phasors make? B

3 For three experiments, Fig. 36-30 gives
the parameter 8 of Eq. 36-20 versus angle
@ for two-slit interference using light of
wavelength 500 nm. The slit separations
in the three experiments differ. Rank the
experiments according to (a) the slit sep-
arations and (b) the total number of two- 9 W/2
slit interference maxima in the pattern, 9 (rad)

greatest first. Figure 36-30 Question 3.

 

QUESTIONS 1107

Double-Slit Diffraction Waves passing through two slits,
each of width a, whose centers are a distance d apart, display dif-
fraction patterns whose intensity / at angle Ais

1(0) = (cos? B) (22) (double slit), (36-19)
a

with 8 = (md /A) sin @ and was for single-slit diffraction.

Diffraction Gratings A diffraction grating is a series of “slits”
used to separate an incident wave into its component wavelengths
by separating and displaying their diffraction maxima. Diffraction
by N (multiple) slits results in maxima (lines) at angles @ such that

 

dsin@= mA, — form=0,1,2,... (maxima), (36-25)
with the half-widths of the lines given by
Ow = Taos yg (halfowidths). (36-28)
The dispersion D and resolving power R are given by
A@ m
D=\ > Tood (36-29, 36-30)

and

   

—"E = Nm. (36-31, 36-32)
X-Ray Diffraction The regular array of atoms in a crystal is a
three-dimensional diffraction grating for short-wavelength waves
such as x rays. For analysis purposes, the atoms can be visualized as
being arranged in planes with characteristic interplanar spacing d.
Diffraction maxima (due to constructive interference) occur if the
incident direction of the wave, measured from the surfaces of these
planes, and the wavelength A of the radiation satisfy Bragg’s law:

2d sin @=mA, for m= 1,2,3,...

(36-34)

(Bragg’s law).

 

4. For three experiments, Fig. 36-31 gives &
aversus angle @in one-slit diffraction using
light of wavelength 500 nm. Rank the ex-
periments according to (a) the slit widths
and (b) the total number of diffraction
minima in the pattern, greatest first.

 

5 Figure 36-32 shows four choices for the
rectangular opening of a source of either
sound waves or light waves. The sides have
lengths of either L or 2L, with L being 3.0
times the wavelength of the waves. Rank
the openings according to the extent of (a) left-right spreading and
(b) up-down spreading of the waves due to diffraction, greatest first.

0 n/2
6 (rad)

Figure 36-31 Question 4.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

() (2) (3) (4)
Figure 36-32 Question 5.
