A Vocabulary of
Gene Expression

   

activator A regulatory protein that pro-
motes gene transcription by binding to
DNA sequences upstream of a promoter.
Activator binding stimulates RNA poly-
merase activity.

anticodon The three-nucleotide sequence
on one end of a tRNA molecule that is
complementary to and base-pairs with an
amino acid-specifying codon in mRNA.
codon The basic unit of the genetic code;
a sequence of three adjacent nucleotides in
DNA or mRNA that codes for one amino
acid or for polypeptide termination.

exon A segment of eukaryotic DNA that
is both transcribed into mRNA and trans-
lated into protein. Exons are typically scat-
tered within much longer stretches of non-
translated intron sequences.

intron A segment of eukaryotic DNA that
is transcribed into mRNA but removed be-
fore translation.

nonsense codon A codon (UAA, UAG, or
UGA) for which there is no tRNA with
a complementary andicodon; a chain-
terminating codon often called a “stop” codon.

operator A site of negative gene regula-
tion; a sequence of nucleotides near or
within the promoter that is recognized by a
repressor. Binding of the repressor to the
operator prevents the functional binding of
RNA polymerase to the promoter and so
blocks transcription.

operon A cluster of functionally related
genes transcribed into a single mRNA mol-
ecule. A common mode of gene regulation
in prokaryotes, it is rare in eukaryotes other
than fungi.

promoter A site upstream from a gene to
which RNA polymerase attaches to initiate
transcription.

repressor A protein that regulates tran-
scription by binding to the operator and so
preventing RNA polymerase from initiating
transcription from the promoter.

RNA polymerase The enzyme that tran-
scribes DNA into RNA.

transcription The RNA polymerase-
catalyzed assembly of an RNA molecule
complementary to a strand of DNA.

translation The assembly of a polypep-

Selectively Degrading mRNA Transcripts

Another aspect that affects gene expression is the stability
of mRNA transcripts in the cell cytoplasm (figure 16.21).
Unlike bacterial mRNA transcripts, which typically have a
half-life of about 3 minutes, eukaryotic mRNA transcripts
are very stable. For example, B-globin gene transcripts have
a half-life of over 10 hours, an eternity in the fast-moving
metabolic life of a cell. The transcripts encoding regulatory
proteins and growth factors, however, are usually much less
stable, with half-lives of less than 1 hour. What makes
these particular transcripts so unstable? In many cases, they
contain specific sequences near their 3’ ends that make
them attractive targets for enzymes that degrade mRNA. A
sequence of A and U nucleotides near the 3’ poly-A tail of a
transcript promotes removal of the tail, which destabilizes
the mRNA. Histone transcripts, for example, have a half-
life of about 1 hour in cells that are actively synthesizing
DNA; at other times during the cell cycle, the poly-A tail is
lost and the transcripts are degraded within minutes. Other
mRNA transcripts contain sequences near their 3’ ends that
are recognition sites for endonucleases, which causes these
transcripts to be digested quickly. The short half-lives of
the mRNA transcripts of many regulatory genes are critical
to the function of those genes, as they enable the levels of
regulatory proteins in the cell to be altered rapidly.

328 = =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

tide on the ribosomes, using mRNA to di-
rect the sequence of amino acids.

An Example of a Complex Gene Control System

Sunlight is an important gene-controlling signal for plants,
from germination to seed formation. Plants must regulate
their genes according to the presence of sunlight, the qual-
ity of the light source, the time of day, and many other en-
vironmental signals. The combination of these responses
culminate in the way the genes are regulated, such as the
genes cab (a chlorophyll-binding photosynthetic protein)
and rbcS (a subunit of a carbon-fixing enzyme). For in-
stance, photosynthesis-related genes tend to express early
in the day, to carry out photosynthesis, and begin to shut
down later in the day. Expression levels may also be regu-
lated according to lighting conditions, such as cloudy days
versus sunny days. When darkness arrives, the transcripts
must be degraded in preparation for the next day. This is
an example of how complex a gene control system can be,
and scientists are just beginning to understand parts of such
a complicated system.

 

Although less common than transcriptional control,
posttranscriptional control of gene expression occurs in
eukaryotes via RNA splicing, translation repression, and
selective degradation of mRNA transcripts.

 
