1086 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

36-2 INTENSITY IN SINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

36.08 Divide a thin slit into multiple zones of equal width identifying the corresponding part of the diffraction pattern.
and write an expression for the phase difference of the 36.10 Describe a diffraction pattern in terms of the net electric
wavelets from adjacent zones in terms of the angle @toa field at points in the pattern.
point on the viewing screen. 36.11 Evaluate a, the convenient connection between angle @to

36.09 For single-slit diffraction, draw phasor diagrams for a point in a diffraction pattern and the intensity / at that point.
the central maximum and several of the minima and maxima off 36.12 Fora given point in a diffraction pattern, at a given
to one side, indicating the phase difference between adjacent angle, calculate the intensity J in terms of the intensity
phasors, explaining how the net electric field is calculated, and I, at the center of the pattern.

Key Idea

 

@ The intensity of the diffraction pattern at any given angle @is_—__ where J,,, is the intensity at the center of the pattern and

sin a \?
(0) = (22) :

mm.
=— sin 6.
on *

Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction, Qualitatively

In Module 36-1 we saw how to find the positions of the minima and the maxima
in a single-slit diffraction pattern. Now we turn to a more general problem: find
an expression for the intensity / of the pattern as a function of 6, the angular posi-
tion of a point on a viewing screen.

To do this, we divide the slit of Fig. 36-4 into N zones of equal widths Ax small
enough that we can assume each zone acts as a source of Huygens wavelets. We
wish to superimpose the wavelets arriving at an arbitrary point P on the viewing
screen, at angle @ to the central axis, so that we can determine the amplitude E, of
the electric component of the resultant wave at P.The intensity of the light at P is
then proportional to the square of that amplitude.

To find Ey, we need the phase relationships among the arriving wavelets. The
point here is that in general they have different phases because they travel different
distances to reach P. The phase difference between wavelets from adjacent zones

is given by
phase )_ (27) (path length
difference) \ difference /*
For point P at angle 6, the path length difference between wavelets from adjacent

zones is Ax sin @.Thus, we can write the phase difference A¢ between wavelets from
adjacent zones as

Ag= (2) (Ax sin 6). (36-4)

‘We assume that the wavelets arriving at P all have the same amplitude AF.
To find the amplitude £, of the resultant wave at P, we add the amplitudes AE via
phasors. To do this, we construct a diagram of N phasors, one corresponding to
the wavelet from each zone in the slit.

Central Maximum. For point Po at @=0 on the central axis of Fig. 36-4,
Eg. 36-4 tells us that the phase difference A¢ between the wavelets is zero; that is,
the wavelets all arrive in phase. Figure 36-7a is the corresponding phasor dia-
gram; adjacent phasors represent wavelets from adjacent zones and are arranged
head to tail. Because there is zero phase difference between the wavelets, there is
zero angle between each pair of adjacent phasors. The amplitude E, of the net
