36-3 DIFFRACTION BY A CIRCULAR APERTURE 1091

 

Key Ideas

@ Diffraction by a circular aperture or alens with verge of resolvability if the central diffraction maximum of one
diameter d produces a central maximum and concentric is at the first minimum of the other. Their angular separation
maxima and minima, with the first minimum at an angle 0 can then be no less than

given by

A Og = 1.22 a (Rayleigh’s criterion),
sin 6 = 1.22 — (first minimum—circular aperture).

d in which d is the diameter of the aperture through which the
@ Rayleigh’s criterion suggests that two objects are on the light passes.

 

Diffraction by a Circular Aperture

Here we consider diffraction by a circular aperture — that is, a circular opening,
such as a circular lens, through which light can pass. Figure 36-10 shows the image
formed by light from a laser that was directed onto a circular aperture with a very
small diameter. This image is not a point, as geometrical optics would suggest, but
a circular disk surrounded by several progressively fainter secondary rings.
Comparison with Fig. 36-1 leaves little doubt that we are dealing with a diffrac-
tion phenomenon. Here, however, the aperture is a circle of diameter d rather
than a rectangular slit.

The (complex) analysis of such patterns shows that the first minimum for the Courtesy Jearl Walker
diffraction pattern of a circular aperture of diameter d is located by Figure 36-10 The diffraction pattern of a cir-
cular aperture. Note the central maximum,
and the circular secondary maxima. The
figure has been overexposed to bring out
these secondary maxima, which are much
The angle @ here is the angle from the central axis to any point on that (circular) _less intense than the central maximum.
minimum. Compare this with Eq. 36-1,

 

a
sin 9 = 1.22 ri (first minimum—circular aperture). (36-12)

A
sin 0 = a (first minimum—single slit), (36-13)

which locates the first minimum for a long narrow slit of width a. The main differ-
ence is the factor 1.22, which enters because of the circular shape of the aperture.

Resolvability

The fact that lens images are diffraction patterns is important when we wish to
resolve (distinguish) two distant point objects whose angular separation is small.
Figure 36-11 shows, in three different cases, the visual appearance and corre-
sponding intensity pattern for two distant point objects (stars, say) with small
sentations of the image intensities. In

(a) the angular separation of the

sources is too small for them to be
distinguished, in (b) they can be mar-
ginally distinguished, and in (c) they are
clearly distinguished. Rayleigh’s crite-
rion is satisfied in (b), with the central
maximum of one diffraction pattern
coinciding with the first minimum of

the other. (a) () (d

 

Figure 36-11 At the top, the images of
two point sources (stars) formed by a
converging lens. At the bottom, repre-

g
5
3
3
