1088

CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

tude Ey is now zero, which means that the intensity of the light is also zero. We have
reached the first minimum, or dark fringe, in the diffraction pattern. The first and last
phasors now have a phase difference of 27rrad, which means that the path length dif-
ference between the top and bottom rays through the slit equals one wavelength.
Recall that this is the condition we determined for the first diffraction minimum.

First Side Maximum. As we continue to increase @, the angle Ad between
adjacent phasors continues to increase, the chain of phasors begins to wrap back
on itself, and the resulting coil begins to shrink. Amplitude E, now increases until
it reaches a maximum value in the arrangement shown in Fig. 36-7d.This arrange-
ment corresponds to the first side maximum in the diffraction pattern.

Second Minimum. If we increase 6 a bit more, the resulting shrinkage of
the coil decreases Ey, which means that the intensity also decreases. When 0 is
increased enough, the head of the last phasor again meets the tail of the first pha-
sor. We have then reached the second minimum.

We could continue this qualitative method of determining the maxima and
minima of the diffraction pattern but, instead, we shall now turn to a quantitative
method.

VI Checkpoint 2

The figures represent, in smoother form (with more phasors)
than Fig. 36-7, the phasor diagrams for two points of a diffraction
pattern that are on opposite sides ofa certain diffraction maxi-
mum. (a) Which maximumis it? (b) What is the approximate
(@ ®

value of m (in Eq. 36-3) that corresponds to this maximum?

Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction, Quantitatively

Equation 36-3 tells us how to locate the minima of the single-slit diffraction pat-
tern on screen C of Fig. 36-4 as a function of the angle @ in that figure. Here we
wish to derive an expression for the intensity /(0) of the pattern as a function of 6.
We state, and shall prove below, that the intensity is given by

 

 

10) = tal sme y. 655)

where a=sh= = sin 6. (36-6)

The symbol a is just a convenient connection between the angle @ that locates a
point on the viewing screen and the light intensity /(@) at that point.The intensity
I, is the greatest value of the intensities /(@) in the pattern and occurs at the cen-
tral maximum (where @ = 0), and ¢ is the phase difference (in radians) between
the top and bottom rays from the slit of width a.
Study of Eq. 36-5 shows that intensity minima will occur where
a=mn7, form =1,2,3,.... (36-7)

If we put this result into Eq. 36-6, we find
ma =" sin 8 form = 1,2,3,...,

or asin @=ma, for m= 1,2,3,...  (minima—dark fringes), (36-8)

which is exactly Eq. 36-3, the expression that we derived earlier for the location
of the minima.
