1046 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

132 Ammillipede sits 1.0 m in front of the nearest part of the surface
of a shiny sphere of diameter 0.70 m. (a) How far from the surface
does the millipede’s image appear? (b) If the millipede’s height is 2.0
mm, what is the image height? (c) Is the image inverted?

133 (a) Show that if the object O in Fig. 34-19c is moved from
focal point F; toward the observer's eye, the image moves in from
infinity and the angle 6’ (and thus the angular magnification m,)
increases. (b) If you continue this process, where is the image
when m, has its maximum usable value? (You can then still in-
crease my, but the image will no longer be clear.) (c) Show that
the maximum usable value of m, is 1 + (25 cm)/f.(d) Show that in
this situation the angular magnification is equal to the lateral
magnification.

134 Isaac Newton, having convinced himself (erroneously as it
turned out) that chromatic aberration
is an inherent property of refracting
telescopes, invented the reflecting tele-
scope, shown schematically in Fig, 34-59.
He presented his second model of this
telescope, with a magnifying power of
38, to the Royal Society (of London),
which still has it. In Fig. 34-59 incident
light falls, closely parallel to the tele-
scope axis, on the objective mirror M.
After reflection from small mirror M‘
(the figure is not to scale), the rays
form a real, inverted image in the focal

   
 

Eyepiece

Objective
plane (the plane perpendicular to mirror
the line of sight, at focal point F). Figure 34-59

This image is then viewed through an
eyepiece. (a) Show that the angular
magnification m, for the device is given by Eq. 34-15:

My = —forlfeys
where f,, is the focal length of the objective mirror and f,, is that of
the eyepiece. (b) The 200 in. mirror in the reflecting telescope at
Mt. Palomar in California has a focal length of 16.8 m. Estimate the
size of the image formed by this mirror when the object is a meter
stick 2.0 km away. Assume parallel incident rays. (c) The mirror of
a different reflecting astronomical telescope has an effective radius
of curvature of 10 m (“effective” because such mirrors are ground
toa parabolic rather than a spherical shape, to eliminate spherical
aberration defects). To give an angular magnification of 200, what
must be the focal length of the eyepiece?

Problem 134.

135 A narrow beam of parallel light rays is incident on a glass
sphere from the left, directed toward the center of the sphere. (The

sphere is a lens but certainly not a thin lens.) Approximate the an-
gle of incidence of the rays as 0°, and assume that the index of
refraction of the glass is n < 2.0. (a) In terms of n and the sphere
radius r, what is the distance between the image produced by the
sphere and the right side of the sphere? (b) Is the image to the left
or right of that side? (Hint: Apply Eq. 34-8 to locate the image that
is produced by refraction at the left side of the sphere; then use
that image as the object for refraction at the right side of the
sphere to locate the final image. In the second refraction, is the
object distance p positive or negative?)

136 <6 A corner reflector, much used in optical, microwave,
and other applications, consists of three plane mirrors fastened
together to form the corner of a cube. Show that after three reflec-
tions, an incident ray is returned with its direction exactly reversed.

137 A cheese enchilada is 4.00 cm in front of a converging lens.
The magnification of the enchilada is —2.00. What is the focal
length of the lens?

138 A grasshopper hops to a point on the central axis of a spheri-
cal mirror. The absolute magnitude of the mirror’s focal length is
40.0 cm, and the lateral magnification of the image produced by
the mirror is +0.200. (a) Is the mirror convex or concave? (b) How
far from the mirror is the grasshopper?

139 In Fig. 34-60, a sand grain is
3.00 cm from thin lens 1,on the central
axis through the two symmetric lenses. 2

The distance between focal point and

Jens is 4.00 om for both lenses: the Ra4®%80 Problem 139.
lenses are separated by 8.00 cm. (a) What is the distance between
lens 2 and the image it produces of the sand grain? Is that image
(b) to the left or right of lens 2, (c) real or virtual, and (d) inverted
relative to the sand grain or not inverted?

 

140 Suppose the farthest distance a person can see without vi-
sual aid is 50 cm. (a) What is the focal length of the corrective lens
that will allow the person to see very far away? (b) Is the lens con-
verging or diverging? (c) The power P of a lens (in diopters) is
equal to 1/f, where fis in meters. What is P for the lens?

141 A simple magnifier of focal length fis placed near the eye of
someone whose near point P,, is 25 cm. An object is positioned so
that its image in the magnifier appears at P,. (a) What is the angu-
lar magnification of the magnifier? (b) What is the angular magni-
fication if the object is moved so that its image appears at infinity?
For f = 10 cm, evaluate the angular magnifications of (c) the situa-
tion in (a) and (d) the situation in (b). (Viewing an image at P,,
requires effort by muscles in the eye, whereas viewing an image at
infinity requires no such effort for many people.)
