1098 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

36-5 DIFFRACTION GRATINGS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

36.22 Describe a diffraction grating and sketch the interfer-
ence pattern it produces in monochromatic light.

36.23 Distinguish the interference patterns of a diffraction
grating and a double-slit arrangement.

36.24 Identify the terms line and order number.

36.25 For a diffraction grating, relate order number m
to the path length difference of rays that give a bright
fringe.

36.26 For a diffraction grating, relate the slit separation d, the
angle @to a bright fringe in the pattern, the order number

Key Idea

e A diffraction grating is a series of “slits” used to separate

an incident wave into its component wavelengths by separat-
ing and displaying their diffraction maxima. Diffraction by N

m of that fringe, and the wavelength A of the light.

36.27 Identify the reason why there is a maximum order
number for a given diffraction grating.

36.28 Explain the derivation of the equation for a line's
half-width in a diffraction-grating pattern.

36.29 Calculate the half-width of a line ata given angle in a
diffraction-grating pattern.

36.30 Explain the advantage of increasing the number of slits
in a diffraction grating.

36.31 Explain how a grating spectroscope works.

@ Aline's half-width is the angle from its center to the point
where it disappears into the darkness and is given by

(multiple) slits results in maxima (lines) at angles @ such that

A
AO bye = Ndcosg (albwiath).

(maxima).

 

dsin@=mA, form =0,1,2,...
J P
)
)
)
a
!
lA c

Figure 36-18 An idealized diffraction grating,
consisting of only five rulings, that produces
an interference pattern on a distant viewing
screen C,

Diffraction Gratings

One of the most useful tools in the study of light and of objects that emit and
absorb light is the diffraction grating. This device is somewhat like the double-slit
arrangement of Fig. 35-10 but has a much greater number N of slits, often called
rulings, perhaps as many as several thousand per millimeter. An idealized grating
consisting of only five slits is represented in Fig. 36-18. When monochromatic
light is sent through the slits, it forms narrow interference fringes that can be
analyzed to determine the wavelength of the light. (Diffraction gratings can also
be opaque surfaces with narrow parallel grooves arranged like the slits in
Fig. 36-18. Light then scatters back from the grooves to form interference fringes
rather than being transmitted through open slits.)

Pattern. With monochromatic light incident on a diffraction grating, if we
gradually increase the number of slits from two to a large number N, the intensity
plot changes from the typical double-slit plot of Fig. 36-15c to a much more compli-
cated one and then eventually to a simple graph like that shown in Fig. 36-194. The
pattern you would see on a viewing screen using monochromatic red light from,

Intensity
I

m=0

Figure 36-19 (a) The intensity plot produced
by a diffraction grating with a great many
rulings consists of narrow peaks, here labeled
with their order numbers m.(b) The
corresponding bright fringes seen on the
screen are called lines and are here also 3 2 1 m=0 1 2 3
labeled with order numbers m. io)

 
