1032

CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

Eyepiece
Objective

   
 
 
   
 

=

Parallel
rays.

 

r ote
e@8""" To distant virtual image

bho = fo = § 1 Sey =|

Figure 34-20 A thin-lens representation of a compound microscope (not to scale). The
objective produces a real image J of object O just inside the focal point F', of the eye-
piece. Image / then acts as an object for the eyepiece, which produces a virtual final
image J’ that is seen by the observer. The objective has focal length f,; the eyepiece has
focal length f.y; and s is the tube length.

From Fig. 34-19, assuming that O is at the focal point of the lens, and approxi-
mating tan @as @and tan 6’ as 6’ for small angles, we have

@=h/2cm and @' ~hif
We then find that

25cm
My ~ f

 

(simple magnifier). (34-12)

Compound Microscope

Figure 34-20 shows a thin-lens version of a compound microscope. The instru-
ment consists of an objective (the front lens) of focal length f,,, and an eyepiece
(the lens near the eye) of focal length f.y. It is used for viewing small objects that
are very close to the objective.

The object O to be viewed is placed just outside the first focal point F, of the
objective, close enough to F, that we can approximate its distance p from the lens
as being f,». The separation between the lenses is then adjusted so that the
enlarged, inverted, real image J produced by the objective is located just inside
the first focal point F', of the eyepiece. The tube length s shown in Fig. 34-20 is
actually large relative to f,,, and therefore we can approximate the distance i
between the objective and the image J as being lengths.

From Eq. 34-6, and using our approximations for p and i, we can write the
lateral magnification produced by the objective as

(34-13)

 

Because the image J is located just inside the focal point F{ of the eyepiece, the
eyepiece acts as a simple magnifying lens, and an observer sees a final (virtual,
inverted) image /' through it. The overall magnification of the instrument is
the product of the lateral magnification m produced by the objective, given by
Eg. 34-13, and the angular magnification m, produced by the eyepiece, given
by Eq. 34-12; that is,

s 25cm

‘fon hey

 

M=mm,= — (microscope). (34-14)

Refracting Telescope

Telescopes come in a variety of forms. The form we describe here is the simple
refracting telescope that consists of an objective and an eyepiece; both are repre-
sented in Fig. 34-21 with simple lenses, although in practice, as is also true for
most microscopes, each lens is actually a compound lens system.
