To find the new phase difference between the waves, we subtract the smaller of
N, and N, from the larger. Assuming m > m, we obtain

Ln Ln L

Ny - N= =~ - > = im n). (35-9)

Suppose Eq. 35-9 tells us that the waves now have a phase difference of
45.6 wavelengths. That is equivalent to taking the initially in-phase waves and
shifting one of them by 45.6 wavelengths. However, a shift of an integer number
of wavelengths (such as 45) would put the waves back in phase; so it is only the
decimal fraction (here, 0.6) that is important. A phase difference of 45.6 wave-
lengths is equivalent to an effective phase difference of 0.6 wavelength.

A phase difference of 0.5 wavelength puts two waves exactly out of phase. If
the waves had equal amplitudes and were to reach some common point, they
would then undergo fully destructive interference, producing darkness at that
point. With a phase difference of 0.0 or 1.0 wavelength, they would, instead,
undergo fully constructive interference, resulting in brightness at the common
point. Our phase difference of 0.6 wavelength is an intermediate situation but
closer to fully destructive interference, and the waves would produce a dimly
illuminated common point.

We can also express phase difference in terms of radians and degrees, as we
have done already. A phase difference of one wavelength is equivalent to phase
differences of 27rad and 360°.

Path Length Difference. As we discussed with sound waves in Module 17-
3, two waves that begin with some initial phase difference can end up with a dif-
ferent phase difference if they travel through paths with different lengths before
coming back together. The key for the waves (whatever their type might be) is
the path length difference AL, or more to the point, how AL compares to the
wavelength A of the waves. From Egs. 17-23 and 17-24, we know that, for light
waves, fully constructive interference (maximum brightness) occurs when

AL
oa =0,1,2,...  (fullyconstructive interference), (35-10)

and that fully destructive interference (darkness) occurs when

ae = 0.5, 1.5,2.5,... (fully destructive interference). (35-11)

Intermediate values correspond to intermediate interference and thus also
illumination.

Rainbows and Optical Interference

In Module 33-5, we discussed how the colors of sunlight are separated into a
rainbow when sunlight travels through falling raindrops. We dealt with a simpli-
fied situation in which a single ray of white light entered a drop. Actually, light
waves pass into a drop along the entire side that faces the Sun. Here we cannot
discuss the details of how these waves travel through the drop and then emerge,
but we can see that different parts of an incoming wave will travel different
paths within the drop. That means waves will emerge from the drop with differ-
ent phases. Thus, we can see that at some angles the emerging light will be in
phase and give constructive interference. The rainbow is the result of such con-
structive interference. For example, the red of the rainbow appears because
waves of red light emerge in phase from each raindrop in the direction in which
you see that part of the rainbow. The light waves that emerge in other direc-
tions from each raindrop have a range of different phases because they take a

35-1 LIGHT AS A WAVE

1051
