The Effect of Chromosome
Structure on Gene Regulation

The way DNA is packaged into chromosomes can have a
profound effect on gene expression. As we saw in chapter 11,
the DNA of eukaryotes is packaged in a highly compact
form that enables it to fit into the cell nucleus. DNA is
wrapped tightly around histone proteins to form nucleo-
somes (figure 16.17) and then the strand of nucleosomes is
twisted into 30-nm filaments.

Promoter Blocking by Nucleosomes

Intensive study of eukaryotic chromosomes has shown
that histones positioned over promoters block the assem-
bly of transcription factor complexes. Therefore, tran-
scription factors appear unable to bind to a promoter
packaged in a nucleosome. In this way, nucleosomes may
prevent continuous transcription initiation. On the other
hand, nucleosomes do not inhibit activators and RNA
polymerase. The regulatory domains of activators at-
tached to enhancers apparently are able to displace the
histones that block a promoter. In fact, this displacement
of histones and the binding of activator to promoter are
required for the assembly of the transcription factor com-
plex. Once transcription has begun, RNA polymerase
seems to push the histones aside as it traverses the nucle-
osome.

DNA Methylation

Chemical methylation of the DNA was once thought to
play a major role in gene regulation in vertebrate cells.
The addition of a methyl group to cytosine creates
5-methylcytosine but has no effect on base-pairing with
guanine (figure 16.18), just as the addition of a methyl
group to uracil produces thymine without affecting base-
pairing with adenine. Many inactive mammalian genes
are methylated, and it was tempting to conclude that
methylation caused the inactivation. However, methyla-
tion is now viewed as having a less direct role, blocking
accidental transcription of “turned-off” genes. Verte-
brate cells apparently possess a protein that binds to clus-
ters of 5-methylcytosine, preventing transcriptional acti-
vators from gaining access to the DNA. DNA
methylation in vertebrates thus ensures that once a gene
is turned off, it stays off.

 

Transcriptional control of gene expression occurs in
eukaryotes despite the tight packaging of DNA into
nucleosomes.

 

 

    

Core complex
of histones

(b)

FIGURE 16.17

Nucleosomes. (a) In the electron micrograph, the individual
nucleosomes have diameters of about 10 nm. (J) In the diagram of
a nucleosome, the DNA double helix is wound around a core
complex of eight histones; one additional histone binds to the
outside of the nucleosome, exterior to the DNA.

NHe MHe
nZOXc—H yao
07 de i ce H Methylation Z by J -H
n 4
Cytosine 5-methylcytosine
FIGURE 16.18

DNA methylation. Cytosine is methylated, creating
5-methyleytosine. Because the methyi group is positioned to the
side, it does not interfere with the hydrogen bonds of a GC base-
pair.

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression 325
