1036 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

Adding Eqs. 34-22 and 34-25 leads to

 

 

Leta -n(h-)

Finally, calling the original object distance simply p and the final image distance

simply i leads to

(34-26)

i r r"

11 @-(L-4),

which, with a small change in notation, is Eqs. 34-9 and 34-10.

Review & Summary

Real and Virtual Images An image is a reproduction of an
object via light. If the image can form on a surface, it is a real image
and can exist even if no observer is present. If the image requires
the visual system of an observer, it is a virtual image.

Image Formation Spherical mirrors, spherical refracting sur-
faces, and thin lenses can form images of a source of light—the
object —by redirecting rays emerging from the source. The image
occurs where the redirected rays cross (forming a real image) or
where backward extensions of those rays cross (forming a virtual
image). If the rays are sufficiently close to the central axis through
the spherical mirror, refracting surface, or thin lens, we have the
following relations between the object distance p (which is posi-
tive) and the image distance i (which is positive for real images and
negative for virtual images):

 

1. Spherical Mirror:

== (34-4, 34-3)

 

where fis the mirror’s focal length and ris its radius of curvatur
A plane mirror is a special case for which r > %, so that p = —i.
Real images form on the side of a mirror where the object is
located, and virtual images form on the opposite side.

2. Spherical Refracting Surface:

 

 

mmm
my Rlm

aan (34-8)

(single surface),
where n; is the index of refraction of the material where the object
is located, ny is the index of refraction of the material on the other
side of the refracting surface, and r is the radius of curvature of the
surface. When the object faces a convex refracting surface, the ra-
dius ris positive. When it faces a concave surface, is negative. Real
images form on the side of a refracting surface that is opposite the
object, and virtual images form on the same side as the object.

3. Thin Lens:

1,1 1 (: 1)

—+>=—==(n-1)(—-—},
f ‘ Gi n

where f is the lens’s focal length, n is the index of refraction of the
lens material, and r; and r, are the radii of curvature of the two sides
of the lens, which are spherical surfaces. A convex lens surface that

 

(34-9, 34-10)

 

faces the object has a positive radius of curvature; a concave lens
surface that faces the object has a negative radius of curvature. Real
images form on the side of a lens that is opposite the object, and vir-
tual images form on the same side as the object.

Lateral Magnification § The Jateral magnification m produced
bya spherical mirror or a thin lens is

 

i
m=-+, 34-6)
> (34-6)
The magnitude of m is given by
h
= “5
iml= > (34-5)

where h and h' are the heights (measured perpendicular to the
central axis) of the object and image, respectively.

Optical Instruments Three optical instruments that extend
human vision are:

1. The simple magnifying lens, which produces an angular magni-
fication mg given by

25em
f

where f is the focal length of the magnifying lens. The distance

of 25 cm is a traditionally chosen value that is a bit more than
the typical near point for someone 20 years old.

(34-12)

my =

2. The compound microscope, which produces an overall magnifi-

cation M given by

s Som
fos °

where m is the lateral magnification produced by the objective,
mz, is the angular magnification produced by the eyepiece, s is
the tube length, and f,, and f., are the focal lengths of the objec-
tive and eyepiece, respectively.

M=mm,=— (34-14)

  

 

3. The refracting telescope, which produces an angular magnifica-
tion mg given by
fi
m= a (34-15)
