<Questions

1 Figure 34-25 shows a fish and a
fish stalker in water. (a) Does the
stalker see the fish in the general re-
gion of point a or point b? (b) Does
the fish see the (wild) eyes of the
stalker in the general region of point
cor point d?

2 In Fig. 34-26, stick figure O
stands in front of a spherical mirror
that is mounted within the boxed re-
gion; the central axis through the oO
mirror is shown. The four stick fig-
ures J, to J, suggest general loca- I
tions and orientations for the im- 2 og
ages that might be produced by the Figure 34-26

mirror. (The figures are only Questions 2 and 10.
sketched in; neither their heights

nor their distances from the mirror are drawn to scale.) (a) Which
of the stick figures could not possibly represent images? Of the
possible images, (b) which would be due to a concave mirror, (c)
which would be due to a convex mirror, (d) which would be virtual,
and (e) which would involve negative magnification?

 

Figure 34-25 Question 1.

 

   

 

i Tk
i |
|

i

 

3 Figure 34-27 is an over-
head view of a mirror maze
based on floor sections that
are equilateral triangles.
Every wall within the maze
is mirrored. If you stand at
entrance x, (a) which of the
maze monsters a, b, and ¢
hiding in the maze can you
see along the virtual hall-
ways extending ~— from
entrance x; (b) how many
times does each visible monster appear in a hallway; and (c) what is
at the far end of a hallway?

Figure 34-27 Question 3.

4 A penguin waddles along the central axis of a concave mirror,
from the focal point to an effectively infinite distance. (a) How
does its image move? (b) Does the height of its image increase
continuously, decrease continuously, or change in some more
complicated manner?

5 Whena Trex pursues a jeep in the movie Jurassic Park, we see
a reflected image of the T. rex via a side-view mirror, on which is
printed the (then darkly humorous) warning: “Objects in mirror
are closer than they appear.” Is the mirror flat, convex, or concave?
6 An object is placed against the center of a concave mirror and
then moved along the central axis _ |;

until it is 5.0m from the mirror.
During the motion, the distance |i!
between the mirror and the image it
produces is measured. The proce-
dure is then repeated with a convex
mirror and a plane mirror. Figure
34-28 gives the results versus object
distance p. Which curve corresponds
to which mirror? (Curve 1 has two.
segments.)

 

Figure 34-28 Questions
6 and8.

QUESTIONS 1037

7 The table details six variations of
the basic arrangement of two thin
lenses represented in Fig, 34-29. (The
points labeled F; and F, are the focal
points of lenses 1 and 2.) An object
is distance p; to the left of lens 1, as
in Fig. 34-18. (a) For which varia-
tions can we tell, without calculation, whether the final image (that
due to lens 2) is to the left or right of lens 2 and whether it has the
same orientation as the object? (b) For those “easy” variations,
give the image location as “left” or “right” and the orientation as
“same” or “inverted.”

Lens 1 Lens 2

 

Figure 34-29 Question 7.

 

Variation Lens 1 Lens 2
1 Converging Converging Pi < If
2 Converging Converging pi> If
3 Diverging Converging pi < If
4 Diverging Converging pi> Il
5 Diverging Diverging p< Ifil
6 Diverging Diverging pi> Il

8 An object is placed against the center of a converging lens and
then moved along the central axis until it is 5.0m from the lens.
During the motion, the distance |i| between the lens and the image
it produces is measured. The procedure is then repeated with a di-
verging lens. Which of the curves in Fig, 34-28 best gives |i| versus
the object distance p for these lenses? (Curve 1 consists of two

segments. Curve 3 is straight.)
(@— (b) (9) @

Figure 34-30 Question 9.

9 Figure 34-30 shows four thin
lenses, all of the same material, with
sides that either are flat or have a ra-
dius of curvature of magnitude 10 cm.
Without written calculation, rank the
lenses according to the magnitude of
the focal length, greatest first.

10 In Fig. 34-26, stick figure O stands in front of a thin,
symmetric lens that is mounted within the boxed region; the
central axis through the lens is shown. The four stick figures J; to
I, suggest general locations and orientations for the images that
might be produced by the lens. (The figures are only sketched in;
neither their height nor their distance from the lens is drawn
to scale.) (a) Which of the stick figures could not possibly repre-
sent images? Of the possible images,
(b) which would be due to a converging lens,
(c) which would be due to a diverging lens,
(d) which would be virtual, and (e) which
would involve negative magnification?

11 Figure 34-31 shows a coordinate system
in front of a flat mirror, with the x axis per-
pendicular to the mirror. Draw the image of
the system in the mirror. (a) Which axis is re-
versed by the reflection? (b) If you face a
mirror, is your image inverted (top for bot-
tom)? (c) Is it reversed left and right (as com-
monly believed)? (d) What then is reversed?

 

Figure 34-31
Question 11.
