34-3 SPHERICAL REFRACTING SURFACES 1021

observer intercepts the rays). The answer depends on the relative values of n, and
ny and on the geometry of the situation.

Six possible results are shown in Fig. 34-12. In each part of the figure, the
medium with the greater index of refraction is shaded, and object O is always in
the medium with index of refraction m, to the left of the refracting surface. In
each part, a representative ray is shown refracting through the surface. (That ray
and a ray along the central axis suffice to determine the position of the image in
each case.)

At the point of refraction of each ray, the normal to the refracting surface is a
radial line through the center of curvature C. Because of the refraction, the ray
bends toward the normal if it is entering a medium of greater index of refraction
and away from the normal if it is entering a medium of lesser index of refraction.
If the bending sends the ray toward the central axis, that ray and others
(undrawn) form a real image on that axis. If the bending sends the ray away from
the central axis, the ray cannot form a real image; however, backward extensions
of it and other refracted rays can form a virtual image, provided (as with mirrors)
some of those rays are intercepted by an observer.

Real images / are formed (at image distance i) in parts a and b of Fig. 34-12,
where the refraction directs the ray toward the central axis. Virtual images are
formed in parts c and d, where the refraction directs the ray away from the cen-
tral axis. Note, in these four parts, that real images are formed when the object is
relatively far from the refracting surface and virtual images are formed when the
object is nearer the refracting surface. In the final situations (Figs. 34-12e and f),
refraction always directs the ray away from the central axis and virtual images
are always formed, regardless of the object distance.

Note the following major difference from reflected images:

Ok) Real images form on the side of a refracting surface that is opposite the object,
and virtual images form on the same side as the object.

 

Dr. Paul A. Zahl/Photo Researchers, Inc.

This insect has been entombed in amber
for about 25 million years. Because we
view the insect through a curved refracting
surface, the location of the image we see
does not coincide with the location of the
insect (see Fig. 34-12d).

 

 

Figure 34-12 Six possible ways in which an image can be formed by refraction through a
spherical surface of radius r and center of curvature C. The surface separates a medium
with index of refraction n; from a medium with index of refraction n>. The point object O
is always in the medium with n;, to the left of the surface. The material with the lesser
index of refraction is unshaded (think of it as being air, and the other material as being
glass). Real images are formed in (a) and (b); virtual images are formed in the other
four situations.
