1090 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

lV] Checkpoint 3

‘Two wavelengths, 650 and 430 nm,

are used separately in a single-slit dif-

fraction experiment. The figure
shows the results as graphs of inten-

sity [versus angle for the two dif-

fraction patterns. If both wavelengths

are then used simultaneously, what

color will be seen in the combined

diffraction pattern at (a) angle A 6

and (b) angle B?

Sample Problem 36.02

Find the intensities of the first three secondary maxima
(side maxima) in the single-slit diffraction pattern of Fig. 36-1,
measured as a percentage of the intensity of the central
maximum.

KEY IDEAS

The secondary maxima lie approximately halfway between
the minima, whose angular locations are given by Eq. 36-7
(a = m7). The locations of the secondary maxima are then
given (approximately) by

a=(m+3)m, form = 1,2,3,...,

with a in radian measure. We can relate the intensity J at
any point in the diffraction pattern to the intensity J, of the
central maximum via Eq. 36-5.

Calculations: Substituting the approximate values of a for
the secondary maxima into Eq. 36-5 to obtain the relative

Intensities of the maxima in a single-slit interference pattern

intensities at those maxima, we get
i 2 H A 2
4 -(#4) - (Se mm + Je) form =1,2,3,....
In a (m + 3)

The first of the secondary maxima occurs for m = 1, and its
relative intensity is

A (220 + az _ (= al

 

Tn (+3) LS
= 4.50 x 107 ~ 4.5%. (Answer)
Form = 2 and m = 3 we find that
i 1.6% and f= 0.83%. (Answer)
In In

As you can see from these results, successive secondary
maxima decrease rapidly in intensity. Figure 36-1 was delib-
erately overexposed to reveal them.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

36-3 DIFFRACTION BY A CIRCULAR APERTURE

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

36.13 Describe and sketch the diffraction pattern from a
small circular aperture or obstacle.

36.14 For diffraction by a small circular aperture or obstacle,
apply the relationships between the angle @to the first
minimum, the wavelength A of the light, the diameter d of
the aperture, the distance D to a viewing screen, and the
distance y between the minimum and the center of the
diffraction pattern.

36.15 By discussing the diffraction patterns of point objects,

explain how diffraction limits visual resolution of objects.

36.16 Identify that Rayleigh's criterion for resolvability gives
the (approximate) angle at which two point objects are just
barely resolvable.

36.17 Apply the relationships between the angle 6g in
Rayleigh’s criterion, the wavelength A of the light, the
diameter d of the aperture (for example, the diameter of
the pupil of an eye), the angle @ subtended by two distant
point objects, and the distance L to those objects.
