1012 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

Ina plane mirror the light
seems to come from an
object on the other side.

Mirror

   

Figure 34-2 A point source of light O, called
the object, is a perpendicular distance p

in front of a plane mirror. Light rays
reaching the mirror from O reflect from
the mirror. If your eye intercepts some of
the reflected rays, you perceive a point
source of light J to be behind the mirror,
at a perpendicular distance i. The perceived
source / is a virtual image of object O.

 

Mirror

Figure 34-3 Two rays from Fig. 34-2. Ray
Oa makes an arbitrary angle @ with the
normal to the mirror surface. Ray Ob is
perpendicular to the mirror.

Mirror

o 7 I

Figure 34-4 A “pencil” of rays from O enters
the eye after reflection at the mirror. Only
a small portion of the mirror near a is
involved in this reflection. The light appears
to originate at point / behind the mirror.

Plane Mirrors

A mirror is a surface that can reflect a beam of light in one direction instead of
either scattering it widely in many directions or absorbing it. A shiny metal
surface acts as a mirror; a concrete wall does not. In this module we examine the
images that a plane mirror (a flat reflecting surface) can produce.

Figure 34-2 shows a point source of light O, which we shall call the object, at a
perpendicular distance p in front of a plane mirror. The light that is incident
on the mirror is represented with rays spreading from O. The reflection of that
light is represented with reflected rays spreading from the mirror. If we extend
the reflected rays backward (behind the mirror), we find that the extensions
intersect at a point that is a perpendicular distance i behind the mirror.

If you look into the mirror of Fig. 34-2, your eyes intercept some of the
reflected light. To make sense of what you see, you perceive a point source of
light located at the point of intersection of the extensions. This point source is the
image J of object O. It is called a point image because it is a point, and it is a vir-
tual image because the rays do not actually pass through it. (As you will see, rays
do pass through a point of intersection for a real image.)

Ray Tracing. Figure 34-3 shows two rays selected from the many rays in
Fig. 34-2. One reaches the mirror at point b, perpendicularly. The other reaches it
at an arbitrary point a, with an angle of incidence .The extensions of the two re-
flected rays are also shown. The right triangles aOba and alba have a common
side and three equal angles and are thus congruent (equal in size); so their hori-
zontal sides have the same length. That is,

Ib = Ob, (34-1)

where Jb and Ob are the distances from the mirror to the image and the object,
respectively. Equation 34-1 tells us that the image is as far behind the mirror as
the object is in front of it. By convention (that is, to get our equations to work
out), object distances p are taken to be positive quantities and image distances i
for virtual images (as here) are taken to be negative quantities. Thus, Eq. 34-1 can
be written as lil = p or as

 

i=—p (plane mirror). (34-2)

Only rays that are fairly close together can enter the eye after reflection at a
mirror. For the eye position shown in Fig. 34-4, only a small portion of the mirror
near point a (a portion smaller than the pupil of the eye) is useful in forming the
image. To find this portion, close one eye and look at the mirror image of a small
object such as the tip of a pencil. Then move your fingertip over the mirror sur-
face until you cannot see the image. Only that small portion of the mirror under
your fingertip produced the image.

Extended Objects

In Fig. 34-5, an extended object O, represented by an upright arrow, is at
perpendicular distance p in front of a plane mirror. Each small portion of the

+¥— Pp

   

In a plane mirror the image
is just as far from the mirror
as the object.

Figure 34-5 An extended object O and its virtual image / in a plane mirror.
