34-1 IMAGES AND PLANE MIRRORS

Figure 34-6 A maze of
mirrors.

Courtesy Adrian Fisher, www.mazemaker.com

object that faces the mirror acts like the point source O of Figs. 34-2 and 34-3.
If you intercept the light reflected by the mirror, you perceive a virtual image I
that is a composite of the virtual point images of all those portions of the ob-
ject. This virtual image seems to be at (negative) distance i behind the mirror,
with jand p related by Eq. 34-2.

We can also locate the image of an extended object as we did for a point
object in Fig. 34-2: we draw some of the rays that reach the mirror from the top of
the object, draw the corresponding reflected rays, and then extend those reflected
rays behind the mirror until they intersect to form an image of the top of the
object. We then do the same for rays from the bottom of the object. As shown in
Fig. 34-5, we find that virtual image / has the same orientation and height (mea-
sured parallel to the mirror) as object O.

Mirror Maze

In a mirror maze (Fig. 34-6), each wall is covered, floor to ceiling, with a mirror.
‘Walk through such a maze and what you see in most directions is a confusing mon-
tage of reflections. In some directions, however, you see a hallway that seems to of-
fer a path through the maze. Take these hallways, though, and you soon learn, after
smacking into mirror after mirror, that the hallways are largely an illusion.

Figure 34-7a is an overhead view of a simple mirror maze in which differently
painted floor sections form equilateral triangles (60° angles) and walls are
covered with vertical mirrors. You look into the maze while standing at point O at
the middle of the maze entrance. In most directions, you see a confusing jumble
of images. However, you see something curious in the direction of the ray shown
in Fig. 34-7a. That ray leaves the middle of mirror B and reflects to you at the
middle of mirror A. (The reflection obeys the law of reflection, with the angle of
incidence and the angle of reflection both equal to 30°.)

To make sense of the origin of the ray reaching you, your brain automati-
cally extends the ray backward. It appears to originate at a point lying behind
mirror A. That is, you perceive a virtual image of B behind A, at a distance equal
to the actual distance between A and B (Fig. 34-7b). Thus, when you face into the
maze in this direction, you see B along an apparent straight hallway consisting of
four triangular floor sections.

This story is incomplete, however, because the ray reaching you does not
originate at mirror B—it only reflects there. To find the origin, we continue to
apply the law of reflection as we work backwards, reflection by reflection on the
mirrors (Fig. 34-7c). We finally come to the origin of the ray: you! What you see
when you look along the apparent hallway is a virtual image of yourself, at a dis-
tance of nine triangular floor sections from you (Fig. 34-7d). cond

   

1013

(b)

    

A hallway seems to
lie in front of you.

0)

oO

Figure 34-7 (a) Overhead view of a mirror
maze. A ray from mirror B reaches you at
O by reflecting from mirror A. (b) Mirror B
appears to be behind A. (c) The ray reach-
ing you comes from you. (d) You see a vir-
tual image of yourself at the end of an
apparent hallway. (Can you find a second
apparent hallway extending away from
point O?)
