 

Activators

These regulatory proteins bind to DNA at distant sites
known as enhancers. When DNA folds so that the
enhancer is brought into proximity with the transcription
complex, the activator proteins interact with the complex
to increase the rate of transcription.

 

 

 

  
 
  
 
 
  

Enhancer

 

Coactivators
These transcription factors transmit signals
from activator proteins to the basal factors.

 

 

 

FIGURE 16.14

 

Repressors

These regulatory proteins bind to “silencer” sites
onthe DNA, preventing the binding of activators
to nearby enhancers and so slowing transcription.

 

 

  

 

 

Basal factors

These transcription factors, in response to
coactivators, position RNA polymerase at
the start of a protein-coding sequence, and
then release the polymerase to transcribe
the mRNA.

Enhancer

 

 

 

Core promoter

‘The structure of a human transcription complex. The transcription complex that positions RNA polymerase at the beginning of a
human gene consists of four kinds of proteins. Basal factors (the green shapes at bottom of complex with letter names) are transcription
factors that are essential for transcription but cannot by themselves increase or decrease its rate. They include the TATA-binding protein,

the first of the basal factors to bind to the core promoter sequence.

. Coactivators (the tan shapes that form the bulk of the transcription

complex, named according to their molecular weights) are transcription factors that link the basal factors with regulatory proteins called
activators (the red shapes). The activators bind to enhancer sequences at other locations on the DNA. The interaction of individual basal
factors with particular activator proteins is necessary for proper positioning of the polymerase, and the rate of transcription is regulated by
the availability of these activators. When a second kind of regulatory protein called a repressor (the purple shape) binds to a so-called
“silencer” sequence located adjacent to or overlapping an enhancer sequence, the corresponding activator that would normally have bound
that enhancer is no longer able to do so. The activator is thus unavailable to interact with the transcription complex and initiate

transcription.

Eukaryotic Transcription Factors

For RNA polymerase to successfully bind to a eukaryotic
promoter and initiate transcription, a set of proteins
called transcription factors must first assemble on the
promoter, forming a complex that guides and stabilizes
the binding of the polymerase (figure 16.14). The assem-
bly process begins some 25 nucleotides upstream from the
transcription start site, where a transcription factor com-
posed of many subunits binds to a short TATA sequence
(discussed in chapter 15). Other transcription factors then
bind, eventually forming a full transcription factor com-

plex able to capture RNA polymerase. In many instances,
the transcription factor complex then phosphorylates the
bound polymerase, disengaging it from the complex so
that it is free to begin transcription.

The binding of several different transcription factors
provides numerous points where control over transcription
may be exerted. Anything that reduces the availability of a
particular factor (for example, by regulating the promoter
that governs the expression and synthesis of that factor) or
limits its ease of assembly into the transcription factor
complex will inhibit transcription.

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression 323
