1026 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

Table 34-2 Your Organizing Table for Thin Lenses

 

Image Sign
Lens Object
Type Location Location Type Orientation off ofi ofm
Inside F
Converging
Outside F
Diverging Anywhere

sides are convex or both sides are concave). Under Image Location note whether
the image is on the same side of the lens as the object or on the opposite side. Under
Image Type note whether the image is real or virtual. Under Image Orientation note
whether the image has the same orientation as the object or is inverted.

Locating Images of Extended Objects by Drawing Rays

Figure 34-16a shows an object O outside focal point F, of a converging lens. We
can graphically locate the image of any off-axis point on such an object (such as
the tip of the arrow in Fig. 34-16a) by drawing a ray diagram with any two of
three special rays through the point. These special rays, chosen from all those that
pass through the lens to form the image, are the following:

1. A ray that is initially parallel to the central axis of the lens will pass through
focal point F; (ray 1 in Fig. 34-16a).

2. A ray that initially passes through focal point F, will emerge from the lens
parallel to the central axis (ray 2 in Fig.34-16a).

3. A ray that is initially directed toward the center of the lens will emerge from
the lens with no change in its direction (ray 3 in Fig. 34-16a) because the ray
encounters the two sides of the lens where they are almost parallel.

The image of the point is located where the rays intersect on the far side of the lens.
The image of the object is found by locating the images of two or more of its points.

Figure 34-165 shows how the extensions of the three special rays can be used
to locate the image of an object placed inside focal point F, of a converging lens.
Note that the description of ray 2 requires modification (it is now a ray whose
backward extension passes through F;).

You need to modify the descriptions of rays | and 2 to use them to locate an
image placed (anywhere) in front of a diverging lens. In Fig. 34-16c, for example,
we find the point where ray 3 intersects the backward extensions of rays | and 2.

   

In each figure, any two of the
rays will locate the image.

   

(a) (d)

Figure 34-16 Three special rays allow us to locate an image
formed by a thin lens whether the object O is (a) outside or
(b) inside the focal point of a converging lens, or (c) anywhere
in front of a diverging lens.

 
