34-2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS 1019

1. A ray that is initially parallel to the central axis reflects through the focal point

F (ray 1 in Fig. 34-1 1a).

2. A ray that reflects from the mirror after passing through the focal point

emerges parallel to the central axis (ray 2 in Fig. 34-1 1a).

3. A ray that reflects from the mirror after passing through the center of curva-

ture C returns along itself (ray 3 in Fig. 34-11b).

4. A ray that reflects from the mirror at point c is reflected symmetrically about

that axis (ray 4 in Fig. 34-11b).

The image of the point is at the intersection of the two special rays you choose.
The image of the object can then be found by locating the images of two or more
of its off-axis points (say, the point most off axis) and then sketching in the rest of
the image. You need to modify the descriptions of the rays slightly to apply them

to convex mirrors, as in Figs. 34-1 1c and d.

Proof of Equation 34-6

We are now in a position to derive Eq. 34-6 (m = —i/p), the equation for the lat-
eral magnification of an object reflected in a mirror. Consider ray 4 in Fig. 34-11b.
It is reflected at point c so that the incident and reflected rays make equal angles

with the axis of the mirror at that point.

The two right triangles abc and dec in the figure are similar (have the same

set of angles); so we can write
de _ cd

ab ca”

The quantity on the left (apart from the question of sign) is the lateral magnification
m produced by the mirror. Because we indicate an inverted image as a negative mag-
nification, we symbolize this as —m. However, cd = iand ca = p;so we have

i

m = —— (magnification),
P

 

which is the relation we set out to prove.

| Checkpoint 2

(34-7)

A Central American vampire bat, dozing on the central axis of a spherical mirror,
is magnified by m = —4. Is its image (a) real or virtual, (b) inverted or of the same
orientation as the bat, and (c) on the same side of the mirror as the bat or on the

opposite side?

Sample Problem 34.01

A tarantula of height / sits cautiously before a spherical
mirror whose focal length has absolute value |f|= 40 cm.
The image of the tarantula produced by the mirror has the
same orientation as the tarantula and has height h’ = 0.20h.

(a) Is the image real or virtual, and is it on the same side of
the mirror as the tarantula or the opposite side?

Reasoning: Because the image has the same orientation as
the tarantula (the object), it must be virtual and on the op-
posite side of the mirror. (You can easily see this result if
you have filled out Table 34-1.)

Image produced by a spherical mirror

(b) Is the mirror concave or convex, and what is its focal
length f, sign included?

KEY IDEA

 

‘We cannot tell the type of mirror from the type of image be-
cause both types of mirror can produce virtual images.
Similarly, we cannot tell the type of mirror from the sign of
the focal length f, as obtained from Eq. 34-3 or Eq. 34-4, be-
cause we lack enough information to use either equation.
However, we can make use of the magnification information.
