1064 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

Key Ideas

@ When light is incident on a thin transparent film, the light waves
reflected from the front and back surfaces interfere. For near-nor-
mal incidence, the wavelength conditions for maximum and mini-

where My is the index of refraction of the film, L is its
thickness, and A is the wavelength of the light in air.

@ Ifa film is sandwiched between media other than air, these

The interference depends
on the reflections and the
path lengths. ny

mum intensity of the light reflected from a film in air are
A

2L=(m+3)—, form =0,1,2,...
nm

(maxima—bright film in air),

2am,
nm

(minima—dark film in air),

 

Figure 35-15 Light waves, represented with
ray i, are incident on a thin film of thick-
ness L and index of refraction m. Rays 7;
and r represent light waves that have
been reflected by the front and back sur-
faces of the film, respectively. (All three
rays are actually nearly perpendicular to
the film.) The interference of the waves of
r, and r) with each other depends on their
phase difference. The index of refraction
n, of the medium at the left can differ
from the index of refraction n; of the
medium at the right, but for now we
assume that both media are air, with n; =
.0, which is less than 1.

 

form = 0,1,2,...

equations for bright and dark films may be interchanged, de-
pending on the relative indexes of refraction.

@ If the light incident at an interface between media with
different indexes of refraction is in the medium with the
smaller index of refraction, the reflection causes a phase
change of zrrad, or half a wavelength, in the reflected
wave. Otherwise, there is no phase change due to the
reflection. Refraction causes no phase shift.

Interference from Thin Films

The colors on a sunlit soap bubble or an oil slick are caused by the interference of
light waves reflected from the front and back surfaces of a thin transparent film.
The thickness of the soap or oil film is typically of the order of magnitude of the
wavelength of the (visible) light involved. (Greater thicknesses spoil the coher-
ence of the light needed to produce the colors due to interference.)

Figure 35-15 shows a thin transparent film of uniform thickness L and index
of refraction 1, illuminated by bright light of wavelength A from a distant point
source. For now, we assume that air lies on both sides of the film and thus that
n, = ny in Fig. 35-15. For simplicity, we also assume that the light rays are almost
perpendicular to the film (@ ~ 0). We are interested in whether the film is bright
or dark to an observer viewing it almost perpendicularly. (Since the film is
brightly illuminated, how could it possibly be dark? You will see.)

The incident light, represented by ray i, intercepts the front (left) surface
of the film at point a and undergoes both reflection and refraction there. The
reflected ray r; is intercepted by the observer’s eye. The refracted light crosses
the film to point b on the back surface, where it undergoes both reflection and
refraction. The light reflected at b crosses back through the film to point c, where
it undergoes both reflection and refraction. The light refracted at c, represented
by ray rp, is intercepted by the observer's eye.

If the light waves of rays r; and ry are exactly in phase at the eye, they produce
an interference maximum and region ac on the film is bright to the observer. If they
are exactly out of phase, they produce an interference minimum and region ac is
dark to the observer, even though it is illuminated. If there is some intermediate
phase difference, there are intermediate interference and brightness.

The Key. Thus, the key to what the observer sees is the phase difference be-
tween the waves of rays r; and r>. Both rays are derived from the same ray i, but
the path involved in producing rp involves light traveling twice across the film (a
to b,and then b to c), whereas the path involved in producing r; involves no travel
through the film. Because @is about zero, we approximate the path length differ-
ence between the waves of r, and r, as 2L. However, to find the phase difference
between the waves, we cannot just find the number of wavelengths A that is
equivalent to a path length difference of 2L. This simple approach is impossible
for two reasons: (1) the path length difference occurs in a medium other than air,
and (2) reflections are involved, which can change the phase.

Ok) The phase difference between two waves can change if one or both are reflected.

Let’s next discuss changes in phase that are caused by reflections.
