1082 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

Ken Kay/Fundamental
Photographs

Figure 36-1 This diffraction pattern appeared
ona viewing screen when light that had
passed through a narrow vertical slit
reached the screen. Diffraction caused the
light to flare out perpendicular to the long
sides of the slit. That flaring produced an
interference pattern consisting of a broad
central maximum plus less intense and nar-
rower secondary (or side) maxima, with
minima between them.

 

Ken Kay/Fundamental Photographs
Figure 36-2 The diffraction pattern produced
bya razor blade in monochromatic light.
Note the lines of alternating maximum and
minimum intensity.

light produces an interference pattern called a diffraction pattern. For example, when
monochromatic light from a distant source (or a laser) passes through a narrow slit
and is then intercepted by a viewing screen, the light produces on the screen a diffrac-
tion pattern like that in Fig. 36-1. This pattern consists of a broad and intense (very
bright) central maximum plus a number of narrower and less intense maxima (called
secondary or side maxima) to both sides. In between the maxima are minima. Light
flares into those dark regions, but the light waves cancel out one another.

Such a pattern would be totally unexpected in geometrical optics: If light
traveled in straight lines as rays, then the slit would allow some of those rays
through to form a sharp rendition of the slit on the viewing screen instead of a
pattern of bright and dark bands as we see in Fig. 36-1. As in Chapter 35, we must
conclude that geometrical optics is only an approximation.

Edges. Diffraction is not limited to situations in which light passes through a
narrow opening (such as a slit or pinhole). It also occurs when light passes an
edge, such as the edges of the razor blade whose diffraction pattern is shown in
Fig. 36-2. Note the lines of maxima and minima that run approximately parallel to
the edges, at both the inside edges of the blade and the outside edges. As the light
passes, say, the vertical edge at the left, it flares left and right and undergoes inter-
ference, producing the pattern along the left edge. The rightmost portion of that
pattern actually lies behind the blade, within what would be the blade’s shadow if
geometrical optics prevailed.

Floaters. You encounter a common example of diffraction when you look at a
clear blue sky and see tiny specks and hairlike structures floating in your view. These
floaters, as they are called, are produced when light passes the edges of tiny deposits
in the vitreous humor, the transparent material filling most of the eyeball. What you
are seeing when a floater is in your field of vision is the diffraction pattern produced
on the retina by one of these deposits. If you sight through a pinhole in a piece of
cardboard so as to make the light entering your eye approximately a plane wave, you
can distinguish individual maxima and minima in the patterns. eS

Cheerleaders. Diffraction is a wave effect. That is, it occurs because light is a
wave and it occurs with other types of waves as well. For example, you have prob-
ably seen diffraction in action at football games. When a cheerleader near the
playing field yells up at several thousand noisy fans, the yell can hardly be heard
because the sound waves diffract when they pass through the narrow opening of
the cheerleader’s mouth. This flaring leaves little of the waves traveling toward
the fans in front of the cheerleader. To offset the diffraction, the cheerleader can
yell through a megaphone. The sound waves then emerge from the much wider
opening at the end of the megaphone. The flaring is thus reduced, and much more
of the sound reaches the fans in front of the cheerleader. =

The Fresnel Bright Spot

Diffraction finds a ready explanation in the wave theory of light. However, this the-
ory, originally advanced in the late 1600s by Huygens and used 123 years later by
Young to explain double-slit interference, was very slow in being adopted, largely
because it ran counter to Newton’s theory that light was a stream of particles.

Newton’s view was the prevailing view in French scientific circles of the early 19th
century, when Augustin Fresnel was a young military engineer. Fresnel, who believed
in the wave theory of light, submitted a paper to the French Academy of Sciences de-
scribing his experiments with light and his wave-theory explanations of them.

In 1819, the Academy, dominated by supporters of Newton and thinking to
challenge the wave point of view, organized a prize competition for an essay on the
subject of diffraction. Fresnel won. The Newtonians, however, were not swayed.
One of them, S. D. Poisson, pointed out the “strange result” that if Fresnel’s theories
were correct, then light waves should flare into the shadow region of a sphere
as they pass the edge of the sphere, producing a bright spot at the center of
the shadow. The prize committee arranged a test of Poisson’s prediction and dis-
