34-4 THIN LENSES

Learning Objectives

34-4 THIN LENSES 1023

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

34,23 Distinguish converging lenses from diverging lenses.

34,24 For converging and diverging lenses, sketch a ray
diagram for rays initially parallel to the central axis,
indicating how they form focal points, and identifying
which is real and which is virtual.

34.25 Distinguish a real focal point from a virtual focal point,
identify which corresponds to which type of lens and
under which circumstances, and identify the algebraic
sign associated with each focal length.

34.26 For an object (a) inside and (b) outside the focal point
of a converging lens, sketch at least two rays to find the
image and identify the type and orientation of the image.

34.27 For a converging lens, distinguish the locations and
orientations of a real image and a virtual image.

34,28 For an object in front of a diverging lens, sketch at
least two rays to find the image and identify the type and
orientation of the image.

34.29 Identify which type of lens can produce both real

Key Ideas

and virtual images and which type can produce only
virtual images.

34.30 Identify the algebraic sign of the image distance i fora
real image and for a virtual image.

34,31 For converging and diverging lenses, apply the rela-
tionship between the focal length f, object distance p, and
image distance i.

34,32 Apply the relationships between lateral magnification
m, image height h’, object height h, image distance i, and
object distance p.

34,33 Apply the lens maker's equation to relate a focal length
to the index of refraction of a lens (assumed to be in air)
and the radii of curvature of the two sides of the lens.

34,34 For a multiple-lens system with the object in front of
lens 1, find the image produced by lens 1 and then use it
as the object for lens 2, and so on.

34,35 For a multiple-lens system, determine the overall
magnification (of the final image) from the magnifications
produced by each lens.

 

@ This module primarily considers thin lenses with symmetric,
spherical surfaces.

@ If parallel rays are sent through a converging lens

parallel to the central axis, the refracted rays pass through
a common point (a real focus F) at a focal distance f (a
positive quantity) from the lens. If they are sent through a
diverging lens, backward extensions of the refracted rays
pass through a common point (a virtual focus F) at a focal
distance f (a negative quantity) from the lens.

@ A converging lens can form a real image (if the object is
outside the focal point) or a virtual image (if the object is
inside the focal point).

@ A diverging lens can form only a virtual image.

@ For an object in front of a lens, object distance p and
image distance i are related to the lens's focal length f, index

Thin Lenses

of refraction n, and radii of curvature r, and r, by
1 1 1 1 1

pra gee es}

@ The magnitude of the lateral magnification m of an object is

the ratio of the image height h’ to object height h,

h’

We

and is related to the object distance p and image distance i by

pn] =

i
m=-—.
P
@ For a system of lenses with a common central axis, the
image produced by the first lens acts as the object for
the second lens, and so on, and the overall magnification
is the product of the individual magnifications.

A lens is a transparent object with two refracting surfaces whose central axes
coincide. The common central axis is the central axis of the lens. When a lens is
surrounded by air, light refracts from the air into the lens, crosses through the
lens, and then refracts back into the air. Each refraction can change the direction

of travel of the light.

A lens that causes light rays initially parallel to the central axis to converge is
(reasonably) called a converging lens. If, instead, it causes such rays to diverge,
the lens is a diverging lens. When an object is placed in front of a lens of either
type, light rays from the object that refract into and out of the lens can produce

an image of the object.
