36-3 DIFFRACTION BY A CIRCULAR APERTURE 1093

you stand far enough from the painting, the angular separations @ are less than
4g and the dots cannot be seen individually. The resulting blend of colors
coming into your eye from any group of dots can then cause your brain to
“make up” a color for that group—a color that may not actually exist in the
group. In this way, a pointillistic painter uses your visual system to create the
colors of the art. aE

When we wish to use a lens instead of our visual system to resolve objects of
small angular separation, it is desirable to make the diffraction pattern as small as
possible. According to Eq. 36-14, this can be done either by increasing the lens
diameter or by using light of a shorter wavelength. For this reason ultraviolet
light is often used with microscopes because its wavelength is shorter than a visi-
ble light wavelength.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

Suppose that you can barely resolve two red dots because of diffraction by the
pupil of your eye. If we increase the general illumination around you so that the
pupil decreases in diameter, does the resolvability of the dots improve or diminish?
Consider only diffraction. (You might experiment to check your answer.)

 

Sample Problem 36.03 Pointillistic paintings use the diffraction of your eye

Figure 36-13a is a representation of the colored dots ona _ Rayleigh’s criterion:

pointillistic painting. Assume that the average center- a

to-center separation of the dots is D = 2.0 mm. Also assume Op = 1.22—. (36-15)
that the diameter of the pupil of your eye is d = 1.5 mm and a

that the least angular separation between dots you can Calculations: Figure 36-13b shows, from the side, the
resolve is set only by Rayleigh’s criterion. What is the least angular separation @ of the dots, their center-to-center
viewing distance from which you cannot distinguish any separation D, and your distance L from them. Because

 

dots on the painting? eS DIL is small, angle @ is also small and we can make the
approximation
KEY IDEA D
Cia (36-16)
Consider any two adjacent dots that you can distinguish L
when you are close to the painting. As you move away, you Setting 0 of Eq. 36-16 equal to 6g of Eq. 36-15 and solv-
continue to distinguish the dots until their angular separa- ing for L, we then have
tion @ (in your view) has decreased to the angle given by Dd
Tet 36-17
1.22 ( )
Equation 36-17 tells us that L is larger for smaller A. Thus, as
7 Observer you move away from the painting, adjacent red dots (long
D J Dotan as wavelengths) become indistinguishable before adjacent
ao 4 blue dots do. To find the least distance L at which no colored
-_———i dots are distinguishable, we substitute A = 400 nm (blue or

0 violet light) into Eq. 36-17:

_ (2.0 X 10 m)(1.5 x 10-3 m)

 

; a ie (.22)(400 x 10 m) 6.1m. (Answer)
Figure 36-13 (a) Representation of some dots on a pointillistic paint-
ing, showing an average center-to-center separation D. (b) The At this or a greater distance, the color you perceive at
arrangement of separation D between two dots, their angular any given spot on the painting is a blended color that may
separation @,and the viewing distance L. not actually exist there.

mLEY

g
PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
