Posttranscriptional Control in
Eukaryotes

Thus far we have discussed gene regulation entirely in
terms of transcription initiation, that is, when and how
often RNA polymerase starts “reading” a particular gene.
Most gene regulation appears to occur at this point. How-
ever, there are many other points after transcription where
gene expression could be regulated in principle, and all of
them serve as control points for at least some eukaryotic
genes. In general, these posttranscriptional control
processes involve the recognition of specific sequences on
the primary RNA transcript by regulatory proteins or other
RNA molecules.

Processing of the Primary Transcript

As we learned in chapter 15, most eukaryotic genes have a
patchwork structure, being composed of numerous short

 

snRNA forms

(e snRNA
Exon

coding sequences (exons) embedded within long stretches
of noncoding sequences (introns). The initial mRNA mole-
cule copied from a gene by RNA polymerase, the primary
transcript, is a faithful copy of the entire gene, including
introns as well as exons. Before the primary transcript is
translated, the introns, which comprise on average 90% of
the transcript, are removed in a process called RNA pro-
cessing, or RNA splicing. Particles called small nuclear ri-
bonucleoproteins, or RNPs (more informally, snurps), are
thought to play a role in RNA splicing. These particles re-
side in the nucleus of a cell and are composed of proteins
and a special type of RNA called small nuclear RNA, or
snRNA. One kind of snRNP contains snRNA that can bind
to the 5” end of an intron by forming base-pairs with com-
plementary sequences on the intron. When multiple
snRNPs combine to form a larger complex called
a spliceosome, the intron loops out and is excised
(figure 16.19).

RNA splicing provides a potential point where the ex-
pression of a gene can be controlled, because exons can be

 

base-pairs with
5! end of intron.

 

 

 

 

Spliceosome and
looped intron form.

 

 

 

5’ end of intron is cut and
attached near 3’ end of intron,
forming a lariat. The 3°

end of the intron is then cut.

 

 

 

Exons are spliced;
spliceosome disassembles.

 

 

 

Mature mRNA™ 5°

 

FIGURE 16.19

   

=e
[ 2 an, Exon

How spliceosomes process RNA. Particles called saRNPs contain snRNA that interacts with the 5’ end of an intron. Several
snRNPs come together and form a spliceosome. As the intron forms a loop, the 5’ end is cut and linked to a site near the 3’ end of the
intron. The intron forms a lariat that is excised, and the exons are spliced together. The spliceosome then disassembles and releases

the mature mRNA.

326 =PartV_ Molecular Genetics
