1110 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

Module 36-3 Diffraction by a Circular Aperture

°18 The wall of a large room is covered with acoustic tile in
which small holes are drilled 5.0 mm from center to center. How
far can a person be from such a tile and still distinguish the indi-
vidual holes, assuming ideal conditions, the pupil diameter of the
observer's eye to be 4.0 mm, and the wavelength of the room
light to be 550 nm?

°19 (a) How far from grains of red sand must you be to position
yourself just at the limit of resolving the grains if your pupil diame-
ter is 1.5 mm, the grains are spherical with radius 50 wm, and the
light from the grains has wavelength 650 nm? (b) If the grains were
blue and the light from them had wavelength 400 nm, would the
answer to (a) be larger or smaller?

°20 The radar system of a navy cruiser transmits at a wavelength
of 1.6 cm, from a circular antenna with a diameter of 2.3m. At a
range of 6.2 km, what is the smallest distance that two speedboats
can be from each other and still be resolved as two separate objects
by the radar system?

°21 ssm www Estimate the linear separation of two objects on
Mars that can just be resolved under ideal conditions by an
observer on Earth (a) using the naked eye and (b) using the 200 in.
(= 5.1m) Mount Palomar telescope. Use the following data:
distance to Mars = 8.0 x 10’ km, diameter of pupil = 5.0mm,
wavelength of light = 550 nm.

°22 <= Assume that Rayleigh’s criterion gives the limit of reso-
lution of an astronaut’s eye looking down on Earth’s surface from a
typical space shuttle altitude of 400 km. (a) Under that idealized as-
sumption, estimate the smallest linear width on Earth’s surface that
the astronaut can resolve. Take the astronaut’s pupil diameter to be
5 mm and the wavelength of visible light to be 550 nm. (b) Can the
astronaut resolve the Great Wall of China (Fig. 36-40), which is
more than 3000 km long, 5 to 10 m thick at its base, 4 m thick at its
top, and 8 m in height? (c) Would the astronaut be able to resolve
any unmistakable sign of intelligent life on Earth’s surface?

ey
=e

Figure 36-40 Problem 22. The Great Wall of China.

 

©AP/Wide World Photos

*23 SSM The two headlights of an approaching automobile are
1.4 m apart. At what (a) angular separation and (b) maximum dis-
tance will the eye resolve them? Assume that the pupil diameter is
5.0 mm, and use a wavelength of 550 nm for the light. Also assume
that diffraction effects alone limit the resolution so that Rayleigh’s
criterion can be applied.

°24 <8 Entoptic halos. If someone looks at a bright outdoor lamp
in otherwise dark surroundings, the lamp appears to be surrounded
by bright and dark rings (hence halos) that are actually a circular dif-
fraction pattern as in Fig. 36-10, with the central maximum overlap-
ping the direct light from the lamp. The diffraction is produced by
structures within the cornea or lens of the eye (hence entoptic). If the
lamp is monochromatic at wavelength 550 nm and the first dark ring
subtends angular diameter 2.5° in the observer's view, what is the
(linear) diameter of the structure producing the diffraction?

°25 tw Find the separation of two points on the Moon’s surface
that can just be resolved by the 200 in. (= 5.1m) telescope at
Mount Palomar, assuming that this separation is determined by
diffraction effects. The distance from Earth to the Moon is 3.8 x
10° km. Assume a wavelength of 550 nm for the light.

°26 The telescopes on some commercial surveillance satellites
can resolve objects on the ground as small as 85 cm across (see
Google Earth), and the telescopes on military surveillance satel-
lites reportedly can resolve objects as small as 10cm across.
Assume first that object resolution is determined entirely by
Rayleigh’s criterion and is not degraded by turbulence in the at-
mosphere. Also assume that the satellites are at a typical altitude of
400 km and that the wavelength of visible light is 550 nm. What
would be the required diameter of the telescope aperture for
(a) 85 cm resolution and (b) 10 cm resolution? (c) Now, consider-
ing that turbulence is certain to degrade resolution and that the
aperture diameter of the Hubble Space Telescope is 2.4 m, what
can you say about the answer to (b) and about how the military
surveillance resolutions are accomplished?

+27. If Superman really had x-ray vision at 0.10 nm wavelength
and a 4.0 mm pupil diameter, at what maximum altitude could he
distinguish villains from heroes, assuming that he needs to resolve
points separated by 5.0 cm to do this?

28 @ <= The wings of tiger beetles (Fig. 36-41) are colored
by interference due to thin cuticle-like layers. In addition, these lay-
ers are arranged in patches that are 60 um across and produce dif-
ferent colors. The color you see is a pointillistic mixture of thin-film
interference colors that varies with perspective. Approximately

  

Kjell B Sandved/Bruce Coleman, Inc./Photoshot Holdings Ltd.

Figure 36-41 Problem 28. Tiger beetles are colored by pointillistic
mixtures of thin-film interference colors.
