35-5 MICHELSON’S INTERFEROMETER 1071

Michelson’s Interferometer

An interferometer is a device that can be used to measure lengths or changes in
length with great accuracy by means of interference fringes. We describe the form
originally devised and built by A. A. Michelson in 1881.

Consider light that leaves point P on extended source S in Fig. 35-21 and
encounters beam splitter M. A beam splitter is a mirror that transmits half the
incident light and reflects the other half. In the figure we have assumed, for
convenience, that this mirror possesses negligible thickness. At M the light thus
divides into two waves. One proceeds by transmission toward mirror M, at the
end of one arm of the instrument; the other proceeds by reflection toward mirror
M) at the end of the other arm. The waves are entirely reflected at these mirrors
and are sent back along their directions of incidence, each wave eventually
entering telescope T. What the observer sees is a pattern of curved or approxi-
mately straight interference fringes; in the latter case the fringes resemble the
stripes on a zebra.

Mirror Shift. The path length difference for the two waves when they re-
combine at the telescope is 2d, — 2d,,and anything that changes this path length
difference will cause a change in the phase difference between these two waves at
the eye. As an example, if mirror M) is moved by a distance HA, the path length
difference is changed by A and the fringe pattern is shifted by one fringe (as if
each dark stripe on a zebra had moved to where the adjacent dark stripe had
been). Similarly, moving mirror M, by iA causes a shift by half a fringe (each dark
zebra stripe shifts to where the adjacent white stripe had been).

Insertion. A shift in the fringe pattern can also be caused by the insertion of
a thin transparent material into the optical path of one of the mirrors—say, M,. If
the material has thickness L and index of refraction n, then the number of wave-
lengths along the light’s to-and-fro path through the material is, from Eq. 35-7,

2L _ 2Ln

N, =
my Xr

 

(35-41)

The number of wavelengths in the same thickness 2L of air before the insertion

of the material is

2L
Maa (35-42)

When the material is inserted, the light returned from mirror M, undergoes a
phase change (in terms of wavelengths) of
2Ln  2L 2L

Ny N= Se = Ah (35-43)

 

For each phase change of one wavelength, the fringe pattern is shifted by one
fringe. Thus, by counting the number of fringes through which the material causes
the pattern to shift, and substituting that number for N,,, — N, in Eq. 35-43, you
can determine the thickness L of the material in terms of A.

Standard of Length. By such techniques the lengths of objects can be ex-
pressed in terms of the wavelengths of light. In Michelson’s day, the standard of
length —the meter—was the distance between two fine scratches on a certain
metal bar preserved at Sévres, near Paris. Michelson showed, using his interfer-
ometer, that the standard meter was equivalent to 1 553 163.5 wavelengths of a
certain monochromatic red light emitted from a light source containing cad-
mium. For this careful measurement, Michelson received the 1907 Nobel Prize
in physics. His work laid the foundation for the eventual abandonment (in
1961) of the meter bar as a standard of length and for the redefinition of the
meter in terms of the wavelength of light. By 1983, even this wavelength stan-
dard was not precise enough to meet the growing technical needs, and it was re-
placed with a new standard based on a defined value for the speed of light.

Movable
mirror

M,

    
 

M,

The interference
at the eye
depends on the
path length
difference and
the index of any
inserted material.

Figure 35-21 Michelson’s interferometer,
showing the path of light originating at
point P of an extended source S. Mirror M
splits the light into two beams, which re-
flect from mirrors M, and M, back to M
and then to telescope T. In the telescope
an observer sees a pattern of interference
fringes.
