17

Cellular Mechanisms
of Development

Concept Outline

17.1 Development is a regulated process.

Overview of Development. Studies of cellular
mechanisms have focused on mice, fruit flies, nematodes,
and flowering plants.

Vertebrate Development. Vertebrates develop in a
highly orchestrated fashion.

Insect Development. Insect development is highly
specialized, many key events occurring in a fused mass of
cells.

Plant Development. Unlike animal development, which
is buffered from the environment, plant development is
sensitive to environmental influences.

17.2 Multicellular organisms employ the same basic
mechanisms of development.

Cell Movement and Induction. Animal cells move by
extending protein cables that they use to pull themselves
past surrounding cells. Transcription within cells is
influenced by signal molecules from other cells.
Determination. Cells become reversibly committed to
particular developmental paths.

Pattern Formation. Diffusion of chemical inducers
governs pattern formation in fly embryos.

Expression of Homeotic Genes. Master genes
determine the form body segments will take.
Programmed Cell Death. Some genes, when activated,
Kill their cells.

17.3 Four model developmental systems have been
extensively researched.
The Mouse. Mus musculus.
‘The Fruit Fly. Drosophila melanogaster.
The Nematode. Caenorhabditis elegans.
‘The Flowering Plant. Arabidopsis thaliana.

17.4 Aging can be considered a developmental
process.

Theories of Aging. While there are many ideas
about why cells age, no one theory of aging is widely
accepted.

 

FIGURE 17.1
‘A collection of future fish undergo embryonic development.
Inside a transparent fish egg, a single cell becomes millions of
cells that form eyes, fins, gills, and other body parts.

n the previous chapter, we explored gene expression

from the perspective of an individual cell, examining the
diverse mechanisms that may be employed by a cell to
control the transcription of particular genes. Now we will
broaden our perspective and look at the unique challenge
posed by the development of a cell into a multicellular or-
ganism (figure 17.1). In the course of this developmental
journey, a pattern of decisions about transcription are
made that cause particular lines of cells to proceed along
different paths, spinning an incredibly complex web of
cause and effect. Yet, for all its complexity, this develop-
mental program works with impressive precision. In this
chapter, we will explore the mechanisms used by multicel-
lular organisms to control their development and achieve
this precision.

331
