1102 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

 

Kristen Brochmann/Fundamental Photographs

The fine rulings, each 0.5 wm wide, on a
compact disc function as a diffraction grat-
ing. When a small source of white light
illuminates a disc, the diffracted light forms.
colored “lanes” that are the composite of the
diffraction patterns from the rulings. 3a

Here A@ is the angular separation of two lines whose wavelengths differ by AA.
The greater D is, the greater is the distance between two emission lines whose
wavelengths differ by AA. We show below that the dispersion of a grating at angle
is given by

 

m
DE Tend (dispersion of a grating). (36-30)
Thus, to achieve higher dispersion we must use a grating of smaller grating spac-
ing d and work in a higher-order m. Note that the dispersion does not depend on
the number of rulings N in the grating. The SI unit for D is the degree per meter
or the radian per meter.

Resolving Power

To resolve lines whose wavelengths are close together (that is, to make the lines
distinguishable), the line should also be as narrow as possible. Expressed other-
wise, the grating should have a high resolving power R, defined as

 

avg
R= BA (resolving power defined). (36-31)

Here Avg is the mean wavelength of two emission lines that can barely be recog-
nized as separate, and AA is the wavelength difference between them. The greater
R is, the closer two emission lines can be and still be resolved. We shall show
below that the resolving power of a grating is given by the simple expression

R= Nm (resolving power of a grating). (36-32)

To achieve high resolving power, we must use many rulings (large N).

Proof of Eq. 36-30

Let us start with Eq. 36-25, the expression for the locations of the lines in the dif-
fraction pattern of a grating:

dsin 9= ma.
Let us regard @and A as variables and take differentials of this equation. We find
d(cos @)d@=mda.

For small enough angles, we can write these differentials as small differences,
obtaining

 

d(cos 6) A9= mAA (36-33)
sem
or AA dcos 0"

The ratio on the left is simply D (see Eq. 36-29), and so we have indeed derived
Eq. 36-30.

Proof of Eq. 36-32

We start with Eq. 36-33, which was derived from Eq. 36-25, the expression for the
locations of the lines in the diffraction pattern formed by a grating. Here AA is the
small wavelength difference between two waves that are diffracted by the grat-
ing, and A@ is the angular separation between them in the diffraction pattern. If
A@is to be the smallest angle that will permit the two lines to be resolved, it must
(by Rayleigh’s criterion) be equal to the half-width of each line, which is given by
Eq. 36-28:
A

Gy = —2—.
On = Na cos 0
