1106 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

 

Figure 36-29 A family of planes through the
structure of Fig. 36-28a, and a way to relate
the edge length a of a unit cell to the inter-
planar spacing d.

reflected by a family of parallel reflecting planes (or crystal planes) that extend
through the atoms within the crystal and that contain regular arrays of the atoms.
(The x rays are not actually reflected; we use these fictional planes only to sim-
plify the analysis of the actual diffraction process.)

Figure 36-28b shows three reflecting planes (part of a family containing
many parallel planes) with interplanar spacing d, from which the incident rays
shown are said to reflect. Rays 1, 2, and 3 reflect from the first, second, and third
planes, respectively. At each reflection the angle of incidence and the angle of re-
flection are represented with @. Contrary to the custom in optics, these angles are
defined relative to the surface of the reflecting plane rather than a normal to that
surface. For the situation of Fig. 36-28b, the interplanar spacing happens to be
equal to the unit cell dimension ap.

Figure 36-28c shows an edge-on view of reflection from an adjacent pair of
planes. The waves of rays | and 2 arrive at the crystal in phase. After they are
reflected, they must again be in phase because the reflections and the reflecting
planes have been defined solely to explain the intensity maxima in the diffraction
of x rays by a crystal. Unlike light rays, the x rays do not refract upon entering the
crystal; moreover, we do not define an index of refraction for this situation. Thus,
the relative phase between the waves of rays | and 2 as they leave the crystal is
set solely by their path length difference. For these rays to be in phase, the path
length difference must be equal to an integer multiple of the wavelength A of
the x rays.

Diffraction Equation. By drawing the dashed perpendiculars in Fig. 36-28c,
we find that the path length difference is 2d sin 6. In fact, this is true for any pair
of adjacent planes in the family of planes represented in Fig. 36-28). Thus, we
have, as the criterion for intensity maxima for x-ray diffraction,

2d sin @= md, form = 1,2,3,... (Bragg’s law), (36-34)

where m is the order number of an intensity maximum. Equation 36-34 is called
Bragg’s law after British physicist W. L. Bragg, who first derived it. (He and his
father shared the 1915 Nobel Prize in physics for their use of x rays to study the
structures of crystals.) The angle of incidence and reflection in Eq. 36-34 is called
a Bragg angle.

Regardless of the angle at which x rays enter a crystal, there is always a fam-
ily of planes from which they can be said to reflect so that we can apply Bragg’s
law. In Fig. 36-28d, notice that the crystal structure has the same orientation as it
does in Fig. 36-28a, but the angle at which the beam enters the structure differs
from that shown in Fig. 36-28b. This new angle requires a new family of reflecting
planes, with a different interplanar spacing d and different Bragg angle 6,in order
to explain the x-ray diffraction via Bragg’s law.

Determining a Unit Cell. Figure 36-29 shows how the interplanar spacing d
can be related to the unit cell dimension dp. For the particular family of planes
shown there, the Pythagorean theorem gives

Sd = Vidi,

a
or d= vt = 0.22364. (36-35)
Figure 36-29 suggests how the dimensions of the unit cell can be found once the
interplanar spacing has been measured by means of x-ray diffraction.

X-ray diffraction is a powerful tool for studying both x-ray spectra and the
arrangement of atoms in crystals. To study spectra, a particular set of crystal planes,
having a known spacing d, is chosen. These planes effectively reflect different
wavelengths at different angles. A detector that can discriminate one angle from
another can then be used to determine the wavelength of radiation reaching it. The
crystal itself can be studied with a monochromatic x-ray beam, to determine not
only the spacing of various crystal planes but also the structure of the unit cell.
