1070 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

the wedge. Thus, the interference pattern is that shown in
Fig. 35-20b.

‘We can represent the reflection of light at the top and
bottom interfaces of the wedge, at any point along its length,
with Fig. 35-20c, in which L is the wedge thickness at that
point. Let us apply this figure to the left end of the wedge,
where the reflections give a dark fringe.

We know that, for a dark fringe, the waves of rays ry
and rp in Fig. 35-20d must be out of phase. We also know
that the equation relating the film thickness L to the light’s
wavelength A and the film’s index of refraction nj is either
Eg. 35-36 or Eq. 35-37, depending on the reflection phase
shifts. To determine which equation gives a dark fringe at
the left end of the wedge, we should fill out an organizing
table like Table 35-1, as shown in Fig. 35-20e.

At the top interface of the wedge, the incident light is in
the plastic, which has a greater n than the air beneath that in-
terface. So, we fill in 0 under r, in our organizing table. At the
bottom interface of the wedge, the incident light is in air,
which has a lesser n than the plastic beneath that interface.
So we fill in 0.5 wavelength under rp. So, the phase difference
due to the reflection shifts is 0.5 wavelength. Thus the reflec-
tions alone tend to put the waves of r; and 2 out of phase.

Reflections at left end (Fig. 35-20d): Because we see a
dark fringe at the left end of the wedge, which the reflection
phase shifts alone would produce, we don’t want the path
length difference to alter that condition. So, the path length
difference 2L at the left end must be given by

a
2L = integer x —,
e

35-5 MICHELSON’S INTERFEROMETER

Learning Objectives

which leads to Eq. 35-37:

A
aoe
27)

form =0,1,2,.... (35-39)

Reflections at right end (Fig. 35-20f): Equation 35-39
holds not only for the left end of the wedge but also for any
point along the wedge where a dark fringe is observed, in-
cluding the right end, with a different integer value of m for
each fringe. The least value of m is associated with the least
thickness of the wedge where a dark fringe is observed.
Progressively greater values of m are associated with pro-
gressively greater thicknesses of the wedge where a dark
fringe is observed. Let m, be the value at the left end. Then
the value at the right end must be m, + 5 because, from
Fig. 35-20b, the right end is located at the fifth dark fringe
from the left end.

Thickness difference: To find AL, we first solve Eq. 35-39
twice —once for the thickness L, at the left end and once
for the thickness L, at the right end:

a a
Li = (m,) ny? Lp =(m, + 5) oe (35-40)
‘We can now subtract L; from Lp and substitute n. = 1.00
for the air within the wedge and A = 632.8 x 10-°'m:

— (m+ 5)A mA _ 5S A
7

AL=La-L =
“ 2nz 2m 2m

= 1.58 x 10° m. (Answer)

S$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

35.35 With a sketch, explain how an interferometer
works.

35.36 When a transparent material is inserted into one of
the beams in an interferometer, apply the relationship
between the phase change of the light (in terms of

Key Ideas

@ In Michelson’s interferometer, a light wave is split into two
beams that then recombine after traveling along different
paths.

@ The interference pattern they produce depends on the
difference in the lengths of those paths and the indexes of
refraction along the paths.

wavelength) and the material's thickness and index of
refraction.

35.37 For an interferometer, apply the relationship between
the distance a mirror is moved and the resulting fringe shift
in the interference pattern.

@ If a transparent material of index n and thickness L is in
one path, the phase difference (in terms of wavelength) in
the recombining beams is equal to

2L
phase difference = 7a —1),

where A is the wavelength of the light.
