1050 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

The difference in indexes
causes a phase shift
between the rays.

a ae

L-1-|
Figure 35-4 Two light rays travel through

two media having different indexes of
refraction.

Wavelength and Index of Refraction

We have now seen that the wavelength of light changes when the speed of the
light changes, as happens when light crosses an interface from one medium into
another. Further, the speed of light in any medium depends on the index of
refraction of the medium, according to Eq. 35-3. Thus, the wavelength of light in
any medium depends on the index of refraction of the medium. Let a certain
monochromatic light have wavelength A and speed c in vacuum and wavelength
A, and speed v in a medium with an index of refraction n. Now we can rewrite
Eq. 35-1 as

dy =A. (35-5)

A, = —. (35-6)

This equation relates the wavelength of light in any medium to its wavelength in
vacuum: A greater index of refraction means a smaller wavelength.

Next, let f,, represent the frequency of the light in a medium with index of re-
fraction n.Then from the general relation of Eq. 16-13 (v = Af), we can write

v
Jn =
Substituting Eqs. 35-3 and 35-6 then gives us
cn c
in

where f is the frequency of the light in vacuum. Thus, although the speed and
wavelength of light in the medium are different from what they are in vacuum,
the frequency of the light in the medium is the same as it is in vacuum.

Phase Difference. The fact that the wavelength of light depends on the
index of refraction via Eq. 35-6 is important in certain situations involving the in-
terference of light waves. For example, in Fig. 35-4, the waves of the rays (that is,
the waves represented by the rays) have identical wavelengths A and are initially
in phase in air (n ~ 1). One of the waves travels through medium 1 of index of
refraction n; and length L. The other travels through medium 2 of index of refrac-
tion n and the same length L. When the waves leave the two media, they will have
the same wavelength—their wavelength A in air. However, because their wave-
lengths differed in the two media, the two waves may no longer be in phase.

o The phase difference between two light waves can change if the waves travel
through different materials having different indexes of refraction.

As we shall discuss soon, this change in the phase difference can determine how
the light waves will interfere if they reach some common point.

To find their new phase difference in terms of wavelengths, we first count the
number N, of wavelengths there are in the length L of medium 1. From Eq. 35-6,
the wavelength in medium 1 is A, = A/ny; so

L Ln,

N=—=—. 35-7
‘L Ant Xr ¢ )

 

 

Similarly, we count the number N, of wavelengths there are in the length L of
medium 2, where the wavelength is A,» = A/ny:

= (35-8)

 
