The Chemical Building
Blocks of Life

 

Concept Outline

3.1 Molecules are the building blocks of life.

The Chemistry of Carbon. Because individual carbon
atoms can form multiple covalent bonds, organic molecules
can be quite complex.

3.2 Proteins perform the chemistry of the cell.

The Many Functions of Proteins. Proteins can be cata-
lysts, transporters, supporters, and regulators.

Amino Acids Are the Building Blocks of Proteins. Proteins
are long chains of various combinations of amino acids.

A Protein’s Function Depends on the Shape of the
Molecule. A protein’s shape is determined by its amino acid
sequence.

How Proteins Fold Into Their Functional Shape. The
distribution of nonpolar amino acids along a protein chain
largely determines how the protein folds.

How Proteins Unfold. When conditions such as pH or
temperature fluctuate, proteins may denature or unfold.

3.3 Nucleic acids store and transfer genetic information.

Information Molecules. Nucleic acids store information in
cells. RNA isa single-chain polymer of nucleotides, while
DNA possesses two chains twisted around each other.

3.4 Lipids make membranes and store energy.

Phospholipids Form Membranes. ‘The spontaneous ag-
gregation of phospholipids in water is responsible for the
formation of biological membranes.

Fats and Other Kinds of Lipids. Organisms utilize a wide
variety of water-insoluble molecules.

Fats as Food. Fats are very efficient energy storage
molecules because of their high proportion of C—H bonds.

3.5 Carbohydrates store energy and provide building
materials.

Simple Carbohydrates. Sugars are simple carbohydrates,
often consisting of six-carbon rings.

Linking Sugars Together. Sugars can be linked together to
form long polymers, or polysaccharides.

Structural Carbohydrates. Structural carbohydrates like
cellulose are chains of sugars linked in a way that enzymes
cannot easily attack.

 

FIGURE 3.1

Computer-generated model of a macromolecule. Pictured is
an enzyme responsible for releasing energy from sugar. This
complex molecule consists of hundreds of different amino acids
linked into chains that form the characteristic coils and folds seen
here.

Me: are extremely small compared with the fa-
miliar world we see about us. Imagine: there are
more water molecules in a cup than there are stars in the
sky. Many other molecules are gigantic, compared with wa-
ter, consisting of thousands of atoms. These atoms are or-
ganized into hundreds of smaller molecules that are linked
together into long chains (figure 3.1). These enormous
molecules, almost always synthesized by living things, are
called macromolecules. As we shall see, there are four gen-
eral types of macromolecules, the basic chemical building
blocks from which all organisms are assembled.

35
