Diffraction

36-1 sINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...
36.01 Describe the diffraction of light waves by a narrow opening

and an edge, and also describe the resulting interference pattern.

36.02 Describe an experiment that demonstrates the
Fresnel bright spot.

36.03 With a sketch, describe the arrangement for a
single-slit diffraction experiment.

36.04 With a sketch, explain how splitting a slit width into
equal zones leads to the equations giving the angles to the
minima in the diffraction pattern.

36.05 Apply the relationships between width a of a thin,

Key Ideas

@ When waves encounter an edge, an obstacle, or an aperture
the size of which is comparable to the wavelength of the waves,
those waves spread out as they travel and, as aresult, undergo
interference. This type of interference is called diffraction.

@ Waves passing through a long narrow slit of width a
produce, on a viewing screen, a single-slit diffraction

What Is Physics?

rectangular slit or object, the wavelength A, the angle @to
any of the minima in the diffraction pattern, the distance to
a viewing screen, and the distance between a minimum
and the center of the pattern.

36.06 Sketch the diffraction pattern for monochromatic light, iden-
tifying what lies at the center and what the various bright and
dark fringes are called (such as “first minimum’).

36.07 Identify what happens to a diffraction pattern when
the wavelength of the light or the width of the diffracting
aperture or object is varied.

pattern that includes a central maximum (bright fringe) and other
maxima. They are separated by minima that are located relative
to the central axis by angles 0:

asin@=maA, form =1,2,3,... (minima).

@ The maxima are located approximately halfway between minima.

One focus of physics in the study of light is to understand and put to use the
diffraction of light as it passes through a narrow slit or (as we shall discuss) past
either a narrow obstacle or an edge. We touched on this phenomenon in Chapter 35
when we looked at how light flared—diffracted—through the slits in Young’s
experiment. Diffraction through a given slit is more complicated than simple
flaring, however, because the light also interferes with itself and produces an
interference pattern. It is because of such complications that light is rich with
application opportunities. Even though the diffraction of light as it passes
through a slit or past an obstacle seems awfully academic, countless engineers
and scientists make their living using this physics, and the total worth of diffrac-
tion applications worldwide is probably incalculable.

Before we can discuss some of these applications, we first must discuss why
diffraction is due to the wave nature of light.

Diffraction and the Wave Theory of Light

In Chapter 35 we defined diffraction rather loosely as the flaring of light as it
emerges from a narrow slit. More than just flaring occurs, however, because the

1081
