35-4 INTERFERENCE FROM THIN FILMS 1063

Sample Problem 35.04 Combining three light waves by using phasors

Three light waves combine at a certain point where their
electric field components are

E, = Epsin at,
E, = Ey sin(t + 60°),
E, = Ey sin(wt — 30°).
Find their resultant component E(f) at that point.

KEY IDEA

 

The resultant wave is

E(t) = Ex(t) + Ex(t) + Ex).
‘We can use the method of phasors to find this sum, and we
are free to evaluate the phasors at any time ¢.

Calculations: To simplify the solution, we choose t = 0, for
which the phasors representing the three waves are shown
in Fig. 35-14. We can add these three phasors either directly
on a vector-capable calculator or by components. For the
component approach, we first write the sum of their hori-
zontal components as

> En = Ey cos 0 + Epcos 60° + Ey cos(—30°) = 2.37Ep.
The sum of their vertical components, which is the value of
Eatt=0,is

> E, = Epsin0 + Epsin 60° + Ey sin(—30°) = 0.366Ep.

The resultant wave E(t) thus has an amplitude Eg of

RWILEY

Er = V (2.37Ep)* + (0.366Ey)? = 2.4,
and a phase angle f relative to the phasor representing E, of

0.366E)
= tan-! = 88°
B= tan ( 2.37F ) 8.8°.
We can now write, for the resultant wave E(t),

E = Egsin(ot + B)

= 2.4K sin(wt + 8.8°). (Answer)

Be careful to interpret the angle correctly in Fig. 35-14: It is
the constant angle between Ex and the phasor representing
£, as the four phasors rotate as a single unit around the

origin. The angle between Ep and the horizontal axis in
Fig. 35-14 does not remain equal to B.

Phasors that represent
waves can be added to
find the net wave.

 

Figure 35-14 Three phasors, representing waves with equal ampli-
tudes Ey and with phase constants 0°,60°,and —30°, shown at time
t = 0. The phasors combine to give a resultant phasor with magni-
tude Ep, at angle B.

PLUS additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

35-4 INTERFERENCE FROM THIN FILMS

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

35.29 Sketch the setup for thin-film interference, showing
the incident ray and reflected rays (perpendicular to the
film but drawn slightly slanted for clarity) and identifying
the thickness and the three indexes of refraction.

35.30 Identify the condition in which a reflection can result in
a phase shift, and give the value of that phase shift.

35.31 Identify the three factors that determine the interfer-
ence of the reflected waves: reflection shifts, path length
difference, and internal wavelength (set by the film's index
of refraction).

35.32 For a thin film, use the reflection shifts and the desired
result (the reflected waves are in phase or out of phase, or

the transmitted waves are in phase or out of phase) to
determine and then apply the necessary equation relating
the thickness L, the wavelength A (measured in air), and
the index of refraction n of the film.

35.33 For a very thin film in air (with thickness much less
than the wavelength of visible light), explain why the film
is always dark.

35.34 At each end ofa thin film in the form of a wedge, deter-
mine and then apply the necessary equation relating the
thickness L, the wavelength A (measured in air), and the
index of refraction n of the film, and then count the number
of bright bands and dark bands across the film.

9
