36-6 GRATINGS: DISPERSION AND RESOLVING POWER 1101

Figure 36-25 The visible
emission lines of cadmium,
as seen through a grating

spectroscope. Photo Researchers, Inc.

Department of Physics, Imperial College/Science Photo Library/

solve Eq. 36-25 for the angle 6 for the red wavelength when m = 4, we find that
sin @is greater than unity, which is not possible. The fourth order is then said to be
incomplete for this grating; it might not be incomplete for a grating with greater
spacing d, which will spread the lines less than in Fig. 36-24. Figure 36-25 is a

photograph of the visible emission lines produced by cadmium.

Iv] Checkpoint 5

 

The figure shows lines of different orders produced by
a diffraction grating in monochromatic red light. (a) Is

 

 

 

 

the center of the pattern to the left or right? (b) In

monochromatic green light, are the half-widths of the lines produced in the same or-
ders greater than, less than, or the same as the half-widths of the lines shown?

36-6 Gratings: DISPERSION AND RESOLVING POWER

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

36.32 Identify dispersion as the spreading apart of
the diffraction lines associated with different
wavelengths.

36.33 Apply the relationships between dispersion D,
wavelength difference AA, angular separation A@, slit

separation d, order number m, and the angle @ correspon-

ding to the order number.
36.34 Identify the effect on the dispersion of a diffraction

Key Ideas

grating if the slit separation is varied.

36.35 Identify that for us to resolve lines, a diffraction grating
must make them distinguishable.

36.36 Apply the relationship between resolving power R,
wavelength difference AA, average wavelength Ave,
number of rulings N, and order number m.

36.37 Identify the effect on the resolving power R if the
number of slits N is increased.

 

@ The dispersion D of a diffraction grating is a measure of
the angular separation Ad of the lines it produces for two
wavelengths differing by AA. For order number m, at angle 6,
the dispersion is given by

Ag m

D=-—

Ar = dosh (ilspersion).

Gratings: Dispersion and Resolving Power
Dispersion

@ The resolving power R of a diffraction grating is a measure of
its ability to make the emission lines of two close wavelengths
distinguishable. For two wavelengths differing by AA and with
an average value of A,,., the resolving power is given by

Aavg
AA

lave

 

R= = Nm (resolving power).

To be useful in distinguishing wavelengths that are close to each other (as in a
grating spectroscope), a grating must spread apart the diffraction lines associated
with the various wavelengths. This spreading, called dispersion, is defined as

D= ave (dispersion defined).

(36-29)
