center of the visible spectrum. Figure 36-27 shows that x rays are produced when
electrons escaping from a heated filament F are accelerated by a potential differ-
ence V and strike a metal target T.

A standard optical diffraction grating cannot be used to discriminate
between different wavelengths in the x-ray wavelength range. For A=1A
(= 0.1 nm) and d = 3000 nm, for example, Eq. 36-25 shows that the first-order
maximum occurs at

1A _ sin-! (1)O.1 nm)

3000am 001".

= sin™
This is too close to the central maximum to be practical. A grating with d ~ A is
desirable, but, because x-ray wavelengths are about equal to atomic diameters,
such gratings cannot be constructed mechanically.

In 1912, it occurred to German physicist Max von Laue that a crystalline
solid, which consists of a regular array of atoms, might form a natural three-
dimensional “diffraction grating” for x rays. The idea is that, in a crystal such as
sodium chloride (NaCl), a basic unit of atoms (called the unit cell) repeats itself
throughout the array. Figure 36-284 represents a section through a crystal of
NaCl and identifies this basic unit. The unit cell is a cube measuring dj on
each side.

When an x-ray beam enters a crystal such as NaCl, x rays are scattered —that
is, redirected —in all directions by the crystal structure. In some directions the
scattered waves undergo destructive interference, resulting in intensity minima;
in other directions the interference is constructive, resulting in intensity maxima.
This process of scattering and interference is a form of diffraction.

Fictional Planes. Although the process of diffraction of x rays by a crystal is
complicated, the maxima turn out to be in directions as if the x rays were

1

32
Na*_oCl- Incident
xrays

() +te——e—_+—+

 

(a)

 

The extra distance of ray 2
(oO determines the interference. (ad

 

Figure 36-28 (a) The cubic structure of NaCl, showing the sodium and chlorine ions and

a unit cell (shaded). (b) Incident x rays undergo diffraction by the structure of (a). The
xrays are diffracted as if they were reflected by a family of parallel planes, with angles
measured relative to the planes (not relative to a normal as in optics). (c) The path length
difference between waves effectively reflected by two adjacent planes is 2d sin 6. (d)

A different orientation of the incident x rays relative to the structure. A different family
of parallel planes now effectively reflects the x rays.

36-7 X-RAY DIFFRACTION

1105

 

 

Figure 36-27 X rays are generated when
electrons leaving heated filament F are
accelerated through a potential difference
V and strike a metal target 7. The “win-
dow” W in the evacuated chamber C is
transparent to x rays.
