35-1

Angle 0, in Fig. 35-3a is the angle between the wavefront and the interface; it
has the same value as the angle between the normal to the wavefront (that is, the
incident ray) and the normal to the interface. Thus, 6, is the angle of incidence.

As the wave moves into the glass, a Huygens wavelet at point e in Fig. 35-3b
will expand to pass through point c, at a distance of A; from point e. The time
interval required for this expansion is that distance divided by the speed of the
wavelet, or A,/v;. Now note that in this same time interval, a Huygens wavelet at
point h will expand to pass through point g, at the reduced speed v, and with
wavelength A . Thus, this time interval must also be equal to A,/v2. By equating
these times of travel, we obtain the relation

Ay Vy

Ay v9? (35-1)
which shows that the wavelengths of light in two media are proportional to the
speeds of light in those media.

By Huygens’ principle, the refracted wavefront must be tangent to an arc of
radius A, centered on h, say at point g. The refracted wavefront must also be tan-
gent to an arc of radius A, centered on e, say at c. Then the refracted wavefront
must be oriented as shown. Note that @, the angle between the refracted wave-
front and the interface, is actually the angle of refraction.

For the right triangles hce and hcg in Fig. 35-3b we may write

— (ortriangle hee)

sin 6 he

. X
and sin = Te (for triangle hcg).
c

Dividing the first of these two equations by the second and using Eq. 35-1, we find

sin A
sin 0; Ay V2"

 

(35-2)

We can define the index of refraction n for each medium as the ratio of the
speed of light in vacuum to the speed of light v in the medium. Thus,

n= = (index of refraction). (35-3)

In particular, for our two media, we have
c c
nmy=— and m=—.
vy v2

We can now rewrite Eq. 35-2 as

sin@ — cin _ ny

sin cing ny
or n, sin 6; = ny sin 6 (law of refraction), (35-4)

as introduced in Chapter 33.

Vv] Checkpoint 1

The figure shows a monochromatic ray of light travel-
ing across parallel interfaces, from an original material
a, through layers of materials b and cand then back
into material a. Rank the materials according to the
speed of light in them, greatest first.

 

LIGHT AS A WAVE

1049
