35-3 INTERFERENCE AND DOUBLE-SLIT INTENSITY 1059

35-3 INTERFERENCE AND DOUBLE-SLIT INTENSITY

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

 

 

35.23 Distinguish between coherent and incoherent the arriving waves and relate that phase difference to the
light. angle @ locating that point in the pattern.

35.24 For two light waves arriving at a common point, write 35.27 Use a phasor diagram to find the resultant wave
expressions for their electric field components as (amplitude and phase constant) of two or more light
functions of time and a phase constant. waves arriving at a common point and use that result to

35.25 Identify that the phase difference between two waves determine the intensity.
determines their interference. 35.28 Apply the relationship between a light wave's angular

35.26 For a point in a double-slit interference pattern, frequency wand the angular speed w of the phasor repre-
calculate the intensity in terms of the phase difference of senting the wave.

Key Ideas

@ If two light waves that meet at a point are to interfere @ In Young's interference experiment, two waves, each with

perceptibly, the phase difference between them must remain intensity Jo, yield a resultant wave of intensity J at the viewing

constant with time; that is, the waves must be coherent. screen, with

When two coherent waves meet, the resulting intensity may and

be found by using phasors. 1=4l) cos? 34, — where f= sin 0.

Coherence

For the interference pattern to appear on viewing screen C in Fig. 35-8, the light
waves reaching any point P on the screen must have a phase difference that does
not vary in time. That is the case in Fig. 35-8 because the waves passing through
slits S,; and S, are portions of the single light wave that illuminates the slits.
Because the phase difference remains constant, the light from slits S; and S, is
said to be completely coherent.

Sunlight and Fingernails. Direct sunlight is partially coherent; that is, sun-
light waves intercepted at two points have a constant phase difference only if the
points are very close. If you look closely at your fingernail in bright sunlight, you
can see a faint interference pattern called speckle that causes the nail to appear to
be covered with specks. You see this effect because light waves scattering from
very close points on the nail are sufficiently coherent to interfere with one
another at your eye. The slits in a double-slit experiment, however, are not close
enough, and in direct sunlight, the light at the slits would be incoherent. To get
coherent light, we would have to send the sunlight through a single slit as in
Fig. 35-8; because that single slit is small, light that passes through it is coherent.
In addition, the smallness of the slit causes the coherent light to spread via
diffraction to illuminate both slits in the double-slit experiment.

Incoherent Sources. If we replace the double slits with two similar but inde-
pendent monochromatic light sources, such as two fine incandescent wires, the
phase difference between the waves emitted by the sources varies rapidly and
randomly. (This occurs because the light is emitted by vast numbers of atoms in
the wires, acting randomly and independently for extremely short times— of the
order of nanoseconds.) As a result, at any given point on the viewing screen, the
interference between the waves from the two sources varies rapidly and ran-
domly between fully constructive and fully destructive. The eye (and most com-
mon optical detectors) cannot follow such changes, and no interference pattern
can be seen. The fringes disappear, and the screen is seen as being uniformly
illuminated.
