1014 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

lv] Checkpoint 1

mirrors A and B separated by distance d.A grinning

In the figure you are ina system of two vertical parallel 4
a he

gargoyle is perched at point O, a distance 0.2d from
mirror A.Each mirror produces a first (least deep)
image of the gargoyle. Then each mirror produces a
second image with the object being the first image in

e 86

B

 

the opposite mirror. Then each mirror produces a third
image with the object being the second image in the opposite mirror, and so on—you
might see hundreds of grinning gargoyle images. How deep behind mirror A are the

first, second, and third images in mirror A?

34-2 sPHERICAL MIRRORS

=

 

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

34.06 Distinguish a concave spherical mirror from a convex
spherical mirror.

34.07 For concave and convex mirrors, sketch a ray diagram
for the reflection of light rays that are initially parallel to
the central axis, indicating how they form the focal points,
and identifying which is real and which is virtual.

34.08 Distinguish a real focal point from a virtual focal point,
identify which corresponds to which type of mirror, and
identify the algebraic sign associated with each focal
length.

34,09 Relate a focal length of a spherical mirror to the radius.

34,10 Identify the terms “inside the focal point” and “outside
the focal point”

34.11 For an object (a) inside and (b) outside the focal point
of a concave mirror, sketch the reflections of at least two
rays to find the image and identify the type and orientation
of the image.

Key Ideas

@ A spherical mirror is in the shape of a small section of a
spherical surface and can be concave (the radius of curvature
risa positive quantity), convex (r is a negative quantity), or
plane (flat, r is infinite).

@ If parallel rays are sent into a (spherical) concave

mirror parallel to the central axis, the reflected rays pass
through a common point (a real focus F) at a distance f
(a positive quantity) from the mirror. If they are sent toward
a (spherical) convex mirror, backward extensions of the
reflected rays pass through a common point (a virtual
focus F) at a distance f (a negative quantity) from

the mirror.

@ A concave mirror can form a real image (if the object is

outside the focal point) or a virtual image (if the object is
inside the focal point).

34,12 For a concave mirror, distinguish the locations and ori-
entations of a real image and a virtual image.

34,13 For an object in front of a convex mirror, sketch the re-
flections of at least two rays to find the image and identify
the type and orientation of the image.

34,14 Identify which type of mirror can produce both real
and virtual images and which type can produce only virtual
images.

34.15 Identify the algebraic signs of the image distance i for
real images and virtual images.

34.16 For convex, concave, and plane mirrors, apply the rela-
tionship between the focal length f, object distance p, and
image distance i.

34.17 Apply the relationships between lateral magnification
m, image height h’, object height h, image distance i, and
object distance p.

@ Aconvex mirror can form only a virtual image.

@ The mirror equation relates an object distance p, the mir-
ror's focal length f and radius of curvature r, and the
image distance i:

Pp + i f r
@ The magnitude of the lateral magnification m of an object is
the ratio of the image height h’ to object height h,
h
Ww
and is related to the object distance p and image distance i by

[ml =

 

 
