1048

 

Philippe Colombi/PhotoDisc/Getty Images Inc.

Figure 35-1 The blue of the top surface of a Morpho
butterfly wing is due to optical interference and
shifts in color as your viewing perspective changes.

  

Wavefront at New position
t=0 of wavefront
at time t= At

a e

Figure 35-2 The propagation of a plane wave
in vacuum, as portrayed by Huygens’
principle.

Refraction occurs at the
surface, giving a new
direction of travel.

Jy Incident wave
air
Glass

(@

CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

bottom wing surface, but the brown is hidden on the top surface by an arrest-
ing blue due to the interference of light reflecting from that surface (Fig. 35-
1). Moreover, the top surface is color-shifting; if you change your perspective
or if the wing moves, the tint of the color changes. Similar color shifting is used
in the inks on many currencies to thwart counterfeiters, whose copy machines
can duplicate color from only one perspective and therefore cannot duplicate
any shift in color caused by a change in perspective. aS

To understand the basic physics of optical interference, we must largely
abandon the simplicity of geometrical optics (in which we describe light as
rays) and return to the wave nature of light.

Light as a Wave

The first convincing wave theory for light was in 1678 by Dutch physicist
Christian Huygens. Mathematically simpler than the electromagnetic the-
ory of Maxwell, it nicely explained reflection and refraction in terms of
waves and gave physical meaning to the index of refraction.

Huygens’ wave theory is based on a geometrical construction that al-
lows us to tell where a given wavefront will be at any time in the future if we
know its present position. Huygens’ principle is:

Oo All points on a wavefront serve as point sources of spherical secondary wavelets.
After a time f, the new position of the wavefront will be that of a surface tangent
to these secondary wavelets.

Here is a simple example. At the left in Fig. 35-2, the present location of a wavefront
of a plane wave traveling to the right in vacuum is represented by plane ab, perpen-
dicular to the page. Where will the wavefront be at time Af later? We let several
points on plane ab (the dots) serve as sources of spherical secondary wavelets that
are emitted at f= 0. At time Af, the radius of all these spherical wavelets will have
grown to c At, where c is the speed of light in vacuum. We draw plane de tangent to
these wavelets at time At. This plane represents the wavefront of the plane wave at
time Af; it is parallel to plane ab and a perpendicular distance c At from it.

The Law of Refraction

We now use Huygens’ principle to derive the law of refraction, Eq. 33-40 (Snell’s
law). Figure 35-3 shows three stages in the refraction of several wavefronts at
a flat interface between air (medium 1) and glass (medium 2). We arbitrarily
choose the wavefronts in the incident light beam to be separated by A, the
wavelength in medium 1. Let the speed of light in air be v, and that in glass be v>.
We assume that v) < vj, which happens to be true.

Refracted wave ‘A

 

(b) (

Figure 35-3 The refraction of a plane wave at an air—glass interface, as portrayed by Huygens’ principle. The wavelength in glass is smaller
than that in air. For simplicity, the reflected wave is not shown. Parts (a) through (c) represent three successive stages of the refraction.
