1054 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

Awave passing through
aslit flares (diffracts).

Incident Diffracted
wave wave
alka

—

im in
4 Iii]

(6.02) ~

(a) Screen

aka “
Ie, 3 |
4
(3.02) //
™~e
(b)
A
shea \
+
¢
(1.54)
_N

(c)

Figure 35-7 Diffraction represented
schematically. For a given wavelength A, the
diffraction is more pronounced the smaller
the slit width a. The figures show the cases
for (a) slit width a = 6.0A, (b) slit width a =
3.0A, and (c) slit width a = 1.5A.Inall three
cases, the screen and the length of the slit
extend well into and out of the page, per-
pendicular to it.

 

Figure 35-7a shows the situation schematically for an incident plane wave of
wavelength A encountering a slit that has width a = 6.0 and extends into and out
of the page. The part of the wave that passes through the slit flares out on the far
side. Figures 35-7b (with a = 3.0A) and 35-7c (a = 1.5A) illustrate the main fea-
ture of diffraction: the narrower the slit, the greater the diffraction.

Diffraction limits geometrical optics, in which we represent an electromag-
netic wave with a ray. If we actually try to form a ray by sending light through
a narrow slit, or through a series of narrow slits, diffraction will always defeat our
effort because it always causes the light to spread. Indeed, the narrower we make
the slits (in the hope of producing a narrower beam), the greater the spreading is.
Thus, geometrical optics holds only when slits or other apertures that might be
located in the path of light do not have dimensions comparable to or smaller than
the wavelength of the light.

Young’s Interference Experiment

In 1801, Thomas Young experimentally proved that light is a wave, contrary to
what most other scientists then thought. He did so by demonstrating that light
undergoes interference, as do water waves, sound waves, and waves of all other
types. In addition, he was able to measure the average wavelength of sunlight;
his value, 570 nm, is impressively close to the modern accepted value of 555 nm.
‘We shall here examine Young’s experiment as an example of the interference of
light waves.

Figure 35-8 gives the basic arrangement of Young’s experiment. Light from a
distant monochromatic source illuminates slit Sp in screen A. The emerging light
then spreads via diffraction to illuminate two slits S$; and S, in screen B.
Diffraction of the light by these two slits sends overlapping circular waves into

Max

        
 
      
  
  
     

The waves emerging
from the two slits
Max overlap and form an
interference pattern.

Max

  
 

ZL

Max

Max

C7

Max

2S

Max

oS

Max

SSSSS

Max

SS

Max

SS

Max

Ss

Max

Max

Figure 35-8. In Young’s interference experiment, incident monochromatic light is diffracted
by slit Sy, which then acts as a point source of light that emits semicircular wavefronts. As
that light reaches screen B, it is diffracted by slits $; and S, which then act as two point
sources of light. The light waves traveling from slits 5; and 5) overlap and undergo inter-
ference, forming an interference pattern of maxima and minima on viewing screen C. This
figure is a cross section; the screens, slits, and interference pattern extend into and out of
the page. Between screens B and C, the semicircular wavefronts centered on S depict the
waves that would be there if only S, were open. Similarly, those centered on S; depict
waves that would be there if only S; were open.
