1084

   

Py
TT
a/4
+
+
a/4
4 D
cabin? abecaiaenaeciaranetal Py
a/4

   
 

These rays
cancel at Po.

eS+

B
Incident |

wave

(a)

To see the cancellation,

 
 
  
  
  

Path length
difference between
rand 1,

  

Path length
difference between
rand 1%

(b)

Figure 36-6 (a) Waves from the top points
of four zones of width a/4 undergo fully
destructive interference at point P>.(b) For
D> a,we can approximate rays r,12,73.
andr, as being parallel, at angle to the
central axis.

group the rays into pairs.

CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

as being parallel, at angle @ to the central axis. We can also approximate the trian-
gle formed by point b, the top point of the slit, and the center point of the slit as
being a right triangle, and one of the angles inside that triangle as being 0. The
path length difference between rays r; and r (which is still the distance from the
center of the slit to point b) is then equal to (a/2) sin 6.

First Minimum. We can repeat this analysis for any other pair of rays origi-
nating at corresponding points in the two zones (say, at the midpoints of the
zones) and extending to point P;. Each such pair of rays has the same path length
difference (a/2) sin @. Setting this common path length difference equal to V2
(our condition for the first dark fringe), we have

4 ang
— 7 sin O= 5.
which gives us
asin @=A (first minimum). (36-1)

Given slit width a and wavelength A, Eq. 36-1 tells us the angle 0 of the first dark
fringe above and (by symmetry) below the central axis.

Narrowing the Slit. Note that if we begin with a > A and then narrow the slit
while holding the wavelength constant, we increase the angle at which the first
dark fringes appear; that is, the extent of the diffraction (the extent of the flaring
and the width of the pattern) is greater for a narrower slit. When we have reduced
the slit width to the wavelength (that is,a = A), the angle of the first dark fringes
is 90°. Since the first dark fringes mark the two edges of the central bright fringe,
that bright fringe must then cover the entire viewing screen.

Second Minimum. We find the second dark fringes above and below the
central axis as we found the first dark fringes, except that we now divide the slit
into four zones of equal widths a/4, as shown in Fig. 36-6a. We then extend rays r,
1, 73, and r, from the top points of the zones to point P>, the location of the sec-
ond dark fringe above the central axis. To produce that fringe, the path length dif-
ference between r, and ry, that between r, and r3, and that between r; and r, must
all be equal to A/2.

For D > a, we can approximate these four rays as being parallel, at angle @ to
the central axis. To display their path length differences, we extend a perpendi-
cular line through each adjacent pair of rays, as shown in Fig. 36-6), to form a se-
ries of right triangles, each of which has a path length difference as one side.
We see from the top triangle that the path length difference between r, and rp is
(a/4) sin 0. Similarly, from the bottom triangle, the path length difference between
r; and rgis also (a/4) sin @. In fact, the path length difference for any two rays that
originate at corresponding points in two adjacent zones is (a/4) sin @. Since in
each such case the path length difference is equal to A/2, we have

sin 0 = 4
which gives us
asin 9@=2A (second minimum). (36-2)

All Minima. We could now continue to locate dark fringes in the diffraction
pattern by splitting up the slit into more zones of equal width. We would always
choose an even number of zones so that the zones (and their waves) could be
paired as we have been doing. We would find that the dark fringes above and be-
low the central axis can be located with the general equation

asin @= mA, for m = 1,2,3,... (minima—dark fringes). (36-3)

You can remember this result in the following way. Draw a triangle like the
one in Fig. 36-5, but for the full slit width a, and note that the path length differ-
ence between the top and bottom rays equals a sin @. Thus, Eq. 36-3 says:
