1108 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

6 Light of frequency f illuminating a long narrow slit produces a
diffraction pattern. (a) If we switch to light of frequency 1.3f, does
the pattern expand away from the center or contract toward the
center? (b) Does the pattern expand or contract if, instead, we sub-
merge the equipment in clear corn syrup?

7 Atnight many people see rings (called entoptic halos) surround-
ing bright outdoor lamps in otherwise dark surroundings. The rings
are the first of the side maxima in diffraction patterns produced by
structures that are thought to be within the cornea (or possibly the
lens) of the observer’s eye. (The central maxima of such patterns
overlap the lamp.) (a) Would a particular ring become smaller or
larger if the lamp were switched from blue to red light? (b) Ifa lamp
emits white light, is blue or red on the outside edge of the ring?

8 (a) For a given diffraction grating, does the smallest difference
AA in two wavelengths that can be resolved increase, decrease, or
remain the same as the wavelength increases? (b) For a given
wavelength region (say, around 500 nm), is AA greater in the first
order or in the third order?

9 Figure 36-33 shows a red line and

a green line of the same order in the | |
pattern produced by a diffraction
grating. If we increased the number
of rulings in the grating—say, by
removing tape that had covered the outer half of the rulings—
would (a) the half-widths of the lines and (b) the separation of the
lines increase, decrease, or remain the same? (c) Would the lines
shift to the right, shift to the left, or remain in place?

 

 

 

 

Figure 36-33 Questions 9
and 10.

10 For the situation of Question 9 and Fig, 36-33, if instead we in-
creased the grating spacing, would (a) the half-widths of the lines and
(b) the separation of the lines increase, decrease, or remain the same?
(c) Would the lines shift to the right, shift to the left, or remain in place?

11 (a) Figure 36-34a shows the lines produced by diffraction
gratings A and B using light of the same wavelength; the lines are
of the same order and appear at the same angles 6. Which grating

<Problems

has the greater number of rulings? (b) Figure 36-34b shows lines of
two orders produced by a single diffraction grating using light of
two wavelengths, both in the red region of the spectrum. Which
lines, the left pair or right pair, are in the order with greater m? Is
the center of the diffraction pattern located to the left or to the
right in (c) Fig, 36-34a and (d) Fig. 36-34b?

: L |
aL
(a (d)

Figure 36-34 Question 11.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 Figure 36-35 shows the

bright fringes that lie within 4 |
the central diffraction enve-
lope in two double-slit dif-
fraction experiments using ? | |
the same wavelength of light.
Are (a) the slit width a, (b)
the slit separation d, and (c) the ratio d/a in experiment B greater
than, less than, or the same as those quantities in experiment A?

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 36-35 Question 12.

13 In three arrangements you view two closely spaced small
objects that are the same large distance from you. The angles that
the objects occupy in your field of view and their distances from
you are the following: (1) 2¢ and R; (2) 2¢ and 2R; (3) #/2 and R/2.
(a) Rank the arrangements according to the separation between
the objects, greatest first. If you can just barely resolve the two ob-
jects in arrangement 2, can you resolve them in (b) arrangement 1
and (c) arrangement 3?

14 For acertain diffraction grating, the ratio A/a of wavelength to
ruling spacing is 1/3.5. Without written calculation or use of a cal-
culator, determine which of the orders beyond the zeroth order ap-
pear in the diffraction pattern.

© Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign

SSM _ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
s+ Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

 

WWW Worked-out solution is at

1 tv cot

ES Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 36-1  Single-Slit Diffraction

1 @ The distance between the first and fifth minima of a single-
slit diffraction pattern is 0.35 mm with the screen 40 cm away from
the slit, when light of wavelength 550 nm is used. (a) Find the slit
width. (b) Calculate the angle @ of the first diffraction minimum.

°2 What must be the ratio of the slit width to the wavelength for a
single slit to have the first diffraction minimum at @ = 45.0°?

°3 A plane wave of wavelength 590 nm is incident on a slit with a
width of a = 0.40 mm. A thin converging lens of focal length +70 cm
is placed between the slit and a viewing screen and focuses the
light on the screen. (a) How far is the screen from the lens?
(b) What is the distance on the screen from the center of the dif-
fraction pattern to the first minimum?

*4 In conventional television, signals are broadcast from towers
to home receivers. Even when a receiver is not in direct view of a

tower because of a hill or building, it can still intercept a signal if
the signal diffracts enough around the obstacle, into the obstacle’s
“shadow region.” Previously, television signals had a wavelength of
about 50 cm, but digital television signals that are transmitted
from towers have a wavelength of about 10 mm. (a) Did this
change in wavelength increase or decrease the diffraction of the
signals into the shadow regions of obstacles? Assume that a
signal passes through an opening of 5.0 m width between two
adjacent buildings. What is the angular spread of the central dif-
fraction maximum (out to the first minima) for wavelengths of
(b) 50 cm and (c) 10 mm?

*5 A single slit is illuminated by light of wavelengths A, and A;,
chosen so that the first diffraction minimum of the A, component
coincides with the second minimum of the A, component. (a) If
A, = 350 nm, what is A,? For what order number m, (if any) does a
