34-5 OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS

 

oO
h ry Fn h
Pr
|}_ ___— 25 en ———_-

 

-—f—1

(9)
Figure 34-19 (a) An object O of height h placed at the near point of a human eye occupies
angle @ in the eye’s view. (b) The object is moved closer to increase the angle, but now
the observer cannot bring the object into focus. (c) A converging lens is placed between
the object and the eye, with the object just inside the focal point F; of the lens. The
image produced by the lens is then far enough away to be focused by the eye, and
the image occupies a larger angle # than object O does in (a).

Simple Magnifying Lens

The normal human eye can focus a sharp image of an object on the retina (at the
rear of the eye) if the object is located anywhere from infinity to a certain point
called the near point P,,. If you move the object closer to the eye than the near
point, the perceived retinal image becomes fuzzy. The location of the near point
normally varies with age, generally moving away from the person. To find your
own near point, remove your glasses or contacts if you wear any, close one eye,
and then bring this page closer to your open eye until it becomes indistinct. In
what follows, we take the near point to be 25 cm from the eye,a bit more than the
typical value for 20-year-olds.

Figure 34-194 shows an object O placed at the near point P,, of an eye. The
size of the image of the object produced on the retina depends on the angle @
that the object occupies in the field of view from that eye. By moving the object
closer to the eye, as in Fig. 34-19b, you can increase the angle and, hence, the
possibility of distinguishing details of the object. However, because the object is
then closer than the near point, it is no longer in focus; that is, the image is no
longer clear.

You can restore the clarity by looking at O through a converging lens, placed
so that O is just inside the focal point F, of the lens, which is at focal length f
(Fig. 34-19c). What you then see is the virtual image of O produced by the lens.
That image is farther away than the near point; thus, the eye can see it clearly.

Moreover, the angle @ occupied by the virtual image is larger than the largest
angle @ that the object alone can occupy and still be seen clearly. The angular magni-
fication m, (not to be confused with lateral magnification m) of what is seen is

me= 0/0.

In words, the angular magnification of a simple magnifying lens is a comparison
of the angle occupied by the image the lens produces with the angle occupied by
the object when the object is moved to the near point of the viewer.

(d)

1031
