35-2 YOUNG'S INTERFERENCE EXPERIMENT

the region beyond screen B, where the waves from one slit interfere with the
waves from the other slit.

The “snapshot” of Fig. 35-8 depicts the interference of the overlapping waves.
However, we cannot see evidence for the interference except where a viewing
screen C intercepts the light. Where it does so, points of interference max-
ima form visible bright rows—called bright bands, bright fringes, or (loosely
speaking) maxima— that extend across the screen (into and out of the page in
Fig. 35-8). Dark regions—called dark bands, dark fringes, or (loosely speaking)
minima—result from fully destructive interference and are visible between
adjacent pairs of bright fringes. (Maxima and minima more properly refer to the
center of a band.) The pattern of bright and dark fringes on the screen is called
an interference pattern. Figure 35-9 is a photograph of part of the interference
pattern that would be seen by an observer standing to the left of screen C in the
arrangement of Fig. 35-8.

Locating the Fringes

Light waves produce fringes in a Young's double-slit interference experiment, as it is
called, but what exactly determines the locations of the fringes? To answer, we shall
use the arrangement in Fig. 35-10a.There, a plane wave of monochromatic light is in-
cident on two slits S; and Sin screen B; the light diffracts through the slits and pro-
duces an interference pattern on screen C. We draw a central axis from the point
halfway between the slits to screen C as a reference. We then pick, for discussion, an
arbitrary point P on the screen, at angle @ to the central axis. This point intercepts
the wave of ray r, from the bottom slit and the wave of ray ry from the top slit.

Path Length Difference. These waves are in phase when they pass through
the two slits because there they are just portions of the same incident wave.
However, once they have passed the slits, the two waves must travel different
distances to reach P. We saw a similar situation in Module 17-3 with sound waves
and concluded that

am

Ys The phase difference between two waves can change if the waves travel paths of
different lengths.

The change in phase difference is due to the path length difference AL in the
paths taken by the waves. Consider two waves initially exactly in phase, traveling
along paths with a path length difference AL, and then passing through some
common point. When AL is zero or an integer number of wavelengths, the waves
arrive at the common point exactly in phase and they interfere fully con-
structively there. If that is true for the waves of rays r; and ry in Fig. 35-10, then

   

The AL shifts
one wave from
the other, which
determines the
interference.

Incident
wave

(a) B C

1055

 

Courtesy Jearl Walker

Figure 35-9 A photograph of the interfer-
ence pattern produced by the arrangement
shown in Fig. 35-8, but with short slits. (The
photograph is a front view of part of screen
C.) The alternating maxima and minima
are called interference fringes (because they
resemble the decorative fringe sometimes
used on clothing and rugs).

Figure 35-10 (a) Waves from slits S;and S;
(which extend into and out of the page)
combine at P,an arbitrary point on screen

C at distance y from the central axis. The
angle @serves as a convenient locator for P.
(b) For D > d,we can approximate rays r;
and ry as being parallel, at angle 6 to the
central axis.
