1092 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

Figure 36-12 The pointillistic painting The
Seine at Herblay by Maximilien Luce con-
sists of thousands of colored dots. With the
viewer very close to the canvas, the dots
and their true colors are visible. At normal
viewing distances, the dots are irresolvable
and thus blend.

angular separation. In Figure 36-lla, the objects are not resolved because of
diffraction; that is, their diffraction patterns (mainly their central maxima) overlap
so much that the two objects cannot be distinguished from a single point object. In
Fig. 36-11b the objects are barely resolved, and in Fig, 36-1 1c they are fully resolved.

In Fig. 36-11 the angular separation of the two point sources is such that the
central maximum of the diffraction pattern of one source is centered on the first
minimum of the diffraction pattern of the other, a condition called Rayleigh’s
criterion for resolvability. From Eq. 36-12, two objects that are barely resolvable
by this criterion must have an angular separation 6g of

1.22a
= sin!
Og = sin aq

 

Since the angles are small, we can replace sin g With 6g expressed in radians:
A
On = car (Rayleigh’s criterion). (36-14)

Human Vision. Applying Rayleigh’s criterion for resolvability to human
vision is only an approximation because visual resolvability depends on many fac-
tors, such as the relative brightness of the sources and their surroundings, turbu-
lence in the air between the sources and the observer, and the functioning of the
observer’s visual system. Experimental results show that the least angular separa-
tion that can actually be resolved by a person is generally somewhat greater than
the value given by Eq. 36-14. However, for calculations here, we shall take Eq. 36-
14 as being a precise criterion: If the angular separation @ between the sources is
greater than 6g, we can visually resolve the sources; if it is less, we cannot.

Pointillism. Rayleigh’s criterion can explain the arresting illusions of
color in the style of painting known as pointillism (Fig. 36-12). In this style, a
painting is made not with brush strokes in the usual sense but rather with a
myriad of small colored dots. One fascinating aspect of a pointillistic painting is
that when you change your distance from it, the colors shift in subtle, almost
subconscious ways. This color shifting has to do with whether you can resolve
the colored dots. When you stand close enough to the painting, the angular
separations 6 of adjacent dots are greater than 6g and thus the dots can be seen
individually. Their colors are the true colors of the paints used. However, when

 

Maximilien Luce, The Seine at Herblay, 1890. Musée d’Orsay, Paris, France. Photo by Erich Lessing/Art Resource
