1030 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

of lens 2. So the image J, produced by lens 2 must be real, in-
verted, and on the side of the lens opposite O. Let us see.

The distance p> between this object O, and lens 2 is,
from Fig. 34-18c,

Pp. =L+li!= 10cm + 8.0cm = 18 cm.

Then Eq. 34-9, now written for lens 2, yields

34-5 optical INSTRUMENTS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

34.36 Identify the near point in vision.

34.37 With sketches, explain the function of a simple
magnifying lens.

34.38 Identify angular magnification.

34.39 Determine the angular magnification for an object at
the focal point of a simple magnifying lens.

34.40 With a sketch, explain a compound microscope.

34.41 Identify that the overall magnification of a compound

Key Ideas
@ The angular magnification of a simple magnifying lens is
We 25cm
6 7
where f is the focal length of the lens and 25 cmis a
reference value for the near point value.

 

@ The overall magnification of a compound microscope is

M=mmn,=-—— 25 cm

foo fey *

 

ae
+18cm ° 5 = =+9.0cm™
Hence, ip = +18 cm. (Answer)

The plus sign confirms our guess: Image J, produced by lens
2 is real, inverted, and on the side of lens 2 opposite O», as
shown in Fig. 34-18c. Thus, the image would appear on a
card placed at its location.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

microscope is due to the lateral magnification by the
objective and the angular magnification by the
eyepiece.

34,42 Calculate the overall magnification of a compound
microscope.

34,43 With a sketch, explain a refracting telescope.

34.44 Calculate the angular magnification of a refracting
telescope.

where m is the lateral magnification of the objective, my

is the angular magnification of the eyepiece, s is the tube
length, fo» is the focal length of the objective, and fy is the
focal length of the eyepiece.

@ The angular magnification of a refracting telescope is

— So.
Sey”

My=

 

Optical Instruments

The human eye is a remarkably effective organ, but its range can be extended in
many ways by optical instruments such as eyeglasses, microscopes, and tele-
scopes. Many such devices extend the scope of our vision beyond the visible
range; satellite-borne infrared cameras and x-ray microscopes are just two
examples.

The mirror and thin-lens formulas can be applied only as approximations to
most sophisticated optical instruments. The lenses in typical laboratory micro-
scopes are by no means “thin.” In most optical instruments the lenses are com-
pound lenses; that is, they are made of several components, the interfaces rarely
being exactly spherical. Now we discuss three optical instruments, assuming, for
simplicity, that the thin-lens formulas apply.
