36-1 SINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION 1085

oO Ina single-slit diffraction experiment, dark fringes are produced where the
path length differences (a sin @) between the top and bottom rays are equal
to A,2A,3A,....

This may seem to be wrong because the waves of those two particular rays will be
exactly in phase with each other when their path length difference is an integer
number of wavelengths. However, they each will still be part of a pair of waves
that are exactly out of phase with each other; thus, each wave will be canceled by
some other wave, resulting in darkness. (Two light waves that are exactly out of
phase will always cancel each other, giving a net wave of zero, even if they happen
to be exactly in phase with other light waves.)

Using a Lens. Equations 36-1, 36-2, and 36-3 are derived for the case of D > a.
However, they also apply if we place a converging lens between the slit and the view-
ing screen and then move the screen in so that it coincides with the focal plane of the
lens. The lens ensures that rays which now reach any point on the screen are exactly
parallel (rather than approximately) back at the slit. They are like the initially parallel
rays of Fig.34-14a that are directed to the focal point by a converging lens.

Vv] Checkpoint 1

We produce a diffraction pattern on a viewing screen by means of a long narrow
slit illuminated by blue light. Does the pattern expand away from the bright center
(the maxima and minima shift away from the center) or contract toward it if we
(a) switch to yellow light or (b) decrease the slit width?

 

Sample Problem 36.01 Single-slit diffraction pattern with white light

A slit of width a is illuminated by white light. KEY IDEA

 

(a) For what value of a will the first minimum for red light of

The first side maximum for any wavelength is about halfway
wavelength A = 650 nm appear at @ = 15°?

between the first and second minima for that wavelength.
Calculations: Those first and second minima can be located
with Eq. 36-3 by setting m = 1 and m = 2, respectively. Thus,
the first side maximum can be located approximately by
setting m = 1.5. Then Eq. 36-3 becomes

asin 0= 1.5A'.

KEY IDEA

 

Diffraction occurs separately for each wavelength in the
range of wavelengths passing through the slit, with the loca-
tions of the minima for each wavelength given by Eq. 36-3
(asin 9 = ma).

Calculation: When we set m = 1 (for the first minimum) one oa ue ne eae a a
and substitute the given values of @ and A, Eq. 36-3 yields vat sin@ — (2511 nm)(sin 15°)

mA _ (1)(650 nm) 15 15

sin 0 sin 15° = 430 nm.

= 2511 nm = 2.5 wm.

ae (Answer)

(Answer) Light of this wavelength is violet (far blue, near the short-
wavelength limit of the human range of visible light). From
the two equations we used, can you see that the first side
maximum for light of wavelength 430 nm will always coin-
cide with the first minimum for light of wavelength 650 nm,
no matter what the slit width is? However, the angle 6 at

For the incident light to flare out that much (+15° to the first
minima) the slit has to be very fine indeed—in this case, a
mere four times the wavelength. For comparison, note that
a fine human hair may be about 100 um in diameter.

(b) What is the wavelength A’ of the light whose first side
diffraction maximum is at 15°, thus coinciding with the first
minimum for the red light?

which this overlap occurs does depend on slit width. If the
slit is relatively narrow, the angle will be relatively large, and
conversely.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
