34-1 IMAGES AND PLANE MIRRORS

textures, shapes, and colors and then rapidly brings to your consciousness an
image (a reproduction derived from light) of the penguin; you perceive and rec-
ognize the penguin as being in the direction from which the light rays came and
at the proper distance.

Your visual system goes through this processing and recognition even if the
light rays do not come directly from the penguin, but instead reflect toward you
from a mirror or refract through the lenses in a pair of binoculars. However, you
now see the penguin in the direction from which the light rays came after they
reflected or refracted, and the distance you perceive may be quite different from
the penguin’s true distance.

For example, if the light rays have been reflected toward you from a standard
flat mirror, the penguin appears to be behind the mirror because the rays you
intercept come from that direction. Of course, the penguin is not back there. This
type of image, which is called a virtual image, truly exists only within the brain
but nevertheless is said to exist at the perceived location.

Areal image differs in that it can be formed on a surface, such as a card or a
movie screen. You can see a real image (otherwise movie theaters would be
empty), but the existence of the image does not depend on your seeing it and it is
present even if you are not. Before we discuss real and virtual images in detail,
let’s examine a natural virtual image.

A Common Mirage

A common example of a virtual image is a pool of water that appears to lie on the
road some distance ahead of you on a sunny day, but that you can never
reach. The pool is a mirage (a type of illusion), formed by light rays coming from
the low section of the sky in front of you (Fig. 34-1a). As the rays approach the
road, they travel through progressively warmer air that has been heated by
the road, which is usually relatively warm. With an increase in air temperature,
the density of the air—and hence the index of refraction of the air—decreases
slightly. Thus, as the rays descend, encountering progressively smaller indexes of
refraction, they continuously bend toward the horizontal (Fig. 34-1b).

Once a ray is horizontal, somewhat above the road’s surface, it still bends because
the lower portion of each associated wavefront is in slightly warmer air and is moving
slightly faster than the upper portion of the wavefront (Fig. 34-1c). This nonuniform
motion of the wavefronts bends the ray upward. As the ray then ascends, it continues
to bend upward through progressively greater indexes of refraction (Fig.34-1d).

If you intercept some of this light, your visual system automatically infers
that it originated along a backward extension of the rays you have intercepted
and, to make sense of the light, assumes that it came from the road surface. If the
light happens to be bluish from blue sky, the mirage appears bluish, like water.
Because the air is probably turbulent due to the heating, the mirage shimmies, as
if water waves were present. The bluish coloring and the shimmy enhance the
illusion of a pool of water, but you are actually seeing a virtual image of a low
section of the sky. As you travel toward the illusionary pool, you no longer inter-
cept the shallow refracted rays and the illusion disappears.

        

Warm
Light ray Warmer
a
Pool mirage Road Road
(@) (b)

1011

Es
Road

Figure 34-1 (a) A ray from a low section of the sky refracts through air that is heated by a road (without reaching the road). An observer who
intercepts the light perceives it to be from a pool of water on the road. (b) Bending (exaggerated) of a light ray descending across an imagi-
nary boundary from warm air to warmer air. (c) Shifting of wavefronts and associated bending of a ray, which occur because the lower ends of

wavefronts move faster in warmer air. (d) Bending of a ray ascending across an imaginary boundary to warm air from warmer air.
