1094 CHAPTER 36 DIFFRACTION

Sample Problem 36.04 Rayleigh’s criterion for resolving two distant objects

A circular converging lens, with diameter d = 32 mm and focal
length f = 24 cm, forms images of distant point objects in the fo-
cal plane of the lens. The wavelength is A = 550 nm.

(a) Considering diffraction by the lens, what angular separa-
tion must two distant point objects have to satisfy
Rayleigh’s criterion?

KEY IDEA

 

Figure 36-14 shows two distant point objects P; and P), the
lens, and a viewing screen in the focal plane of the lens. It
also shows, on the right, plots of light intensity J versus
position on the screen for the central maxima of the images
formed by the lens. Note that the angular separation @, of
the objects equals the angular separation 6; of the images.
Thus, if the images are to satisfy Rayleigh’s criterion, these
separations must be given by Eq. 36-14 (for small angles).

Calculations: From Eq. 36-14, we obtain

 

A
= Oy = 1227

(1.22)(550 x 10-? m) -
=? = 2.1 X zs iB
32x 102m 2.1 X 10% rad. (Answer)

Each central maximum in the two intensity curves of Fig.
36-14 is centered on the first minimum of the other curve.

36-4 DIFFRACTION BY A DOUBLE SLIT

Focal-plane
screen

2

Py

  

8,
2

2
| ,s—| 5
Figure 36-14 Light from two distant point objects P; and P, passes
through a converging lens and forms images on a viewing screen in
the focal plane of the lens. Only one representative ray from each

object is shown. The images are not points but diffraction patterns,
with intensities approximately as plotted at the right.

(b) What is the separation Ax of the centers of the images in
the focal plane? (That is, what is the separation of the cen-
tral peaks in the two intensity-versus-position curves?)

Calculations: From either triangle between the lens and
the screen in Fig. 36-14, we see that tan 6/2 = Ax/2f-
Rearranging this equation and making the approximation
tan 0 ~ 6,we find

Ax = f6,, (36-18)
where @;is in radian measure. We then find
Ax = (0.24 m)(2.1 x 10> rad) = 5.0 um. (Answer)

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

36.18 In a sketch of a double-slit experiment, explain
how the diffraction through each slit modifies the two-slit
interference pattern, and identify the diffraction envelope,
the central peak, and the side peaks of that envelope.

36.19 For agiven point in a double-slit diffraction pattern,
calculate the intensity / in terms of the intensity J,,, at the
center of the pattern.

36.20 In the intensity equation for a double-slit diffraction

Key Ideas

@ Waves passing through two slits produce a combination of
double-slit interference and diffraction by each slit.

@ For identical slits with width a and center-to-center separation d,
the intensity in the pattern varies with the angle @from the central
axis as

a
(8) = In(cos? B) (22) (double slit),

pattern, identify what part corresponds to the interference
between the two slits and what part corresponds to the
diffraction by each slit.

36.21 For double-slit diffraction, apply the relationship between
the ratio d/a and the locations of the diffraction minima in the
single-slit diffraction pattern, and then count the number of
two-slit maxima that are contained in the central peak and in
the side peaks of the diffraction envelope.

where J,, is the intensity at the center of the pattern,

B= (=) sind,
and a= (=) sind.

 
