1028 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

Step 2 Neglecting lens 1, treat J, as though it is the object for lens 2. Use Eq. 34-9 to
locate the image J, produced by lens 2. This is the final image of the system.
Determine whether the image is on the left or right side of the lens, whether
itis real or virtual, and whether it has the same orientation as the object for
lens 2. Roughly sketch J). The bottom part of Fig. 34-17a gives an example.

Thus we treat the two-lens system with two single-lens calculations, using
the normal decisions and rules for a single lens. The only exception to the pro-
cedure occurs if J, lies to the right of lens 2 (past lens 2). We still treat it as the
object for lens 2, but we take the object distance p as a negative number when
we use Eq. 34-9 to find J. Then, as in our other examples, if the image distance
iy is positive, the image is real and on the right side of the lens. An example is
sketched in Fig. 34-17.

This same step-by-step analysis can be applied for any number of lenses. It
can also be applied if a mirror is substituted for lens 2. The overall (or net) lateral
magnification M of a system of lenses (or lenses and a mirror) is the product of
the individual lateral magnifications as given by Eq. 34-7 (m = —i/p).Thus, for a
two-lens system, we have

M=mym. (34-11)
If M is positive, the final image has the same orientation as the object (the one in
front of lens 1). If M is negative, the final image is inverted from the object. In the
situation where pp is negative, such as in Fig. 34-17b, determining the orientation
of the final image is probably easiest by examining the sign of M.

Iv] Checkpoint 4

A thin symmetric lens provides an image of a fingerprint with a magnification of
+0.2 when the fingerprint is 1.0 cm farther from the lens than the focal point of the
lens. What are the (a) type and (b) orientation of the image, and (c) what is the type
of lens?

Sample Problem 34.03 Image produced by a thin symmetric lens

A praying mantis preys along the central axis of a thin sym-
metric lens, 20 cm from the lens. The lateral magnification of
the mantis provided by the lens is m = —0.25, and the index
of refraction of the lens material is 1.65.

(a) Determine the type of image produced by the lens, the
type of lens, whether the object (mantis) is inside or outside
the focal point, on which side of the lens the image appears,
and whether the image is inverted.

Reasoning: We can tell a lot about the lens and the image
from the given value of m. From it and Eq. 34-6 (m = —i/p),
we see that

i= —mp = 0.25p.

Even without finishing the calculation, we can answer the
questions. Because p is positive, i here must be positive. That
means we have a real image, which means we have a con-
verging lens (the only lens that can produce a real image).

The object must be outside the focal point (the only way a
real image can be produced). Also, the image is inverted and
on the side of the lens opposite the object. (That is how a
converging lens makes a real image.)

(b) What are the two radii of curvature of the lens?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. Because the lens is symmetric, 7, (for the surface nearer
the object) and ry have the same magnitude r.

2. Because the lens is a converging lens, the object faces a con-
vex surface on the nearer side and so r; = +r. Similarly, it
faces a concave surface on the farther side; sor) = —r.

3. We can relate these radii of curvature to the focal length f
via the lens maker’s equation, Eq. 34-10 (our only equa-
tion involving the radii of curvature of a lens).

4, We can relate f to the object distance p and image
distance i via Eq. 34-9.
