36-2 INTENSITY IN SINGLE-SLIT DIFFRACTION 1087

   
   
     
   
       
   
     
   

 
 

Here, with an even larger
phase difference, they add
to give a small amplitude
and thus a small intensity.

 

The last phasor is out of

phase with the first phasor
7 by 27 rad (full circle).

Here, with a larger phase
Fy=0 difference, the phasors add
to give zero amplitude and

_ thus a minimum in the pattern.
()

       
      
   
  
         
       
 

Here the phasors have a small
phase difference and add to give
(2) asmaller amplitude and thus

less intensity in the pattern.

Fy (= En)

   

 
   

Phasor for Phasor for
top ray bottom ray

 

 

rams for N = 18 phasors, cor-
responding to the division of a single slit into

18 zones. Resultant amplitudes E, are shown for (a)
the central maximum at @ = 0, (b) a point on the
screen lying at a small angle @to the central axis, (c)
the first minimum, and (d) the first side maximum.

(a) The phasors from the 18 zones
in the slit are in phase and add
to give a maximum amplitude
and thus the central maximum
in the diffraction pattern.

 

wave at Pp is the vector sum of these phasors. This arrangement of the phasors
turns out to be the one that gives the greatest value for the amplitude Ey. We call
this value E,,; that is, E,,, is the value of E,for = 0.

We next consider a point P that is at a small angle @ to the central axis.
Equation 36-4 now tells us that the phase difference A¢ between wavelets from
adjacent zones is no longer zero. Figure 36-7) shows the corresponding phasor
diagram; as before, the phasors are arranged head to tail, but now there is an
angle A¢ between adjacent phasors. The amplitude £, at this new point is still the
vector sum of the phasors, but it is smaller than that in Fig. 36-7a, which means
that the intensity of the light is less at this new point P than at Pp.

First Minimun. If we continue to increase @, the angle Ad between adjacent pha-
sors increases, and eventually the chain of phasors curls completely around so that the
head of the last phasor just reaches the tail of the first phasor (Fig. 36-7c). The ampli-
