35-4 INTERFERENCE FROM THIN FILMS 1065

Reflection Phase Shifts

Refraction at an interface never causes a phase change—but reflection can,
depending on the indexes of refraction on the two sides of the interface.
Figure 35-16 shows what happens when reflection causes a phase change, using
as an example pulses on a denser string (along which pulse travel is relatively
slow) and a lighter string (along which pulse travel is relatively fast).

When a pulse traveling relatively slowly along the denser string in Fig. 35-16a
reaches the interface with the lighter string, the pulse is partially transmitted
and partially reflected, with no change in orientation. For light, this situation
corresponds to the incident wave traveling in the medium of greater index of
refraction n (recall that greater n means slower speed). In that case, the wave
that is reflected at the interface does not undergo a change in phase; that is, its
reflection phase shift is zero.

When a pulse traveling more quickly along the lighter string in Fig. 35-16b
reaches the interface with the denser string, the pulse is again partially transmit-
ted and partially reflected. The transmitted pulse again has the same orientation
as the incident pulse, but now the reflected pulse is inverted. For a sinusoidal
wave, such an inversion involves a phase change of 7 rad, or half a wavelength.
For light, this situation corresponds to the incident wave traveling in the medium
of lesser index of refraction (with greater speed). In that case, the wave that is
reflected at the interface undergoes a phase shift of rad, or half a wavelength.

‘We can summarize these results for light in terms of the index of refraction of
the medium off which (or from which) the light reflects:

be

Reflection Reflection phase shift
Off lower index 0
Off higher index 0.5 wavelength

This might be remembered as “higher means half.”

Equations for Thin-Film Interference

In this chapter we have now seen three ways in which the phase difference
between two waves can change:

1. by reflection
2. by the waves traveling along paths of different lengths
3. by the waves traveling through media of different indexes of refraction

When light reflects from a thin film, producing the waves of rays r; and r, shown
in Fig. 35-15, all three ways are involved. Let us consider them one by one.

Reflection Shift. We first reexamine the two reflections in Fig. 35-15. At
point a on the front interface, the incident wave (in air) reflects from the medium
having the higher of the two indexes of refraction; so the wave of reflected ray r,
has its phase shifted by 0.5 wavelength. At point b on the back interface, the inci-
dent wave reflects from the medium (air) having the lower of the two indexes of
refraction; so the wave reflected there is not shifted in phase by the reflection,
and thus neither is the portion of it that exits the film as ray r. We can organize
this information with the first line in Table 35-1, which refers to the simplified
drawing in Fig. 35-17 for a thin film in air. So far, as a result of the reflection phase
shifts, the waves of r, and ry have a phase difference of 0.5 wavelength and thus
are exactly out of phase.

Path Length Difference. Now we must consider the path length difference
2L that occurs because the wave of ray r, crosses the film twice. (This difference

Interface

 

(b)

Figure 35-16 Phase changes when a pulse is
reflected at the interface between two
stretched strings of different linear densi-
ties. The wave speed is greater in the lighter
string. (a) The incident pulse is in the
denser string, (b) The incident pulse is in

the lighter string. Only here is there a phase
change, and only in the reflected wave.

 

Figure 35-17 Reflections from a thin film
in air.
