17.1

Overview of Development

Organisms in all three multicellular kingdoms—fungi,
plants, and animals—realize cell specialization by orches-
trating gene expression. That is, different cells express dif-
ferent genes at different times. To understand develop-
ment, we need to focus on how cells determine which
genes to activate, and when.

Among the fungi, the specialized cells are largely lim-
ited to reproductive cells. In basidiomycetes and as-
comycetes (the so-called higher fungi), certain cells pro-
duce hormones that influence other cells, but the basic
design of all fungi is quite simple. For most of its life, a
fungus has a two-dimensional body, consisting of long fila-
ments of cells that are only imperfectly separated from
each other. Fungal maturation is primarily a process of
growth rather than specialization.

Development is far more complex in plants, where the
adult individuals contain a variety of specialized cells or-
ganized into tissues and organs. A hallmark of plant de-
velopment is flexibility; as a plant develops, the precise
array of tissues it achieves is greatly influenced by its
environment.

In animals, development is complex and rigidly con-
trolled, producing a bewildering array of specialized cell
types through mechanisms that are much less sensitive to
the environment. The subject of intensive study, animal de-
velopment has in the last decades become relatively well
understood.

Here we will focus our attention on four developmental
systems which researchers have studied intensively: (1) an
animal with a very complexly arranged body, a mammal;
(2) a less complex animal with an intricate developmental
cycle, an insect; (3) a very simple animal, a nematode; and
(4) a flowering plant (figure 17.2).

To begin our investigation of development, we will
first examine the overall process of development in three
quite different organisms, so we can sort through differ-
ences in the gross process to uncover basic similarities in
underlying mechanisms. We will start by describing the
overall process in vertebrates, because it is the best un-
derstood among the animals. Then we will examine the
very different developmental process carried out by in-
sects, in which genetics has allowed us to gain detailed
knowledge of many aspects of the process. Finally we will
look at development in a third very different organism, a
flowering plant.

 

Almost all multicellular organisms undergo
development. The process has been well studied in
animals, especially in mammals, insects, nematodes, and
flowering plants.

 

332 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

Development is a regulated process.

 

a
————

Nematode

 

Flowering plant

FIGURE 17.2
Four developmental systems. Researchers studying the cellular
mechanisms of development have focused on these four
organisms.
