spliced together in different ways, allowing a variety of dif-
ferent polypeptides to be assembled from the same gene!
Alternative splicing is common in insects and vertebrates,
with two or three different proteins produced from one
gene. In many cases, gene expression is regulated by chang-
ing which splicing event occurs during different stages of
development or in different tissues.

An excellent example of alternative splicing in action is
found in two different human organs, the thyroid and the
hypothalamus. The thyroid gland (see chapter 56) is re-
sponsible for producing hormones that control processes
such as metabolic rate. The hypothalamus, located in the
brain, collects information from the body (for example, salt
balance) and releases hormones that in turn regulate the re-
lease of hormones from other glands, such as the pituitary
gland (see chapter 56). The two organs produce two dis-
tinct hormones, calcitonin and CGRP (calcitonin gene-
related peptide) as part of their function. Calcitonin is re-
sponsible for controlling the amount of calcium we take up
from our food and the balance of calcium in tissues like
bone and teeth. CGRP is involved in a number of neural
and endocrine functions. Although these two hormones are
used for very different physiological purposes, the hor-
mones are made using the same transcript (figure 16.20).
The appearance of one product versus another is deter-
mined by tissue-specific factors that regulate the processing
of the primary transcript. This ability offers another pow-
erful way to control the expression of gene products, rang-
ing from proteins with subtle differences to totally unre-
lated proteins.

Transport of the Processed Transcript Out
of the Nucleus

Processed mRNA transcripts exit the nucleus through the
nuclear pores described in chapter 5. The passage of a tran-
script across the nuclear membrane is an active process that
requires that the transcript be recognized by receptors lin-
ing the interior of the pores. Specific portions of the tran-
script, such as the poly-A tail, appear to play a role in this
recognition. The transcript cannot move through a pore as
long as any of the splicing enzymes remain associated with
the transcript, ensuring that partially processed transcripts
are not exported into the cytoplasm.

There is little hard evidence that gene expression is reg-
ulated at this point, although it could be. On average, about
10% of transcribed genes are exon sequences, but only
about 5% of the total mRNA produced as primary tran-
script ever reaches the cytoplasm. This suggests that about
half of the exon primary transcripts never leave the nucleus,
but it is not clear whether the disappearance of this mRNA
is selective.

 

Mature
me [Te]

Splicing
pathway 1
(hypothalamus)

=
transcript

Splicing
pathway 2
(thyroid)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 16.20

Alternative splicing products. The same transcript made from
one gene can be spliced differently to give rise to two very distinct
protein products, calcitonin and CGRP.

Selecting Which mRNAs Are Translated

The translation of a processed mRNA transcript by the ri-
bosomes in the cytoplasm involves a complex of proteins
called translation factors. In at least some cases, gene ex-
pression is regulated by modification of one or more of
these factors. In other instances, translation repressor
proteins shut down translation by binding to the begin-
ning of the transcript, so that it cannot attach to the ribo-
some. In humans, the production of ferritin (an iron-
storing protein) is normally shut off by a translation
repressor protein called aconitase. Aconitase binds to a 30-
nucleotide sequence at the beginning of the ferritin
mRNA, forming a stable loop to which ribosomes cannot
bind. When the cell encounters iron, the binding of iron to
aconitase causes the aconitase to dissociate from the ferritin
mRNA, freeing the mRNA to be translated and increasing
ferritin production 100-fold.

Chapter 16 Control of Gene Expression 327
