34-2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS

An observer can then see a virtual image of O in the mirror: The image appears
to be behind the mirror, and it has the same orientation as the object.

If we now move the object away from the mirror until it is at the focal point,
the image moves farther and farther back from the mirror until, when the object
is at the focal point, the image is at infinity (Fig. 34-10b). The image is then am-
biguous and imperceptible because neither the rays reflected by the mirror nor
the ray extensions behind the mirror cross to form an image of O.

Outside. If we next move the object outside the focal point—that is, farther
away from the mirror than the focal point— the rays reflected by the mirror con-
verge to form an inverted image of object O (Fig. 34-10c) in front of the mirror.
That image moves in from infinity as we move the object farther outside F. If you
were to hold a card at the position of the image, the image would show up on the
card—the image is said to be focused on the card by the mirror. (The verb “focus,”
which in this context means to produce an image, differs from the noun “focus,”
which is another name for the focal point.) Because this image can actually appear
on a surface, it is a real image —the rays actually intersect to create the image, re-
gardless of whether an observer is present. The image distance i of a real image is a
positive quantity, in contrast to that for a virtual image. We can now generalize about
the location of images from spherical mirrors:

Oo Real images form on the side of a mirr
form on the opposite side.

 

where the object is, and virtual images

Main Equation. As we shall prove in Module 34-6, when light rays from an ob-
ject make only small angles with the central axis of a spherical mirror, a simple equa-
tion relates the object distance p,the image distance i, and the focal length f:

1 1
a ra (spherical mirror). (34-4)

1
P f

We assume such small angles in figures such as Fig. 34-10, but for clarity the
rays are drawn with exaggerated angles. With that assumption, Eq. 34-4 applies
to any concave, convex, or plane mirror. For a convex or plane mirror, only a
virtual image can be formed, regardless of the object’s location on the central
axis. As shown in the example of a convex mirror in Fig. 34-8c, the image is al-
ways on the opposite side of the mirror from the object and has the same orien-
tation as the object.

Magnification. The size of an object or image, as measured perpendicular to
the mirror’s central axis, is called the object or image height. Let h represent the
height of the object, and h' the height of the image. Then the ratio h'/h is called
the lateral magnification m produced by the mirror. However, by convention, the
lateral magnification always includes a plus sign when the image orientation is
that of the object and a minus sign when the image orientation is opposite that of
the object. For this reason, we write the formula for mas

Iml = h
h

 

(lateral magnification). (34-5)
We shall soon prove that the lateral magnification can also be written as
i
m = —— (lateral magnification). (34-6)
P

For a plane mirror, for which i = —p, we have m = +1. The magnification
of 1 means that the image is the same size as the object. The plus sign means that

1017
