 

1052 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

range of different paths through each drop. This light is neither bright nor col-
orful, and so you do not notice it.
If you are lucky and look carefully below a primary rainbow, you can see dim-

  

ry mer colored arcs called supernumeraries (Fig. 35-5). Like the main arcs of the rain-

v* bow bow, the supernumeraries are due to waves that emerge from each drop
Supernumeraries approximately in phase with one another to give constructive interference. If you

Figure 35-5 A primary rainbow and the faint
supernumeraries below it are due to
optical interference.

are very lucky and look very carefully above a secondary rainbow, you might see
even more (but even dimmer) supernumeraries. Keep in mind that both types of
rainbows and both sets of supernumeraries are naturally occurring examples of op-

tical interference and naturally occurring evidence that light consists of waves. ===

lv] Checkpoint 2

The light waves of the rays in Fig. 35-4 have the same wavelength and amplitude and are
initially in phase. (a) If 7.60 wavelengths fit within the length of the top material and 5.50
wavelengths fit within that of the bottom material, which material has the greater index
of refraction? (b) Ifthe rays are angled slightly so that they meet at the same point on a
distant screen, will the interference there result in the brightest possible illumination,
bright intermediate illumination, dark intermediate illumination, or darkness?

Sample Problem 35.01

In Fig. 35-4, the two light waves that are represented by the
rays have wavelength 550.0 nm before entering media 1 and
2. They also have equal amplitudes and are in phase. Medium
1 is now just air, and medium 2 is a transparent plastic layer of
index of refraction 1.600 and thickness 2.600 um.

(a) What is the phase difference of the emerging waves in
wavelengths, radians, and degrees? What is their effective
phase difference (in wavelengths)?

KEY IDEA

 

The phase difference of two light waves can change if they
travel through different media, with different indexes of
refraction. The reason is that their wavelengths are different
in the different media. We can calculate the change in phase
difference by counting the number of wavelengths that fits
into each medium and then subtracting those numbers.

Calculations: When the path lengths of the waves in the two
media are identical, Eq. 35-9 gives the result of the subtrac-
tion. Here we have n; = 1.000 (for the air), nm = 1.600,
L = 2.600 wm, and A = 550.0 nm. Thus, Eq. 35-9 yields

16,
N-M =Z mm)

2.600 x 10-m
~ 5.500 X 10-7 m

= 2.84.

(1.600 — 1.000)

(Answer)

WILEY

Phase difference of two waves due to difference in refractive indexes

Thus, the phase difference of the emerging waves is 2.84 wave-
lengths. Because 1.0 wavelength is equivalent to 27 rad and
360°, you can show that this phase difference is equivalent to

phase difference = 17.8 rad ~ 1020°. (Answer)

The effective phase difference is the decimal part of
the actual phase difference expressed in wavelengths. Thus,
we have

effective phase difference = 0.84 wavelength. (Answer)

‘You can show that this is equivalent to 5.3 rad and about
300°. Caution: We do not find the effective phase difference
by taking the decimal part of the actual phase difference as
expressed in radians or degrees. For example, we do not take
0.8 rad from the actual phase difference of 17.8 rad.

(b) If the waves reached the same point on a distant screen,
what type of interference would they produce?

Reasoning: We need to compare the effective phase differ-
ence of the waves with the phase differences that give the
extreme types of interference. Here the effective phase dif-
ference of 0.84 wavelength is between 0.5 wavelength (for
fully destructive interference, or the darkest possible result)
and 1.0 wavelength (for fully constructive interference, or
the brightest possible result), but closer to 1.0 wavelength.
Thus, the waves would produce intermediate interference
that is closer to fully constructive interference—they would
produce a relatively bright spot.

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
