Interference

35-1 LighT As A WAVE

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

35.01 Using a sketch, explain Huygens’ principle.

35.02 With a few simple sketches, explain refraction in terms
of the gradual change in the speed of a wavefront as it
passes through an interface at an angle to the normal.

35.03 Apply the relationship between the speed of light in
vacuum c, the speed of light in a material v, and the index
of refraction of the material n.

35.04 Apply the relationship between a distance L ina
material, the speed of light in that material, and the time
required for a pulse of the light to travel through L.

35.05 Apply Snell's law of refraction.

35.06 When light refracts through an interface, identify that
the frequency does not change but the wavelength and
effective speed do.

35.07 Apply the relationship between the wavelength in
vacuum A, the wavelength A,, in a material (the internal
wavelength), and the index of refraction n of the material.

Key Ideas

@ The three-dimensional transmission of waves, including
light, may often be predicted by Huygens’ principle, which
states that all points on a wavefront serve as point sources of
spherical secondary wavelets. After a time ¢, the new position
of the wavefront will be that of a surface tangent to these
secondary wavelets.

@ The law of refraction can be derived from Huygens’
principle by assuming that the index of refraction of any
medium is n = c/v, in which v is the speed of light in the
medium and c is the speed of light in vacuum.

What Is Physics?

35.08 For light in a certain length of a material, calculate the
number of internal wavelengths that fit into the length.

35.09 If two light waves travel through different materials with
different indexes of refraction and then reach a common
point, determine their phase difference and interpret the
resulting interference in terms of maximum brightness,
intermediate brightness, and darkness.

35.10 Apply the learning objectives of Module 17-3 (sound
waves there, light waves here) to find the phase difference
and interference of two waves that reach a common point
after traveling paths of different lengths.

35.11 Given the initial phase difference between two
waves with the same wavelength, determine their phase
difference after they travel through different path lengths
and through different indexes of refraction.

35.12 Identify that rainbows are examples of optical
interference.

@ The wavelength A,, of light in a medium depends on the
index of refraction n of the medium:

in which A is the wavelength in vacuum.

@ Because of this dependency, the phase difference between
two waves can change if they pass through different materials
with different indexes of refraction.

One of the major goals of physics is to understand the nature of light. This
goal has been difficult to achieve (and has not yet fully been achieved) because
light is complicated. However, this complication means that light offers many
opportunities for applications, and some of the richest opportunities involve the

interference of light waves— optical interference.

Nature has long used optical interference for coloring. For example, the
wings of a Morpho butterfly are a dull, uninspiring brown, as can be seen on the

1047
