NtrC (Activator)

   
   

Enhancer

 

FIGURE 16.15

 

 

 

RNA polymerase Bacterial RNA polymerase is loosely
bound to the promoter. The activator
(NtrC) binds at the enhancer.
f =
Promoter

 

DNA loops around so
that the activator comes
into contact with the

RNA polymerase.

 

 

 

 

 

The activator triggers RNA polymerase
activation, and transcription begins.
DNA unloops.

e “a
mRNA synthesis >

 

 

 

 

 

An enhancer in action. When the bacterial activator NtrC binds to an enhancer, it causes the DNA to loop over toa distant site where
RNA polymerase is bound, activating transcription. While such enhancers are rare in bacteria, they are common in eukaryotes.

Enhancers

A key advance in the evolution of eukaryotic gene tran-
scription was the advent of regulatory proteins composed
of two distinct modules, or domains. The DNA-binding
domain physically attaches the protein to the DNA at a
specific site, using one of the structural motifs discussed
earlier, while the regulatory domain interacts with other
regulatory proteins.

The great advantage of this modular design is that it un-
couples regulation from DNA binding, allowing a regula-
tory protein to bind to a specific DNA sequence at one site
on a chromosome and exert its regulation over a promoter
at another site, which may be thousands of nucleotides
away. The distant sites where these regulatory proteins
bind are called enhancers. Although enhancers also occur
in exceptional instances in bacteria (figure 16.15), they are
the rule rather than the exception in eukaryotes.

How can regulatory proteins affect a promoter when
they bind to the DNA at enhancer sites located far from
the promoter? Apparently the DNA loops around so that
the enhancer is positioned near the promoter. This brings
the regulatory domain of the protein attached to the en-
hancer into direct contact with the transcription factor
complex attached to the promoter (figure 16.16).

The enhancer mode of transcriptional control that has
evolved in eukaryotes adds a great deal of flexibility to the
control process. The positioning of regulatory sites at a
distance permits a large number of different regulatory
sequences scattered about the DNA to influence a partic-
ular gene.

324 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

 

  
   

RNA polymerase
. Transcription
Activator for
ee
Enhancer Promoter Coding
sequence region
of gene

 

mRNA syntesist >
FIGURE 16.16

How enhancers work. The enhancer site is located far away
from the gene being regulated. Binding of an activator (red) to the
enhancer allows the activator to interact with the transcription
factors (green) associated with RNA polymerase, activating
transcription.

 

Transcription factors and enhancers confer great
flexibility on the control of gene expression in
eukaryotes.

 
