36-4 DIFFRACTION BY A DOUBLE SLIT

Diffraction by a Double Slit

In the double-slit experiments of Chapter 35, we implicitly assumed that the slits
were much narrower than the wavelength of the light illuminating them; that is,
a <A. For such narrow slits, the central maximum of the diffraction pattern of
either slit covers the entire viewing screen. Moreover, the interference of light
from the two slits produces bright fringes with approximately the same intensity
(Fig. 35-12).

In practice with visible light, however, the condition a < A is often not met.
For relatively wide slits, the interference of light from two slits produces bright
fringes that do not all have the same intensity. That is, the intensities of the
fringes produced by double-slit interference (as discussed in Chapter 35) are
modified by diffraction of the light passing through each slit (as discussed in
this chapter).

Plots. As an example, the intensity plot of Fig. 36-15a suggests the double-
slit interference pattern that would occur if the slits were infinitely narrow (and
thus a < A); all the bright interference fringes would have the same intensity. The
intensity plot of Fig. 36-15b is that for diffraction by a single actual slit; the dif-
fraction pattern has a broad central maximum and weaker secondary maxima at
+17°. The plot of Fig. 36-15c suggests the interference pattern for two actual slits.
That plot was constructed by using the curve of Fig. 36-15b as an envelope on the
intensity plot in Fig. 36-15a. The positions of the fringes are not changed; only the
intensities are affected.

Relativelintensity

 

20 15 10 5

  
  

5

Relative|intensity

Figure 36-15 (a) The intensity plot to be expected in a dou-
ble-slit interference experiment with vanishingly narrow
slits. (b) The intensity plot for diffraction by a typical slit
of width a (not vanishingly narrow). (c) The intensity
plot to be expected for two slits of width a. The curve of
(b) acts as an envelope, limiting the intensity of the dou-
ble-slit fringes in (a). Note that the first minima of the 20 15 10 5
diffraction pattern of (b) eliminate the double-slit

fringes that would occur near 12° in (c).

5 0 5
6 (degrees)

(a)

Relative|intensity

0 5
6 (degrees)
(0)

0 5
6 (degrees)
(9)

  

1095

This diffraction minimum
eliminates some of the

double-slit bright fringes.
