1016 CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

To find the focus, If you intercept the
send in rays parallel reflections, they seem
to the central axis. to come from this point.

 
    

      

 

Real Virtual
focus focus
c E Gentral oes B oe c
_e - —e- o
axis xs

 

a —

(a) (4)
Figure 34-8 (a) In a concave mirror, incident parallel light rays are brought to a real
focus at F, on the same side of the mirror as the incident light rays. (b) In a convex mir-

ror, incident parallel light rays seem to diverge from a virtual focus at F,on the side of
the mirror opposite the light rays.

focus) F of the convex mirror, and its distance from the mirror surface is the focal
length f of the mirror. If we placed a card at this focal point, an image of object O
would not appear on the card; so this focal point is not like that of a concave
mirror.

Two Types. To distinguish the actual focal point of a concave mirror from
the perceived focal point of a convex mirror, the former is said to be a real focal
point and the latter is said to be a virtual focal point. Moreover, the focal length f
of a concave mirror is taken to be a positive quantity, and that of a convex mirror
a negative quantity. For mirrors of both types, the focal length fis related to the
radius of curvature r of the mirror by

f=4r (spherical mirror), (34-3)

where r is positive for a concave mirror and negative for a convex mirror.

Images from Spherical Mirrors

Inside. With the focal point of a spherical mirror defined, we can find the rela-
tion between image distance i and object distance p for concave and convex
spherical mirrors. We begin by placing the object O inside the focal point of the
concave mirror—that is, between the mirror and its focal point F (Fig. 34-10).

Changing the location
of the object relative to
F changes the image.

Virtual

      

Parallel rays

be p=f—i
St
@ o

  

Figure 34-10 (a) An object O inside the focal point of a concave mirror, and its virtual image /. (b) The object at the
focal point F. (c) The object outside the focal point, and its real image J.
