34-2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS 1015

Spherical Mirrors

‘We turn now from images produced by plane mirrors to images produced by mir-
rors with curved surfaces. In particular, we consider spherical mirrors, which are
simply mirrors in the shape of a small section of the surface of a sphere. A plane
mirror is in fact a spherical mirror with an infinitely large radius of curvature and
thus an approximately flat surface.

Making a Spherical Mirror

We start with the plane mirror of Fig. 34-8a, which faces leftward toward an
object O that is shown and an observer that is not shown. We make a concave
mirror by curving the mirror’s surface so it is concave (“caved in”) as in
Fig. 34-8b. Curving the surface in this way changes several characteristics of the
mirror and the image it produces of the object:

1. The center of curvature C (the center of the sphere of which the mirror’s sur-
face is part) was infinitely far from the plane mirror; it is now closer but still in
front of the concave mirror.

2. The field of view—the extent of the scene that is reflected to the observer —
was wide; it is now smaller.

3. The image of the object was as far behind the plane mirror as the object was in
front; the image is farther behind the concave mirror; that is, lil is greater.

4, The height of the image was equal to the height of the object; the height of the
image is now greater. This feature is why many makeup mirrors and shaving
mirrors are concave— they produce a larger image of a face.

We can make a convex mirror by curving a plane mirror so its surface is
convex (“flexed out”) as in Fig. 34-8c. Curving the surface in this way (1) moves
the center of curvature C to behind the mirror and (2) increases the field of view.
It also (3) moves the image of the object closer to the mirror and (4) shrinks it.
Store surveillance mirrors are usually convex to take advantage of the increase in
the field of view—more of the store can then be seen with a single mirror.

Focal Points of Spherical Mirrors

For a plane mirror, the magnitude of the image distance i is always equal to
the object distance p. Before we can determine how these two distances are
related for a spherical mirror, we must consider the reflection of light from an
object O located an effectively infinite distance in front of a spherical mirror,
on the mirror’s central axis. That axis extends through the center of curvature C
and the center c of the mirror. Because of the great distance between the object
and the mirror, the light waves spreading from the object are plane waves when
they reach the mirror along the central axis. This means that the rays representing
the light waves are all parallel to the central axis when they reach the mirror.

Forming a Focus. When these parallel rays reach a concave mirror like that
of Fig. 34-9a, those near the central axis are reflected through a common point F;
two of these reflected rays are shown in the figure. If we placed a (small) card at
F,a point image of the infinitely distant object O would appear on the card. (This
would occur for any infinitely distant object.) Point F is called the focal point (or
focus) of the mirror, and its distance from the center of the mirror c is the focal
length f of the mirror.

If we now substitute a convex mirror for the concave mirror, we find that the
parallel rays are no longer reflected through a common point. Instead, they
diverge as shown in Fig. 34-9b. However, if your eye intercepts some of the
reflected light, you perceive the light as originating from a point source behind
the mirror. This perceived source is located where extensions of the reflected rays
pass through a common point (F in Fig. 34-9b). That point is the focal point (or

 

byl

(@)

Bending the mirror
this way shifts
the image away.

      
 

C Cental axis

Bending it this
way shifts the
image closer.

T Central axis ©

Figure 34-8 (a) An object O forms a virtual
image Jin a plane mirror. (b) If the mirror
is bent so that it becomes concave, the
image moves farther away and becomes
larger. (c) If the plane mirror is bent so
that it becomes convex, the image moves
closer and becomes smaller.
