1024

CHAPTER 34 IMAGES

   

Courtesy Matthew G. Wheeler

A fire is being started by focusing sunlight
onto newspaper by means of a converging
lens made of clear ice. The lens was made
by melting both sides of a flat piece of ice
into a convex shape in the shallow vessel
(which has a curved bottom).

Figure 34-14 (a) Rays initially parallel to
the central axis of a converging lens are
made to converge to a real focal point Fy
by the lens. The lens is thinner than
drawn, with a width like that of the verti-
cal line through it. We shall consider all
the bending of rays as occurring at this
central line. (b) An enlargement of the
top part of the lens of (a); normals to the
surfaces are shown dashed. Note

that both refractions bend the ray down-
ward, toward the central axis. (c) The
same initially parallel rays are made to
diverge by a diverging lens. Extensions of
the diverging rays pass through a virtual
focal point F. (d) An enlargement of the
top part of the lens of (c). Note that both
refractions bend the ray upward, away
from the central axis.

Lens Equations. We shall consider only the special case of a thin lens —that

is, a lens in which the thickest part is thin relative to the object distance p, the im-

age distance i, and the radii of curvature r, and ry of the two surfaces of the lens.

We shall also consider only light rays that make small angles with the central axis

(they are exaggerated in the figures here). In Module 34-6 we shall prove that for

such rays, a thin lens has a focal length f. Moreover, i and p are related to each
other by

i

+ a (thin lens),

(34-9)

cont
se

which is the same as we had for mirrors. We shall also prove that when a thin lens
with index of refraction n is surrounded by air, this focal length f is given by

=(n-1) (+ = +) (thin lens in air), (34-10)
rn Ty

Zs
ffi
which is often called the lens maker's equation. Here r, is the radius of curvature
of the lens surface nearer the object and r, is that of the other surface. The signs
of these radii are found with the rules in Module 34-3 for the radii of spherical
refracting surfaces. If the lens is surrounded by some medium other than air (say,

corn oil) with index of refraction Medium, We replace n in Eq. 34-10 with 1/Ngedium
Keep in mind the basis of Eqs. 34-9 and 34-10:

Oo A lens can produce an image of an object only because the lens can bend light
rays, but it can bend light rays only if its index of refraction differs from that of
the surrounding medium.

Forming a Focus. Figure 34-14a shows a thin lens with convex refracting
surfaces, or sides. When rays that are parallel to the central axis of the lens are
sent through the lens, they refract twice, as is shown enlarged in Fig. 34-14. This

To find the focus,
send in rays parallel
to the central axis.

The bending occurs
only at the surfaces.

 

(d)

If you intercept these
rays, they seem to
come from Fo.

     

1)
