1068 CHAPTER 35 INTERFERENCE

Sample Problem 35.06 Thin-film interference of a coating on a glass lens

In Fig. 35-19, a glass lens is coated on one side with a thin
film of magnesium fluoride (MgF,) to reduce reflection
from the lens surface. The index of refraction of MgF, is
1.38; that of the glass is 1.50. What is the least coating thick-
ness that eliminates (via interference) the reflections at the
middle of the visible spectrum (A = 550 nm)? Assume that
the light is approximately perpendicular to the lens surface.

KEY IDEA

 

Reflection is eliminated if the film thickness L is such that
light waves reflected from the two film interfaces are exactly
out of phase. The equation relating L to the given wave-
length A and the index of refraction n of the thin film is ei-
ther Eq. 35-36 or Eq. 35-37, depending on the reflection
phase shifts at the interfaces.

Calculations: To determine which equation is needed, we
fill out an organizing table like Table 35-1. At the first inter-
face, the incident light is in air, which has a lesser index of
refraction than the MgF, (the thin film). Thus, we fill in 0.5
wavelength under r, in our organizing table (meaning that
the waves of ray r; are shifted by 0.54 at the first interface).
At the second interface, the incident light is in the MgF,
which has a lesser index of refraction than the glass on the
other side of the interface. Thus, we fill in 0.5 wavelength
under r> in our table.

Because both reflections cause the same phase shift,
they tend to put the waves of r; and r, in phase. Since we
want those waves to be out of phase, their path length differ-
ence 2L must be an odd number of half-wavelengths:

odd number A

= XX
on FI a

Air MgF, Glass
m= 1.00 my =1.38 ng = 1.50

   

Both reflection phase shifts
are 0.5 wavelength. So, only
the path length difference
determines the interference.

=r

Figure 35-19 Unwanted reflections from glass can be suppressed
(at a chosen wavelength) by coating the glass with a thin
transparent film of magnesium fluoride of the properly chosen
thickness.

This leads to Eq. 35-36 (for a bright film sandwiched in air
but for a dark film in the arrangement here). Solving that
equation for L then gives us the film thicknesses that will
eliminate reflection from the lens and coating:

A
L=(m +Day form =0,1,2,.... (35-38)

We want the least thickness for the coating—that is, the
smallest value of L.Thus, we choose m = 0, the smallest pos-
sible value of m. Substituting it and the given data in Eq.
35-38, we obtain

ie A _ 550 nm

in (038) = 99.6 nm.

(Answer)

Sample Problem 35.07 Thin-film interference of a transparent wedge

Figure 35-20a shows a transparent plastic block with a thin
wedge of air at the right. (The wedge thickness is exagger-
ated in the figure.) A broad beam of red light, with wave-
length A = 632.8 nm, is directed downward through the top
of the block (at an incidence angle of 0°). Some of the light
that passes into the plastic is reflected back up from the
top and bottom surfaces of the wedge, which acts as a thin
film (of air) with a thickness that varies uniformly and
gradually from L, at the left-hand end to Le at the right-
hand end. (The plastic layers above and below the wedge
of air are too thick to act as thin films.) An observer look-
ing down on the block sees an interference pattern consist-
ing of six dark fringes and five bright red fringes along the
wedge. What is the change in thickness AL (= Lr — L;)
along the wedge?

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) The brightness at any point along the left-right length of
the air wedge is due to the interference of the waves
reflected at the top and bottom interfaces of the wedge.
(2) The variation of brightness in the pattern of bright and
dark fringes is due to the variation in the thickness of the
wedge. In some regions, the thickness puts the reflected
waves in phase and thus produces a bright reflection
(a bright red fringe). In other regions, the thickness puts the
reflected waves out of phase and thus produces no reflec-
tion (a dark fringe).

Organizing the reflections: Because the observer sees
more dark fringes than bright fringes, we can assume that a
dark fringe is produced at both the left and right ends of
