35-2 YOUNG'S INTERFERENCE EXPERIMENT

1053

35-2 vouNe’s INTERFERENCE EXPERIMENT

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

35.13 Describe the diffraction of light by a narrow slit and the
effect of narrowing the slit.

35.14 With sketches, describe the production of the interfer-
ence pattern in a double-slit interference experiment using
monochromatic light.

35.15 Identify that the phase difference between two waves
can change if the waves travel along paths of different
lengths, as in the case of Young's experiment.

35.16 In a double-slit experiment, apply the relationship
between the path length difference AL and the wave-
length A, and then interpret the result in terms of interfer-
ence (maximum brightness, intermediate brightness, and
darkness).

35.17 For a given point in a double-slit interference pattern,
express the path length difference AL of the rays reaching
that point in terms of the slit separation d and the angle 0
to that point.

35.18 In a Young's experiment, apply the relationships be-
tween the slit separation d, the light wavelength A, and the

Key Ideas

angles @to the minima (dark fringes) and to the maxima
(bright fringes) in the interference pattern.

35.19 Sketch the double-slit interference pattern, identifying
what lies at the center and what the various bright and
dark fringes are called (such as “first side maximum”
and “third order”).

35.20 Apply the relationship between the distance D
between a double-slit screen and a viewing screen,
the angle @ to a point in the interference pattern,
and the distance y to that point from the pattern’s
center.

35.21 For a double-slit interference pattern, identify the
effects of changing d or A and also identify what
determines the angular limit to the pattern.

35.22 For a transparent material placed over one slitina
Young's experiment, determine the thickness or index of
refraction required to shift a given fringe to the center of
the interference pattern.

 

@ In Young's interference experiment, light passing through a single slit falls on two slits in a screen. The light leaving these slits
flares out (by diffraction), and interference occurs in the region beyond the screen. A fringe pattern, due to the interference,

forms on a viewing screen.

@ The conditions for maximum and minimum intensity are
dsin = ma,

dsin 0 = (m + 4)A,

form =0,1,2,...
form = 0,1,2,...

(maxima —bright fringes),

(minima—dark fringes),

where @ is the angle the light path makes with a central axis and dis the slit separation.

 

Diffraction

In this module we shall discuss the experiment that first proved that light is
a wave. To prepare for that discussion, we must introduce the idea of diffraction
of waves, a phenomenon that we explore much more fully in Chapter 36. Its
essence is this: If a wave encounters a barrier that has an opening of dimensions
similar to the wavelength, the part of the wave that passes through the opening
will flare (spread) out—will diffract—into the region beyond the barrier. The
flaring is consistent with the spreading of wavelets in the Huygens construction
of Fig. 35-2. Diffraction occurs for waves of all types, not just light waves; Fig. 35-6
shows the diffraction of water waves traveling across the surface of water in
a shallow tank. Similar diffraction of ocean waves through openings in a barrier
can actually increase the erosion of a beach the barrier is intended to protect.

 

Figure 35-8 Waves produced by an oscillating paddle at the left flare out through an opening

in a barrier along the water surface.

 

George Resch/Fundamental Photographs
