1140

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

Since Chapter 7, we have discussed many examples involving changes in
the total energy of a particle or a system of particles. However, we did not in-
clude mass energy in the discussions because the changes in mass energy were
either zero or small enough to be neglected. The law of conservation of total
energy still applies when changes in mass energy are significant. Thus, regard-
less of what happens to the mass energy, the following statement from Module
8-5 is still true:

oS The total energy E of an isolated system cannot change.

For example, if the total mass energy of two interacting particles in an isolated
system decreases, some other type of energy in the system must increase because
the total energy cannot change.

Q Value. In a system undergoing a chemical or nuclear reaction, a change in
the total mass energy of the system due to the reaction is often given as a Q value.
The Q value for a reaction is obtained from the relation

system’s initial | / system’s final +0
total mass energy) \total mass energy,

or Ei = Eng + Q. (37-49)

Using Eq. 37-43 (Ep = mc), we can rewrite this in terms of the initial total mass
Mand the final total mass M;as

M|? =M;c? +O
or Q= Mc? — Myc? = -AMc’, (37-50)

where the change in mass due to the reaction is AM = M,;— Mi.

If a reaction results in the transfer of energy from mass energy to, say, kinetic
energy of the reaction products, the system’s total mass energy Ey (and total
mass M) decreases and Q is positive. If, instead, a reaction requires that energy
be transferred to mass energy, the system’s total mass energy Ep (and its total
mass M) increases and Q is negative.

For example, suppose two hydrogen nuclei undergo a fusion reaction in
which they join together to form a single nucleus and release two particles:

'H+'H > *H+e* +y,

where 7H is another type of hydrogen nucleus (with a neutron in addition to the
proton), e* is a positron, and v is a neutrino. The total mass energy (and total
mass) of the resultant single nucleus and two released particles is less than the
total mass energy (and total mass) of the initial hydrogen nuclei. Thus, the Q of
the fusion reaction is positive, and energy is said to be released (transferred
from mass energy) by the reaction. This release is important to you because
the fusion of hydrogen nuclei in the Sun is one part of the process that results
in sunshine on Earth and makes life here possible.

Kinetic Energy

In Chapter 7 we defined the kinetic energy K of an object of mass m moving at
speed v well below c to be

K =3mv. (37-51)

However, this classical equation is only an approximation that is good enough
when the speed is well below the speed of light.

Let us now find an expression for kinetic energy that is correct for all physi-
cally possible speeds, including speeds close to c. Solving Eq. 37-47 for K and then
substituting for E from Eq. 37-48 lead to
