1118 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

a

   

&

nN

Kinetic energy (MeV)

Ultimate speed

° 1 2 3
Speed (10° m/s)

Figure 37-2 The dots show measured values
of the kinetic energy of an electron plot-
ted against its measured speed. No matter
how much energy is given to an electron
(or to any other particle having mass), its
speed can never equal or exceed the ulti-
mate limiting speed c. (The plotted curve
through the dots shows the predictions of
Einstein's special theory of relativity.)

Table 37-1 Record of Event A

Coordinate Value
x 3.58 m
y 1.29 m
z Om
t 34.55

the faster-than-light warp drive used in many science fiction stories appears to be
impossible.)

Both postulates have been exhaustively tested, and no exceptions have ever
been found.

The Ultimate Speed

The existence of a limit to the speed of accelerated electrons was shown in a 1964
experiment by W. Bertozzi, who accelerated electrons to various measured
speeds and—by an independent method—measured their kinetic energies. He
found that as the force on a very fast electron is increased, the electron’s meas-
ured kinetic energy increases toward very large values but its speed does not
increase appreciably (Fig. 37-2). Electrons have been accelerated in laboratories
to at least 0.999 999 999 95 times the speed of light but—close though it may
be—that speed is still less than the ultimate speed c.
This ultimate speed has been defined to be exactly

c = 299 792 458 m/s. (37-1)

Caution: So far in this book we have (appropriately) approximated c as
3.0 x 10° m/s, but in this chapter we shall often use the exact value. You might
want to store the exact value in your calculator’s memory (if it is not there
already), to be called up when needed.

Testing the Speed of Light Postulate

If the speed of light is the same in all inertial reference frames, then the speed of
light emitted by a source moving relative to, say, a laboratory should be the same
as the speed of light that is emitted by a source at rest in the laboratory. This claim
has been tested directly, in an experiment of high precision. The “light source”
was the neutral pion (symbol 7°), an unstable, short-lived particle that can be pro-
duced by collisions in a particle accelerator. It decays (transforms) into two
gamma rays by the process

mDoyty. (37-2)

Gamma rays are part of the electromagnetic spectrum (at very high frequencies)
and so obey the speed of light postulate, just as visible light does. (In this chapter
we shall use the term light for any type of electromagnetic wave, visible or not.)

In 1964, physicists at CERN, the European particle-physics laboratory near
Geneva, generated a beam of pions moving at a speed of 0.999 75c with respect to
the laboratory. The experimenters then measured the speed of the gamma rays
emitted from these very rapidly moving sources. They found that the speed of the
light emitted by the pions was the same as it would be if the pions were at rest in
the laboratory, namely c.

Measuring an Event

An event is something that happens, and every event can be assigned three
space coordinates and one time coordinate. Among many possible events are
(1) the turning on or off of a tiny lightbulb, (2) the collision of two particles,
(3) the passage of a pulse of light through a specified point, (4) an explosion, and
(5) the sweeping of the hand of a clock past a marker on the rim of the clock. A
certain observer, fixed in a certain inertial reference frame, might, for example,
assign to an event A the coordinates given in Table 37-1. Because space and time
are entangled with each other in relativity, we can describe these coordinates
collectively as spacetime coordinates. The coordinate system itself is part of the
reference frame of the observer.

A given event may be recorded by any number of observers, each in a dif-
ferent inertial reference frame. In general, different observers will assign differ-
