Plant Development

At the most basic level, the developmental paths of plants
and animals share many key elements. However, the mech-
anisms used to achieve body form are quite different.
While animal cells follow an orchestrated series of move-
ments during development, plant cells are encased within
stiff cellulose walls, and, therefore, cannot move. Each cell
in a plant is fixed into position when it is created. Instead of
using cell migration, plants develop by building their bod-
ies outward, creating new parts from special groups of self-
renewing cells called meristems. As meristem cells contin-
ually divide, they produce cells that can differentiate into
the tissues of the plant.

Another major difference between animals and plants
is that most animals are mobile and can move away from
unfavorable circumstances, while plants are anchored in
position and must simply endure whatever environment
they experience. Plants compensate for this restriction by
relaxing the rules of development to accommodate local
circumstances. Instead of creating a body in which every
part is specified to have a fixed size and location, a plant
assembles its body from a few types of modules, such as
leaves, roots, branch nodes, and flowers. Each module
has a rigidly controlled structure and organization, but
how the modules are utilized is quite flexible. As a plant
develops, it simply adds more modules, with the environ-
ment having a major influence on the type, number, size,
and location of what is added. In this way the plant is
able to adjust the path of its development to local
circumstances.

Early Cell Division

The first division of the fertilized egg in a flowering plant
is off-center, so that one of the daughter cells is small, with
dense cytoplasm (figure 17.8). That cell, the future em-
bryo, begins to divide repeatedly, forming a ball of cells.
The other daughter cell also divides repeatedly, forming an
elongated structure called a suspensor, which links the
embryo to the nutrient tissue of the seed. The suspensor
also provides a route for nutrients to reach the developing
embryo. Just as the animal embryo acquires its initial axis as
a cell mass formed during cleavage divisions, so the plant
embryo forms its root-shoot axis at this time. Cells near the
suspensor are destined to form a root, while those at the
other end of the axis ultimately become a shoot.

 

Tissue Formation

Three basic tissues differentiate while the plant embryo is
still a ball of cells (figure 17.84), analogous to the formation
of the three germ layers in animal embryos, although in
plants, no cell movements are involved. The outermost
cells in a plant embryo become epidermal cells. The bulk
of the embryonic interior consists of ground tissue cells

338 =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

that eventually function in food and water storage. Lastly,
cells at the core of the embryo are destined to form the fu-
ture vascular tissue.

Seed Formation

Soon after the three basic tissues form, a flowering plant
embryo develops one or two seed leaves called cotyle-
dons. At this point, development is arrested, and the em-
bryo is now either surrounded by nutritive tissue or has
amassed stored food in its cotyledons (figure 17.8c). The
resulting package, known as a seed, is resistant to drought
and other unfavorable conditions; in its dormant state, it is
a vehicle for dispersing the embryo to distant sites and al-
lows a plant embryo to survive in environments that might
kill a mature plant.

Germination

A seed germinates in response to changes in its environ-
ment brought about by water, temperature, or other fac-
tors. The embryo within the seed resumes development
and grows rapidly, its roots extending downward and its
leaf-bearing shoots extending upward (figure 17.84).

Meristematic Development

Plants development exhibits its great flexibility during the
assembly of the modules that make up a plant body. Apical
meristems at the root and shoot tips generate the large
numbers of cells needed to form leaves, flowers, and all
other components of the mature plant (figure 17.8e). At
the same time, meristems ensheathing the stems and roots
produce the wood and other tissues that allow growth in
circumference. A variety of hormones produced by plant
tissues influence meristem activity and, thus, the develop-
ment of the plant body. Plant hormones (see chapter 41)
are the tools that allow plant development to adjust to the
environment.

Morphogenesis

The form of a plant body is largely determined by con-
trolled changes in cell shape as they expand osmotically
after they form (see figure 17.8e). Plant growth-regulating
hormones and other factors influence the orientation of
bundles of microtubules on the interior of the plasma
membrane. These microtubules seem to guide cellulose de-
position as the cell wall forms around the outside of a new
cell. The orientation of the cellulose fibers, in turn, deter-
mines how the cell will elongate as it increases in volume,
and so determines the cell’s final shape.

 

Ina developing plant, leaves, flowers, and branches are
added to the growing body in ways that are strongly
influenced by the environment.

 
