39-1 ENERGIES OF A TRAPPED ELECTRON

kinetic energy. Hence, we can write the de Broglie wavelength of this electron as

yeh bt (39-3)
P 2mE
If we substitute Eq. 39-3 into Eq. 39-1 and solve for the energy E, we find that E
depends on n according to

2
= (soe) forn = 1,2,3,.... (39-4)
The positive integer n here is the quantum number of the electron’s quantum
state in the trap.

Equation 39-4 tells us something important: Because the electron is confined to
the trap, it can have only the energies given by the equation. It cannot have an en-
ergy that is, say, halfway between the values for n = 1 and n = 2. Why this restric-
tion? Because an electron is a matter wave. Were it, instead, a particle as assumed in
classical physics, it could have any value of energy while it is confined to the trap.

Figure 39-3 is a graph showing the lowest five allowed energy values for an
electron in an infinite well with L = 100 pm (about the size of a typical atom).
The values are called energy levels, and they are drawn in Fig. 39-3 as levels, or
steps, on a ladder, in an energy-level diagram. Energy is plotted vertically; nothing
is plotted horizontally.

The quantum state with the lowest possible energy level E, allowed by
Eg. 39-4, with quantum number n = 1, is called the ground state of the electron.
The electron tends to be in this lowest energy state. All the quantum states with
greater energies (corresponding to quantum numbers n = 2 or greater) are called
excited states of the electron. The state with energy level E,, for quantum number
n = 2, is called the first excited state because it is the first of the excited states as
we move up the energy-level diagram. The other states have similar names.

Energy Changes

A trapped electron tends to have the lowest allowed energy and thus to be in its
ground state. It can be changed to an excited state (in which it has greater energy)
only if an external source provides the additional energy that is required for the
change. Let Ej, be the initial energy of the electron and Ehjgn be the greater
energy in a state that is higher on its energy-level diagram. Then the amount of
energy that is required for the electron’s change of state is

AE = Ehigh — Etow- (39-5)

An electron that receives such energy is said to make a quantum jump (or tran-
sition), or to be excited from the lower-energy state to the higher-energy state. Figure
39-4a represents a quantum jump from the ground state (with energy level E;) to
the third excited state (with energy level E,). As shown, the jump must be from one
energy level to another, but it can bypass one or more intermediate energy levels.

Photons. One way an electron can gain energy to make a quantum jump up
to a greater energy level is to absorb a photon. However, this absorption and
quantum jump can occur only if the following condition is met:

o If a confined electron is to absorb a photon, the energy hf of the photon must
equal the energy difference AE between the initial energy level of the electron
and a higher level.

Thus, excitation by the absorption of light requires that

_ he

hf= —— = AE = Eiigh — Brow (39-6)

1189

These are the lowest five energy
levels allowed the electron. (No
intermediate levels are allowed.)

1000

 

4th excited
800
zo Brel excited
&
g
2
a
soa 2nd excited
E,
200 Ist excited

Ground

   

0

Figure 39-3 Several of the allowed energies for
an electron confined to the infinite well of
Fig. 39-2, with width L = 100 pm.

The electron is excited
to a higher energy level.

E

 

It can de-excite to a lower level in several
ways (set by chance).

E E E

(2) () (@
Figure 39-4 (a) Excitation of a trapped electron
from the energy level of its ground state
to the level of its third excited state. (b)—(d)
Three of four possible ways the electron can
de-excite to return to the energy level of its
ground state. (Which way is not shown?)
