37-6 MOMENTUM AND ENERGY

waves that were emitted at point P. However, if the source is emitting light waves,
there is still a Doppler effect, called the transverse Doppler effect. In this situa-
tion, the detected frequency of the light emitted when the source is at point P is

f =f) V1 — B (transverse Doppler effect). (37-37)

For low speeds (8 < 1), Eq. 37-37 can be expanded in a power series in 8 and
approximated as

f= fil — 36°) Clowspeeds). (37-38)

Here the first term is what we would expect for sound waves, and again the
relativistic effect for low-speed light sources and detectors appears with the 6* term.

In principle, a police radar unit can determine the speed of a car even when
the path of the radar beam is perpendicular (transverse) to the path of the car.
However, Eq. 37-38 tells us that because £ is small even for a fast car, the rela-
tivistic term 6°/2 in the transverse Doppler effect is extremely small. Thus, f ~ fo

1137

and the radar unit computes a speed of zero.

The transverse Doppler effect is really another test of time dilation. If we
rewrite Eq. 37-37 in terms of the period T of oscillation of the emitted light wave

instead of the frequency, we have, because T = 1/f,

= yh,

 

(37-39)

in which Tp (= 1/fo) is the proper period of the source. As comparison with

Eq. 37-9 shows, Eq. 37-39 is simply the time dilation formula.

37-6 MoMENTUM AND ENERGY

Learning Objectives

 

Atter reading this module, you should be able to...

37.30 Identify that the classical expressions for momentum
and kinetic energy are approximately correct for slow
speeds whereas the relativistic expressions are correct for
any physically possible speed.

37.31 Apply the relationship between momentum, mass, and
relative speed.

37.32 Identify that an object has a mass energy (or rest
energy) associated with its mass.

37.33 Apply the relationships between total energy, rest
energy, kinetic energy, momentum, mass, speed, the
speed parameter, and the Lorentz factor.

Key Ideas

37.34 Sketch a graph of kinetic energy versus the ratio v/c
(of speed to light speed) for both classical and relativistic
expressions of kinetic energy.

37.35 Apply the work-kinetic energy theorem to relate work
by an applied force and the resulting change in kinetic
energy.

37.36 For a reaction, apply the relationship between the Q
value and the change in the mass energy.

37.37 For a reaction, identify the correlation between the
algebraic sign of Q and whether energy is released or
absorbed by the reaction.

 

@ The following definitions of linear momentum p, kinetic
energy K, and total energy E for a particle of mass m are
valid at any physically possible speed:
p= ymv (momentum),
E=mc?+K= ymc?  (totalenergy),
K=mc(y- 1) (kinetic energy).
Here yis the Lorentz factor for the particle's motion, and mc
is the mass energy, or rest energy, associated with the mass
of the particle.

@ These equations lead to the relationships
(pce? = K* + 2Kmce?
and E? = (pc)? + (me?)
@ When a system of particles undergoes a chemical or

nuclear reaction, the Q of the reaction is the negative of the
change in the system's total mass energy:

Q = Mc? — Myc? = —AM c?,
where M, is the system's total mass before the reaction and
Mis its total mass after the reaction.
