1208

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

Table 39-2 Quantum Numbers for the Hydrogen Atom

 

Symbol Name Allowed Values
n Principal quantum number 1,2.3,...
€ Orbital quantum number

 

m Orbital magnetic quantum number —€, -(€- 1), . - - , +(€-1),4+€

 

can move. The three quantum numbers, along with their names and the values
that they may have, are shown in Table 39-2.

Each set of quantum numbers (n, €,m,) identifies the wave function of a
particular quantum state. The quantum number n, called the principal
quantum number, appears in Eq. 39-34 for the energy of the state. The orbital
quantum number ¢ is a measure of the magnitude of the angular momentum
associated with the quantum state. The orbital magnetic quantum number m;
is related to the orientation in space of this angular momentum vector. The re-
strictions on the values of the quantum numbers for the hydrogen atom, as
listed in Table 39-2, are not arbitrary but come out of the solution to
Schrédinger’s equation. Note that for the ground state (n = 1), the restrictions
require that € = 0 and m, = 0. That is, the hydrogen atom in its ground state
has zero angular momentum, which is not predicted by Eq. 39-23 in the Bohr
model.

Vv] Checkpoint 5

(a) A group of quantum states of the hydrogen atom has n = 5. How many values
of are possible for states in this group? (b) A subgroup of hydrogen atom states in the
n= S group has ¢ = 3. How many values of m, are possible for states in this subgroup?

The Wave Function of the Hydrogen Atom’s Ground State

The wave function for the ground state of the hydrogen atom, as obtained by solv-
ing the three-dimensional Schrédinger equation and normalizing the result, is

Wr) = e7" — (ground state), (39-39)

1
Vana
where a (= 5.291 772 x 10-1"! m) is the Bohr radius. This radius is loosely taken
to be the effective radius of a hydrogen atom and turns out to be a convenient
unit of length for other situations involving atomic dimensions.

As with other wave functions, /(r) in Eq. 39-39 does not have physical mean-
ing but y(r) does, being the probability density—the probability per unit
volume—that the electron can be detected. Specifically, y°(r) dV is the probabil-
ity that the electron can be detected in any given (infinitesimal) volume element
dV located at radius r from the center of the atom:

probability of detection volume probability
in volume dV = density 7(r) (volume dV). (39-40)
at radius r at radius r

Because y7(r) here depends only on r, it makes sense to choose, as a volume
element dV, the volume between two concentric spherical shells whose radii are r
andr + dr.That is, we take the volume element dV to be

dV = (Ar?) dr, (39-41)
