37-1 SIMULTANEITY AND TIME DILATION

Sally Light from event Red reached me before light from event Blue did. From
the marks on my spaceship, I found that I too was standing halfway between
the two sources. Therefore, the events were not simultaneous; event Red
occurred first, followed by event Blue.

These reports do not agree. Nevertheless, both observers are correct.

Note carefully that there is only one wavefront expanding from the site of
each event and that this wavefront travels with the same speed c in both reference
frames, exactly as the speed of light postulate requires.

It might have happened that the meteorites struck the ships in such a way
that the two hits appeared to Sally to be simultaneous. If that had been the case,
then Sam would have declared them not to be simultaneous.

The Relativity of Time

If observers who move relative to each other measure the time interval (or tem-
poral separation) between two events, they generally will find different results.
Why? Because the spatial separation of the events can affect the time intervals
measured by the observers.

o The time interval between two events depends on how far apart they occur in
both space and time; that is, their spatial and temporal separations are entangled.

In this module we discuss this entanglement by means of an example; however, the
example is restricted in a crucial way: To one of two observers, the two events occur at
the same location. We shall not get to more general examples until Module 37-3.
Figure 37-5a shows the basics of an experiment Sally conducts while she and
her equipment —a light source, a mirror, and a clock—ride in a train moving
with constant velocity 7 relative to a station. A pulse of light leaves the light
source B (event 1), travels vertically upward, is reflected vertically downward by
the mirror, and then is detected back at the source (event 2). Sally measures a
certain time interval Af) between the two events, related to the distance D from

Mirror

Event 1 is the emission of light.
Event 2 is the return of the light.
We want the time between them.

Event 1 Event 2
B

Figure 37-5 (a) Sally, on the train,

measures the time interval Af
Event 1
between events 1 and 2 using a
single clock C on the train. That c
clock is shown twice: first for

event 1 and then for event 2.

(b) Sam, watching from the

station as the events occur,

requires two synchronized C G
clocks, C; at event 1 and C, at

event 2, to measure the time

interval between the two events; Sally

his measured time interval is At (a)

Mirror

Sam

(d)

1121

The measure of that time interval
on Sally's clock differs from that
on Sam's clock due to the relative

motion.

 
