37-3 THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

Iv] Checkpoint 2

In Fig. 37-9, frame S" has velocity 0.90¢ relative to frame S. An observer in frame S
measures two events as occurring at the following spacetime coordinates: event Yellow
at (5.0 m,20 ns) and event Green at (—2.0 m,45 ns). An observer in frame S wants to
find the temporal separation Afgy = fg — fy between the events. (a) Which equation in
Table 37-2 should be used? (b) Should +0.90c or —0.90¢ be substituted for vin the
parentheses on the equation’s right side and in the Lorentz factor 7? What value should
be substituted into the (c) first and (d) second term in the parentheses?

Some Consequences of the Lorentz Equations

Here we use the equations of Table 37-2 to affirm some of the conclusions that
we reached earlier by arguments based directly on the postulates.

Simultaneity
Consider Eq. 2 of Table 37-2,

At= (ae + var) (37-23)
If two events occur at different places in reference frame S’ of Fig. 37-9, then
Ax' in this equation is not zero. It follows that even if the events are simultane-
ous in S’ (thus Ar’ = 0), they will not be simultaneous in frame S. (This is in
accord with our conclusion in Module 37-1.) The time interval between the
events in S will be

v Ax’
At=y—3 (simultaneous events in S’).
c

 

Thus, the spatial separation Ax’ guarantees a temporal separation Af.

Time Dilation

Suppose now that two events occur at the same place in S’ (thus Ax’ = 0) but at
different times (thus Ar’ # 0). Equation 37-23 then reduces to

At= yA’ (eventsin same place in S’). (37-24)

This confirms time dilation between frames S and S’. Moreover, because the two
events occur at the same place in S’, the time interval At’ between them can be
measured with a single clock, located at that place. Under these conditions,
the measured interval is a proper time interval, and we can label it Af) as we have
previously labeled proper times. Thus, with that label Eq. 37-24 becomes

At = y At (time dilation),

which is exactly Eq. 37-9, the time dilation equation. Thus, time dilation is a spe-
cial case of the more general Lorentz equations.

Length Contraction
Consider Eq. 1’ of Table 37-2,

Ax’ = y(Ax — vAt). (37-25)
If a rod lies parallel to the x and x’ axes of Fig. 37-9 and is at rest in reference
frame S',an observer in S’ can measure its length at leisure. One way to do so is
by subtracting the coordinates of the end points of the rod. The value of Ax’ that

is obtained will be the proper length Lo of the rod because the measurements are
made ina frame where the rod is at rest.

1131
