37-3 THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

37.15 For frames with relative motion, apply the Galilean trans-
formation to transform an event's position from one frame
to the other.

37.16 Identify that a Galilean transformation is approximately cor-
rect for slow relative speeds but the Lorentz transformations are
the correct transformations for any physically possible speed.

37.17 Apply the Lorentz transformations for the spatial and

37-3 THE LORENTZ TRANSFORMATION 1129

temporal separations of two events as measured in two
frames with a relative speed v.

37.18 From the Lorentz transformations, derive the equations
for time dilation and length contraction.

37.19 From the Lorentz transformations show that if two events
are simultaneous but spatially separated in one frame, they
cannot be simultaneous in another frame with relative motion.

 

Key Idea
The Lorentz transformation equations relate the spacetime
coordinates of a single event as seen by observers in two in-
ertial frames, S and S', where S’ is moving relative to S with
velocity v in the positive x and x’ direction. The four coordi-
nates are related by

 

Xx’ = y(x — vt),
ys

Z=%,

t= y(t — vxlc?).

 

The Lorentz Transformation

Figure 37-9 shows inertial reference frame S’ moving with speed v relative to
frame S, in the common positive direction of their horizontal axes (marked
x and x’). An observer in S reports spacetime coordinates x, y, z, t for an event,
and an observer in S’ reports x’, y’,z’, t’ for the same event. How are these sets
of numbers related? We claim at once (although it requires proof) that the y and

 

Event

 

 

z coordinates, which are perpendicular to the motion, are not affected by the mo- ,

tion; that is,y = y’ and z = z’. Our interest then reduces to the relation between x

and x’ and that between fand (’.

The Galilean Transformation Equations
Prior to Einstein’s publication of his special theory of relati

 

x UL»

Figure 37-9 Two inertial reference frames:
frame S' has velocity V relative to frame S.

ity, the four coordinates

of interest were assumed to be related by the Galilean transformation equations:

xX'=x-—vt
t=t

(Galilean transformation equations;
approximately valid at low speeds).

(37-20)

(These equations are written with the assumption that ¢ = ¢’ = 0 when the origins
of S and S’ coincide.) You can verify the first equation with Fig. 37-9. The second
equation effectively claims that time passes at the same rate for observers in both
reference frames. That would have been so obviously true to a scientist prior to
Einstein that it would not even have been mentioned. When speed v is small

compared to c, Eqs. 37-20 generally work well.

The Lorentz Transformation Equations

Equations 37-20 work well when speed v is small compared to c, but they are ac-
tually incorrect for any speed and are very wrong when v is greater than about
0.10c. The equations that are correct for any physically possible speed are called
the Lorentz transformation equations* (or simply the Lorentz transformations).

*You may wonder why we do not call these the Einstein transformation equations (and why not the
Einstein factor for y). H. A. Lorentz actually derived these equations before Einstein did, but as the
great Dutch physicist graciously conceded, he did not take the further bold step of interpreting these
equations as describing the true nature of space and time. It is this interpretation, first made by

Einstein, that is at the heart of relativity.
