1200

2

 

This is a two-dimensional
trap with infinite
potential walls.

‘Corral

Figure 39-13 A rectangular corral—a
two-dimensional version of the infinite
potential well of Fig. 39-2—with widths L,
and L,.

2

 

This is a three-dimensional
trap with infinite
potential walls.

 

Figure 39-14 A rectangular box—a
three-dimensional version of the infinite
potential well of Fig. 39-2 —with widths

L,

 

yand L,.

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

Two- and Three-Dimensional Electron Traps

In the next module, we shall discuss the hydrogen atom as being a three-
dimensional finite potential well. As a warm-up for the hydrogen atom, let us
extend our discussion of infinite potential wells to two and three dimensions.

Rectangular Corral

Figure 39-13 shows the rectangular area to which an electron can be confined by
the two-dimensional version of Fig. 39-2—a two-dimensional infinite potential
well of widths L, and L, that forms a rectangular corral. The corral might be on
the surface of a body that somehow prevents the electron from moving parallel
to the z axis and thus from leaving the surface. You have to imagine infinite
potential energy functions (like U(x) in Fig. 39-2) along each side of the corral,
keeping the electron within the corral.

Solution of Schrédinger’s equation for the rectangular corral of Fig. 39-13
shows that, for the electron to be trapped, its matter wave must fit into each of
the two widths separately, just as the matter wave of a trapped electron must fit
into a one-dimensional infinite well. This means the wave is separately quantized
in width L, and in width L,. Let n, be the quantum number for which the
matter wave fits into width L,, and let n, be the quantum number for which the
matter wave fits into width L,. As with a one-dimensional potential well,
these quantum numbers can be only positive integers. We can extend Eqs. 39-10
and 39-17 to write the normalized wave function as

2. (naw 2. (nw
Yns,ny = 4 si L “), Pin y), (39-19)

The energy of the electron depends on both quantum numbers and is the
sum of the energy the electron would have if it were confined along the x axis
alone and the energy it would have if it were confined along the y axis alone.
From Eq. 39-4, we can write this sum as

he nh h(n. nb
Eneny = (<a Te ye + (<A TB ye = ¥( L: + L ) (39-20)

Excitation of the electron by photon absorption and de-excitation of the
electron by photon emission have the same requirements as for one-dimensional
traps. Now, however, two quantum numbers (n, and n,) are involved. Because of
that, different states might have the same energy; such states and their energy
levels are said to be degenerate.

 

 

 

 

 

Rectangular Box

An electron can also be trapped in a three-dimensional infinite potential well —
a box. If the box is rectangular as in Fig. 39-14, then Schrédinger’s equation shows
us that we can write the energy of the electron as

I [nz n n
Enx.ny.nz = £( tpt Bp ) (39-21)

 

 

Here n, is a third quantum number, for fitting the matter wave into width L..

Vv] Checkpoint 4

In the notation of Eq. 39-20, is Eo, Eo, Eos, or Ey, the ground-state energy of an
electron in a (two-dimensional) rectangular corral?
