Reasoning: We must be consistent with the notation we set
up in part (a). Recall how we originally defined the time in-
terval between burst and explosion: At = t, — f, = +1.10s.
To be consistent with that choice of notation, our definition
of At’ must be ¢, — t',; thus, we have found that

At =t,— t= —1.04s.
The minus sign here tells us that ¢, > f,; that is, in the
planet-moon reference frame, the burst occurred 1.04s

after the explosion, not 1.10s before the explosion as
detected in the ship frame.

(c) Did the burst cause the explosion, or vice versa?

KEY IDEA

 

The sequence of events measured in the planet-moon

37-4 THE RELATIVITY OF VELOCITIES

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

37.20 With a sketch, explain the arrangement in which a
particle's velocity is to be measured relative to two
frames that have relative motion.

Key Idea

37-4 THE RELATIVITY OF VELOCITIES 1133

reference frame is the reverse of that measured in the ship
frame. In either situation, if there is a causal relationship be-
tween the two events, information must travel from the
location of one event to the location of the other to cause it.

Checking the speed: Let us check the required speed of
the information. In the ship frame, this speed is

_ Ax _ 4.00 x 10%m
Yinio Ar *1.10s

but that speed is impossible because it exceeds c. In the
planet-moon frame, the speed comes out to be 3.70 x 10°
m/s, also impossible. Therefore, neither event could possibly
have caused the other event; that is, they are unrelated
events. Thus, the starship should stand down and not con-
front the Reptulians.

= 3.64 x 10° mis,

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

37.21 Apply the relationship for a relativistic velocity
transformation between two frames with relative
motion.

@ When a particle is moving with speed u’ in the positive x’ direction in an inertial reference frame 5S’ that itself is moving with
speed v parallel to the x direction of a second inertial frame S, the speed u of the particle as measured in S is

u'tv
u=

1+ u'vic?

(relativistic velocity).

 

The Relativity of Velocities

Here we wish to use the Lorentz transformation equations to compare the veloci-

ties that two observers in different inertial reference frames S and S’ would
measure for the same moving particle. Let S’ move with velocity v relative to S.

Suppose that the particle, moving with constant velocity parallel to the x and
x' axes in Fig. 37-11, sends out two signals as it moves. Each observer measures ?
the space interval and the time interval between these two events. These four

measurements are related by Eqs. 1 and 2 of Table 37-2,
Ax = y(Ax' + v At’)

Ay’
and At= (ae ++ )

 

If we divide the first of these equations by the second, we find

Ax Ax’ +vAr

“At At + v Ax'/c2*

 

The speed of the moving
particle depends on the
frame.

  

Particle
was measured from S'

‘Was measured from S

x x!

Figure 37-11 Reference frame S' moves with
velocity ¥ relative to frame S. A particle
has velocity i’ relative to reference frame
S' and velocity i relative to reference
frame S.
