Determination

The mammalian egg is symmetrical in its contents as well
as its shape, so that all of the cells of an early blastoderm
are equivalent up to the eight-cell stage. The cells are said
to be totipotent, meaning that they are potentially capable
of expressing all of the genes of their genome. If they are
separated from one another, any one of them can produce a
completely normal individual. Indeed, just this sort of pro-
cedure has been used to produce sets of four or eight iden-
tical offspring in the commercial breeding of particularly
valuable lines of cattle. The reverse process works, too; if
cells from two different eight-cell-stage embryos are com-
bined, a single normal individual results. Such an individual
is called a chimera, because it contains cells from different
genetic lines (figure 17.12).

Mammalian cells start to become different after the
cight-cell stage as a result of cell-cell interactions like those
we just discussed. At this point, the pathway that will influ-
ence the future developmental fate of the cells is deter-
mined. The commitment of a particular cell to a specialized
developmental path is called determination. A cell in the
prospective brain region of an amphibian embryo at the
early gastrula stage has not yet been determined; if trans-
planted elsewhere in the embryo, it will develop like its
new neighbors (see chapter 60). By the late gastrula stage,
however, determination has taken place, and the cell will
develop as neural tissue no matter where it is transplanted.
Determination must be carefully distinguished from differ-

Homozygous white mouse
embryo is removed from mother
at eight-cell stage.

 

  

Homozygous black mouse
embryo is removed from mother
at eight-cell stage.

The chimeric baby mouse
that develops in the foster
mother has four parents

(none of them is the foster
mother). j

342 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

is transfered to a

mother.

Protease enzymes are used
to remove zona pellucida
from each embryo.

   

The 16-cell embryo
continues development in
vitro as a single embryo
to blastocyst stage.

The fusion blastocyst

pseudopregnant foster

entiation, which is the cell specialization that occurs at the
end of the developmental path. Cells may become deter-
mined to give rise to particular tissues long before they ac-
tually differentiate into those tissues. The cells of a
Drosophila eye imaginal disc, for example, are fully deter-
mined to produce an eye, but they remain totally undiffer-
entiated during most of the course of larval development.

The Mechanism of Determination

What is the molecular mechanism of determination? The
gene regulatory proteins discussed in detail in chapter 16
are the tools used by cells to initiate developmental
changes. When genes encoding these proteins are acti-
vated, one of their effects is to reinforce their own activa-
tion. This makes the developmental switch deterministic,
initiating a chain of events that leads down a particular de-
velopmental pathway. Cells in which a set of regulatory
genes have been activated may not actually undergo differ-
entiation until some time later, when other factors interact
with the regulatory protein and cause it to activate still
other genes. Nevertheless, once the initial “switch” is
thrown, the cell is fully committed to its future develop-
mental path.

Often, before a cell becomes fully committed to a partic-
ular developmental path, it first becomes partially commit-
ted, acquiring positional labels that reflect its location in
the embryo. These labels can have a great influence on how
the pattern of the body subsequently develops. In a chicken
embryo, if tissue at the base of
the leg bud (which would nor-
mally give rise to the thigh) is
transplanted to the tip of the
identical-looking wing bud
(which would normally give rise
to the wing tip), that tissue will
develop into a toe rather than a
thigh! The tissue has already
been determined as leg but is not
yet committed to being a particu-
F lar part of the leg. Therefore, it
— can be influenced by the posi-
tional signaling at the tip of the
wing bud to form a tip (in this
case a tip of leg).

Incubated together at
body temperature, the
two embryos fuse.

 

FIGURE 17.12
Constructing a chimeric mouse.
ss Cells from two eight-cell individuals
fuse to form a single individual.
