‘We can simplify the indicated integration by changing the
variable from x to the dimensionless variable y, where

nw

yas (39-16)
hence dx = egy,
nr

‘When we change the variable, we must also change the
integration limits (again). Equation 39-16 tells us that y = 0
when x = 0 and that y = nz when x = L; thus 0 and nz are
our new limits. With all these substitutions, Eq. 39-15 becomes

on La
aah (sin? y) dy = 1.

39-3 AN ELECTRON IN A FINITE WELL

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

39.18 Sketch a one-dimensional finite potential well, indicating
the length and height.

39.19 Foran electron trapped in a finite well with given energy
levels, sketch the energy-level diagram, indicate the nonquan-
tized region, and compare the energies and de Broglie wave-
lengths with those of an infinite well of the same length.

39.20 For an electron trapped ina finite well, explain (in principle)
how the wave functions for the allowed states are determined.

39.21 For an electron trapped in a finite well with a given quan-
tum number, sketch the probability density as a function of
position across the well and into the walls.

39,22 Identify that a trapped electron can exist in only the
allowed states and relate that energy of the state to the
kinetic energy of the electron.

Key Ideas

39-3 AN ELECTRON IN A FINITE WELL 1195

‘We can use integral 11 in Appendix E to evaluate the inte-
gral, obtaining the equation

AL|y — sin2y |" _ ‘
nw | 2 |
Evaluating at the limits yields

ma
nx 2
2

A= %
1p

This result tells us that the dimension for A2, and thus for
W(x), is an inverse length. This is appropriate because the
probability density of Eq. 39-12 is a probability per unit length.

 

 

thus (Answer) (39-17)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

39.23 Calculate the energy that an electron must absorb
or emit to move between the allowed states or between an
allowed state and any value in the nonquantized region.

39.24 If a quantum jump involves light, apply the relationship
between the energy change and the frequency and wave-
length associated with the photon.

39.25 From a given allowed state in a finite well, calculate the
minimum energy required for the electron to escape and
the kinetic energy of the escaped electron if provided more
than that minimal energy.

39.26 Identify the emission and absorption spectra of an
electron in a one-dimensional infinite potential well, includ-
ing escaping the trap and falling into the trap.

 

@ The wave function for an electron ina finite, one-dimensional
potential well extends into the walls, where the wave function
decreases exponentially with depth.

@ Compared to the states in an infinite well of the same size,
the states in a finite well have a limited number, longer de
Broglie wavelengths, and lower energies.

 

An Electron in a Finite Well

A potential energy well of infinite depth is an idealization. Figure 39-7 shows
a realizable potential energy well—one in which the potential energy of an elec-
tron outside the well is not infinitely great but has a finite positive value Up,

 

Figure 39-7 A finite potential ener;
the infinite potential well of Fig.
the x direction.

 

 

well. The depth of the well is Uy and its width is L. Asin
-2, the motion of the trapped electron is restricted to

 
