38-7 HEISENBERG’S UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE 1173

Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle

Our inability to predict the position of a particle with a uniform electric potential
energy, as indicated by Fig. 38-13, is our first example of Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle, proposed in 1927 by German physicist Werner Heisenberg. It states
that measured values cannot be assigned to the position 7 and the momentum p’
of a particle simultaneously with unlimited precision.

In terms of h = h/27 (called “h-bar”), the principle tells us

Ax-Ap, =h
Ay-Apy =f (Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle). (38-28)
Az-Ap, =h

Here Ax and Ap, represent the intrinsic uncertainties in the measurements of the
x components of 7 and p,, with parallel meanings for the y and z terms. Even with
the best measuring instruments, each product of a position uncertainty and a mo-
mentum uncertainty in Eq. 38-28 will be greater than f, never less.

Here we shall not derive the uncertainty relationships but only apply them.
They are due to the fact that electrons and other particles are matter waves and
that repeated measurements of their positions and momenta involve probabili-
ties, not certainties. In the statistics of such measurements, we can view, say, Ax
and Ap, as the spread (actually, the standard deviations) in the measurements.

We can also justify them with a physical (though highly simplified) argument:
In earlier chapters we took for granted our ability to detect and measure location
and motion, such as a car moving down a street or a pool ball rolling across a
table. We could locate a moving object by watching it—that is, by intercepting
light scattered by the object. That scattering did not alter the object’s motion. In
quantum physics, however, the act of detection in itself alters the location and
motion. The more precisely we wish to determine the location of, say, an electron
moving along an x axis (by using light or by any other means), the more we alter
the electron’s momentum and thus become less certain of the momentum. That
is, by decreasing Av, we necessarily increase Ap,. Vice versa, if we determine the
momentum very precisely (less Ap,), we become less certain of where the elec-
tron will be located (we increase Ax).

That latter situation is what we found in Fig 38-13. We had an electron with a cer-
tain value of k, which, by the de Broglie relationship, means a certain momentum p,.
Thus, Ap, = 0. By Eq. 38-28, that means that Ax = ~. If we then set up an experiment
to detect the electron, it could show up anywhere between x = —* and x = +%.

You might push back on the argument: Couldn’t we very precisely measure
p,and then next very precisely measure x wherever the electron happens to show
up? Doesn't that mean that we have measured both p, and x simultaneously and
very precisely? No, the flaw is that although the first measurement can give us a
precise value for p,, the second measurement necessarily alters that value.
Indeed, if the second measurement really does give us a precise value for x, we
then have no idea what the value of p, is.

Sample Problem 38.05 Uncertainty principle: position and momentum

Assume that an electron is moving along an x axis and that KEY IDEA
you measure its speed to be 2.05 X 10° m/s, which can be
known with a precision of 0.50%. What is the minimum The minimum uncertainty allowed by quantum theory is
uncertainty (as allowed by the uncertainty principle in given by Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle in Eq. 38-28.
quantum theory) with which you can simultaneously meas- | We need only consider components along the x axis be-
ure the position of the electron along the x axis? cause we have motion only along that axis and want the

 
