39-5 THE HYDROGEN ATOM

in which 477? is the surface area of the inner shell and dr is the radial distance
between the two shells. Then, combining Eqs. 39-39, 39-40, and 39-41 gives us

probability of detection 4
in volume dV = W(r) dV = — er? dr. (39-42)
at radius r e

Describing the probability of detecting an electron is easier if we work with a
radial probability density P(r) instead of a volume probability density y?(r). This
P(r) isa linear probability density such that

radial probability radial volume probability
density P(r) . = density ¥7(r) __} (volume dV)
A width dr a.
at radius r at radius r
or P(r) dr = W(r) av. (39-43)

Substituting for ¥°(r) dV from Eq. 39-42, we obtain
4 a2 7 a ,
P(r) = ye" (radial probability density, hydrogen atom groundstate). (39-44)
a

To find the probability of detecting the ground-state electron between any
two radii r; and r) (that is, between a spherical shell of radius r; and another of
radius ry), we integrate Eq. 39-44 between those two radii:

(Propspiiey of ‘steetion) _ [rv dr.
In

between 7, and r (39-45)

If the radial range Ar (= ry — r) in which we search for the electron is small
enough such that P(r) does not vary by much over the range, then we can usually
approximate the integral in Eq. 39-45 as being equal to the product P(r) Ar, with
P(r) evaluated in the center of Ar.

Figure 39-19 is a plot of Eq. 39-44. The area under the plot is unity; that is,

[ P(r) dr = 1. (39-46)
This equation states that in a hydrogen atom, the electron must be somewhere in
the space surrounding the nucleus.

The triangular marker on the horizontal axis of Fig. 39-19 is located one Bohr
radius from the origin. The graph tells us that in the ground state of the hydrogen
atom, the electron is most likely to be found at about this distance from the
center of the atom.

Figure 39-19 conflicts sharply with the popular view that electrons in atoms
follow well-defined orbits like planets moving around the Sun. This popular view,
however familiar, is incorrect. Figure 39-19 shows us all that we can ever know
about the location of the electron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom. The
appropriate question is not “When will the electron arrive at such-and-such
a point?” but “What are the odds that the electron will be detected in a small
volume centered on such-and-such a point?” Figure 39-20, which we call a dot
plot, suggests the probabilistic nature of the wave function: The density of dots
represents the probability density of detection of the electron with the hydrogen
atom in its ground state. Think of the atom in this state as a fuzzy ball with no
sharply defined boundary and no hint of orbits.

It is not easy for a beginner to envision subatomic particles in this probabilistic
way. The difficulty is our natural impulse to regard an electron as something like a
tiny jelly bean, located at certain places at certain times and following a well-defined
path. Electrons and other subatomic particles simply do not behave in this way.

1209

12

7
&
s

 

0 50-100 150 200 250
r (pm)
Figure 39-19 A plot of the radial probability
density P(r) for the ground state of the
hydrogen atom. The triangular markers lo-
cated at one Bohr radius from the origin, and
the origin represents the center of the atom.

 

Figure 39-20 A “dot plot” showing the
volume probability density ¥?(r) —not

the radial probability density P(r) —for the
ground state of the hydrogen atom.The
density of dots drops exponentially with
increasing distance from the nucleus, which
is represented here by ared spot.
