1150 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

65 Another approach to velocity transformations. In Fig. 37-31,
reference frames B and C move past reference frame A in the com-
mon direction of their x axes. Represent the x components of the
velocities of one frame relative to another with a two-letter sub-
script. For example, v4g is the x component of the velocity of A
relative to B. Similarly, represent the corresponding speed parame-
ters with two-letter subscripts. For example, Bag (=V,g/c) is the
speed parameter corresponding to v4, (a) Show that

ae = Pio + Bre
1+ BaoBoc

Let M,z represent the ratio (1 — B4g)/(1 + Bag), and let Mgc and
Mac represent similar ratios. (b) Show that the relation

Mac = MasMac

is true by deriving the equation of part (a) from it.

— —
PE
x x x

Figure 37-31 Problems 65, 66, and 67.

66 Continuation of Problem 65. Use the result of part (b) in
Problem 65 for the motion along a single axis in the following situ-
ation. Frame A in Fig. 37-31 is attached to a particle that moves
with velocity +0.500c past frame B, which moves past frame C
with a velocity of +0.500c. What are (a) Myc, (b) Bac, and (c) the
velocity of the particle relative to frame C?

67 Continuation of Problem 65. Let reference frame C in Fig.
37-31 move past reference frame D (not shown). (a) Show that
Map = MasMacMcp-

(b) Now put this general result to work: Three particles move par-
allel to a single axis on which an observer is stationed. Let plus and
minus signs indicate the directions of motion along that axis.
Particle A moves past particle B at 84, = +0.20. Particle B moves
past particle C at Bgc = —0.40. Particle C moves past observer D
at Bcp = +0.60. What is the velocity of particle A relative to observer
D? (The solution technique here is much faster than using Eq.37-29.)

68 Figure 37-16 shows a ship (attached to reference frame S')
passing us (standing in reference frame S) with velocity
¥ = 0.950ci. A proton is fired at speed 0.980c relative to the ship
from the front of the ship to the rear. The proper length of the ship
is 760 m. What is the temporal separation between the time the
proton is fired and the time it hits the rear wall of the ship accord-
ing to (a) a passenger in the ship and (b) us? Suppose that, instead,
the proton is fired from the rear to the front. What then is the tem-
poral separation between the time it is fired and the time it hits the
front wall according to (c) the passenger and (d) us?

69 The car-in-the-garage problem. Carman has just purchased
the world’s longest stretch limo, which has a proper length of
L, = 305 m. In Fig. 37-32a, it is shown parked in front of a garage
with a proper length of L, = 6.00 m. The garage has a front door
(shown open) and a back door (shown closed). The limo is obviously
longer than the garage. Still, Garageman, who owns the garage and
knows something about relativistic length contraction, makes a bet
with Carman that the limo can fit in the garage with both doors
closed. Carman, who dropped his physics course before reaching
special relativity, says such a thing, even in principle, is impossible.

To analyze Garageman’s scheme, an x, axis is attached to the
limo, with x, = 0 at the rear bumper, and an x, axis is attached to
the garage, with x, = 0 at the (now open) front door. Then Carman
is to drive the limo directly toward the front door at a velocity of
0.9980c (which is, of course, both technically and financially impos-
sible). Carman is stationary in the x, reference frame; Garageman
is stationary in the x, reference frame.

There are two events to consider. Event 1: When the rear
bumper clears the front door, the front door is closed. Let the time
of this event be zero to both Carman and Garageman: fy) = f.1 = 0.
The event occurs at x, = x, = 0. Figure 37-32b shows event 1 ac-
cording to the x, reference frame. Event 2: When the front bumper
reaches the back door, that door opens. Figure 37-32c shows event
2 according to the x, reference frame.

According to Garageman, (a) what is the length of the limo,
and what are the spacetime coordinates (b) x, and (c) f,) of event
2? (d) For how long is the limo temporarily “trapped” inside the
garage with both doors shut? Now consider the situation from the
x; reference frame, in which the garage comes racing past the limo
at a velocity of —0.9980c. According to Carman, (e) what is the
length of the passing garage, what are the spacetime coordinates
(£) xq and (g) f,2 of event 2, (h) is the limo ever in the garage with
both doors shut, and (i) which event occurs first? (j) Sketch events
1and 2 as seen by Carman. (k) Are the events causally related; that
is, does one of them cause the other? (1) Finally, who wins the bet?

 

.————4 ee eal
Bs
0 “
(a)

0 * 0 *
(0) ()

0

Figure 37-32 Problem 69.

70 An airplane has rest length 40.0 m and speed 630 mvs. To a
ground observer, (a) by what fraction is its length contracted and
(b) how long is needed for its clocks to be 1.00 ps slow.

71 SSM To circle Earth in low orbit, a satellite must have a speed
of about 2.7 x 10*km/h. Suppose that two such satellites orbit
Earth in opposite directions. (a) What is their relative speed as they
pass, according to the classical Galilean velocity transformation
equation? (b) What fractional error do you make in (a) by not us-
ing the (correct) relativistic transformation equation?

72 Find the speed parameter of a particle that takes 2.0 y longer
than light to travel a distance of 6.0 ly.

73 ssm How much work is needed to accelerate a proton from
a speed of 0.9850c to a speed of 0.9860c?

74 A pionis created in the higher reaches of Earth’s atmosphere
when an incoming high-energy cosmic-ray particle collides with an
atomic nucleus. A pion so formed descends toward Earth with a
speed of 0.99c. In a reference frame in which they are at rest, pions
