1152 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

92 A relativistic train of proper length 200 m approaches a tun-
nel of the same proper length, at a relative speed of 0.900c. A
paint bomb in the engine room is set to explode (and cover
everyone with blue paint) when the front of the train passes the
far end of the tunnel (event FF). However, when the rear car
passes the near end of the tunnel (event RN), a device in that car
is set to send a signal to the engine room to deactivate the bomb.
Train view: (a) What is the tunnel length? (b) Which event occurs
first, FF or RN? (c) What is the time between those events?
(d) Does the paint bomb explode? Tunnel view: (e) What is the
train length? (f) Which event occurs first? (g) What is the time
between those events? (h) Does the paint bomb explode? If your
answers to (d) and (h) differ, you need to explain the paradox,
because either the engine room is covered with blue paint or not;
you cannot have it both ways. If your answers are the same, you
need to explain why.

93 Particle A (with rest energy 200 MeV) is at rest in a lab frame
when it decays to particle B (rest energy 100 MeV) and particle C
(rest energy 50 MeV). What are the (a) total energy and (b) mo-
mentum of B and the (c) total energy and (d) momentum of C?

94 Figure 37-37 shows three situations in which a starship passes
Earth (the dot) and then makes a round trip that brings it back
past Earth, each at the given Lorentz factor. As measured in the
rest frame of Earth, the round-trip distances are as follows: trip 1,
2D; trip 2, 4D; trip 3, 6D. Neglecting any time needed for accelera-
tions and in terms of D and c, find the travel times of (a) trip 1, (b)
trip 2, and (c) trip 3 as measured from the rest frame of Earth.
Next, find the travel times of (d) trip 1, (e) trip 2, and (f) trip 3 as
measured from the rest frame of the starship. (Hint: For a large
Lorentz factor, the relative speed is almost c.)

y=10 yaa y= 30
a a
qd) (2) (3)

Figure 37-37 Problem 94.

95 Ionization measurements show that a particular lightweight
nuclear particle carries a double charge (= 2e) and is moving with
a speed of 0.710c. Its measured radius of curvature in a magnetic
field of 1.00T is 6.28 m. Find the mass of the particle and identify it.
(Hints: Lightweight nuclear particles are made up of neutrons
(which have no charge) and protons (charge = +e), in roughly
equal numbers. Take the mass of each such particle to be 1.00 u.
(See Problem 53.)

96 A 2.50 MeV electron moves perpendicularly to a magnetic
field in a path with a 3.0 cm radius of curvature. What is the mag-
netic field B? (See Problem 53.)

97 A proton synchrotron accelerates protons to a kinetic energy
of 500 GeV. At this energy, calculate (a) the Lorentz factor, (b) the
speed parameter, and (c) the magnetic field for which the proton
orbit has a radius of curvature of 750 m.

98 Anastronaut exercising on a treadmill maintains a pulse rate
of 150 per minute. If he exercises for 1.00 h as measured by a clock
on his spaceship, with a stride length of 1.00 m/s, while the ship
travels with a speed of 0.900c relative to a ground station, what are
(a) the pulse rate and (b) the distance walked as measured by
someone at the ground station?

99 A spaceship approaches Earth at a speed of 0.42c. A light on
the front of the ship appears red (wavelength 650 nm) to passen-
gers on the ship. What (a) wavelength and (b) color (blue, green,
or yellow) would it appear to an observer on Earth?

100 Some of the familiar hydrogen lines appear in the spectrum
of quasar 3C9, but they are shifted so far toward the red that their
wavelengths are observed to be 3.0 times as long as those observed
for hydrogen atoms at rest in the laboratory. (a) Show that the clas-
sical Doppler equation gives a relative velocity of recession greater
than c for this situation. (b) Assuming that the relative motion of
3C9 and Earth is due entirely to the cosmological expansion of the
universe, find the recession speed that is predicted by the relativis-
tic Doppler equation.

101 In one year the United States consumption of electrical en-
ergy was about 2.2 x 10!2 kW - h. (a) How much mass is equivalent
to the consumed energy in that year? (b) Does it make any
difference to your answer if this energy is generated in oil-burning,
nuclear, or hydroelectric plants?

102 Quite apart from effects due to Earth’s rotational and or-
bital motions, a laboratory reference frame is not strictly an inertial
frame because a particle at rest there will not, in general, remain at
rest; it will fall. Often, however, events happen so quickly that we
can ignore the gravitational acceleration and treat the frame as
inertial. Consider, for example, an electron of speed v = 0.992c,
projected horizontally into a laboratory test chamber and moving
through a distance of 20 cm. (a) How long would that take, and
(b) how far would the electron fall during this interval? (c) What
can you conclude about the suitability of the laboratory as an iner-
tial frame in this case?

103 What is the speed parameter for the following speeds: (a) a
typical rate of continental drift (1 in./y); (b) a typical drift speed for
electrons in a current-carrying conductor (0.5 mm/s); (c) a highway
speed limit of 55 mi/h; (d) the root-mean-square speed of a hydro-
gen molecule at room temperature; (e) a supersonic plane flying at
Mach 2.5 (1200 km/h); (f) the escape speed of a projectile from the
Earth’s surface; (g) the speed of Earth in its orbit around the Sun;
(h) a typical recession speed of a distant quasar due to the cosmo-
logical expansion (3.0 X 10‘ km/s)?

 
