1198

 

From Scientific American, January 1993, page 119.
Reproduced with permission of Michael Steigerwald.

Figure 39-10 Two samples of powdered cad-
mium selenide, a semiconductor, differing
only in the size of their granules. Each granule
serves as an electron trap. The lower sample
has the larger granules and consequently the
smaller spacing between energy levels and the
lower photon energy threshold for the ab-
sorption of light. Light not absorbed is scat-
tered,causing the sample to scatter light of
greater wavelength and appear red. The up-
per sample, because of its smaller granules,

and consequently its larger level spacing and
its larger energy threshold for absorption,
appears yellow.

Figure 39-11 A quantum dot, or “artificial
atom.” (a) A central semiconducting layer
forms a potential energy well in which elec-
trons are trapped. The lower insulating

layer is thin enough to allow electrons to be
added to or removed from the central layer
by barrier tunneling if an appropriate volt-
age is applied between the leads. (b) A pho-
tograph of an actual quantum dot. The cen-
tral purple band is the electron
confinement region.

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

whose granules are small—in the nanometer range—and of uniform size. Each
such granule —each nanocrystallite— acts as a potential well for the electrons
trapped within it.

Equation 39-4 (E = (h?/8mL7)n) shows that we can increase the energy-
level values of an electron trapped in an infinite well by reducing the width L of
the well. This would also shift the photon energies that the well can absorb to
higher values and thus shift the corresponding wavelengths to shorter values.

These general results are also true for a well formed by a nanocrystallite.
A given nanocrystallite can absorb photons with an energy above a certain
threshold energy E, (=hf,) and thus wavelengths below a corresponding
threshold wavelength

c ch

fo &
Light with any wavelength longer than A, is scattered by the nanocrystallite instead
of being absorbed. The color we attribute to the nanocrystallite is then determined
by the wavelength composition of the scattered light we intercept.

If we reduce the size of the nanocrystallite, the value of E, is increased, the
value of A, is decreased, and the light that is scattered to us changes in its
wavelength composition. Thus, the color we attribute to the nanocrystallite
changes. As an example, Fig. 39-10 shows two samples of the semiconductor cad-
mium selenide, each consisting of a powder of nanocrystallites of uniform size.
The lower sample scatters light at the red end of the spectrum.The upper sample
differs from the lower sample only in that the upper sample is composed of
smaller nanocrystallites. For this reason its threshold energy E, is greater and,
from above, its threshold wavelength A, is shorter, in the green range of visible
light. Thus, the sample now scatters both red and yellow. Because the yellow
component happens to be brighter, the sample’s color is now dominated by the
yellow. The striking contrast in color between the two samples is compelling
evidence of the quantization of the energies of trapped electrons and the depend-
ence of these energies on the size of the electron trap.

Ay

 

Quantum Dots

The highly developed techniques used to fabricate computer chips can be used to
construct, atom by atom, individual potential energy wells that behave, in many
respects, like artificial atoms. These quantum dots, as they are usually called, have
promising applications in electron optics and computer technology.

In one such arrangement, a “sandwich” is fabricated in which a thin layer of
a semiconducting material, shown in purple in Fig. 39-1 1a, is deposited between
two insulating layers, one of which is much thinner than the other. Metal end
caps with conducting leads are added at both ends. The materials are chosen to
ensure that the potential energy of an electron in the central layer is less than it is

Conducting
lead

   
 

Semi-
conductor

Insulator
Metal

Conducting
+ Tlead

|-—~500 nm ——|

 

From Scientific American,
September 1995, page 67. Image
reproduced with permission of
(@) H. Temkin, Texas Tech University
