17.2 Multicellular organisms employ the same basic mechanisms of

development.

Despite the many differences in the three developmental
paths we have just discussed, it is becoming increasingly
clear that most multicellular organisms develop according
to molecular mechanisms that are fundamentally very simi-
lar. This observation suggests that these mechanisms
evolved very early in the history of multicellular life. Here,
we will focus on six mechanisms that seem to be of particu-
lar importance in the development of a wide variety of or-
ganisms. We will consider them in roughly the order in
which they first become important during development.

Cell Movement and Induction

Cell Movement

Cells migrate during many stages in animal development,
sometimes traveling great distances before reaching the site
where they are destined to develop. By the time vertebrate
development is complete, most tissues contain cells that
originated from quite different parts of the early embryo.
One way cells move is by pulling themselves along using
cell adhesion molecules, such as the cadherin proteins you
read about in chapter 7. Cadherins span the plasma mem-
brane, protruding into the cytoplasm and extending out
from the cell surface. The cytoplasmic portion of the mole-
cule is attached to actin or intermediate filaments of the cy-
toskeleton, while the extracellular portion has five 100-
amino acid segments linked end-to-end; three or more of
these segments have Ca** binding sites that play a critical
role in the attachment of the cadherin to other cells. Over a
dozen different cadherins have been discovered to date.
Each type of cadherin attaches to others of its own type at
its terminal segments, forming a two-cadherin link between
the cytoskeletons of adjacent cells. As a cell migrates to a

Ectoderm

Optic stalk

Lens invagination

   

Wall of forebrain

Optic cup Optic nerve

340) = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

 

different tissue, the nature of the cadherin it expresses
changes, and if cells expressing two different cadherins are
mixed, they quickly sort themselves out, aggregating into
two separate masses. This is how the different imaginal discs
of a Drosophila larva assemble into an adult. Other calcium-
independent cell adhesion molecules, such as the neural
cell adhesion molecules (N-CAMs) expressed by migrating
nerve cells, reinforce the associations made by cadherins,
but cadherins play the major role in holding aggregating
cells together.

In some tissues, such as connective tissue, much of the
volume of the tissue is taken up by the spaces between cells.
These spaces are not vacant, however. Rather, they are
filled with a network of molecules secreted by surrounding
cells, principally, a matrix of long polysaccharide chains co-
valently linked to proteins (proteoglycans), within which
are embedded strands of fibrous protein (collagen, elastin,
and fibronectin). Migrating cells traverse this matrix by
binding to it with cell surface proteins called integrins,
which was also described in chapter 7. Integrins are at-
tached to actin filaments of the cytoskeleton and protrude
out from the cell surface in pairs, like two hands. The
“hands” grasp a specific component of the matrix such as
collagen or fibronectin, thus linking the cytoskeleton to the
fibers of the matrix. In addition to providing an anchor,
this binding can initiate changes within the cell, alter the
growth of the cytoskeleton, and change the way in which
the cell secretes materials into the matrix.

Thus, cell migration is largely a matter of changing pat-
terns of cell adhesion. As a migrating cell travels, it contin-
ually extends projections that probe the nature of its envi-
ronment. Tugged this way and that by different tentative
attachments, the cell literally feels its way toward its ulti-
mate target site.

 

Lens

FIGURE 17.9

Development of the vertebrate eye
proceeds by induction. The eye develops
as an extension of the forebrain called the
optic stalk that grows out until it contacts
the ectoderm. This contact induces the
formation of a lens from the ectoderm.
