1178 CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

Quartz
rods

   
  

MeMeMMMMM sursHEe
Figure 38-19 The essence of a scanning tun-
neling microscope (STM). Three quartz
rods are used to scan a sharply pointed
conducting tip across the surface of inter-
est and to maintain a constant separation
between tip and surface. The tip thus
moves up and down to match the contours
of the surface, and a record of its move-
ment provides information for a computer
to create an image of the surface.

Barrier tunneling finds many applications in technology, including the tunnel
diode, in which a flow of electrons produced by tunneling can be rapidly turned
on or off by electronically controlling the barrier height. The 1973 Nobel Prize in
physics was shared by three “tunnelers,” Leo Esaki (for tunneling in semiconduc-
tors), Ivar Giaever (for tunneling in superconductors), and Brian Josephson (for
the Josephson junction, a rapid quantum switching device based on tunneling).
The 1986 Nobel Prize was awarded to Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer for
development of the scanning tunneling microscope.

Vv] Checkpoint 5

Is the wavelength of the transmitted wave in Fig, 38-18 larger than, smaller than, or
the same as that of the incident wave?

The Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM)

The size of details that can be seen in an optical microscope is limited by the wave-
length of the light the microscope uses (about 300 nm for ultraviolet light). The size
of details that are required for images on the atomic scale is far smaller and thus
requires much smaller wavelengths. The waves used are electron matter waves,
but they do not scatter from the surface being examined the way waves do in an
optical microscope. Instead, the images we see are created by electrons tunneling
through potential barriers at the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM).

Figure 38-19 shows the heart of the scanning tunneling microscope. A fine
metallic tip, mounted at the intersection of three mutually perpendicular quartz
rods, is placed close to the surface to be examined. A small potential difference,
perhaps only 10 mV, is applied between tip and surface.

Crystalline quartz has an interesting property called piezoelectricity: When an
electric potential difference is applied across a sample of crystalline quartz, the di-
mensions of the sample change slightly. This property is used to change the length
of each of the three rods in Fig. 38-19, smoothly and by tiny amounts, so that the
tip can be scanned back and forth over the surface (in the x and y directions) and
also lowered or raised with respect to the surface (in the z direction).

The space between the surface and the tip forms a potential energy barrier,
much like that plotted in Fig. 38-17. If the tip is close enough to the surface,
electrons from the sample can tunnel through this barrier from the surface to the
tip, forming a tunneling current.

In operation, an electronic feedback arrangement adjusts the vertical
position of the tip to keep the tunneling current constant as the tip is scanned
over the surface. This means that the tip-surface separation also remains con-
stant during the scan. The output of the device is a video display of the varying
vertical position of the tip, hence of the surface contour, as a function of the tip
position in the xy plane.

An STM not only can provide an image of a static surface, it can also be used
to manipulate atoms and molecules on a surface, such as was done in forming
the quantum corral shown in Fig. 39-12 in the next chapter. In a process known as
lateral manipulation, the STM probe is initially brought down near a molecule,
close enough that the molecule is attracted to the probe without actually touch-
ing it. The probe is then moved across the background surface (such as copper),
dragging the molecule with it until the molecule is in the desired location. Then
the probe is backed up away from the molecule, weakening and then eliminating
the attractive force on the molecule. Although the work requires very fine con-
trol, a design can eventually be formed. In Fig. 39-12, an STM probe has been
used to move 48 iron atoms across a copper surface and into a circular corral
14nm in diameter, in which electrons can be trapped.
