38-2 THE PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

Electrons can escape only _— The escaping electron’s
if the light frequency kinetic energy is greater

exceeds a certain value. for a greater light frequency.

Figure 38-2 The stopping po-
tential Vitop as a function of

 

the frequency f of the inci- Cutoff

dent light for a sodium target frequency fo, en b

T in the apparatus of Fig. 38-

1. (Data reported by R. A. oy 7 S z i0 iz
Millikan in 1916.) Frequency of incident light f (10! Hz)

The existence of a cutoff frequency is, however, just what we should expect
if the energy is transferred via photons. The electrons within the target are held
there by electric forces. (If they weren’t, they would drip out of the target due to
the gravitational force on them.) To just escape from the target, an electron must
pick up a certain minimum energy ®, where ® is a property of the target material
called its work function. If the energy /f transferred to an electron by a photon
exceeds the work function of the material (if hf > ©), the electron can escape
the target. If the energy transferred does not exceed the work function (that is,
if hf < ®), the electron cannot escape. This is what Fig. 38-2 shows.

The Photoelectric Equation

Einstein summed up the results of such photoelectric experiments in the equation
hf = Kmax + ® (photoelectric equation). (38-5)

This is a statement of the conservation of energy for a single photon absorption by a
target with work function ®. Energy equal to the photon’s energy hfis transferred to
a single electron in the material of the target. If the electron is to escape from the
target, it must pick up energy at least equal to ®. Any additional energy (hf — ®)
that the electron acquires from the photon appears as kinetic energy K of the elec-
tron. In the most favorable circumstance, the electron can escape through the sur-
face without losing any of this kinetic energy in the process; it then appears outside
the target with the maximum possible kinetic energy Kmax-

Let us rewrite Eq. 38-5 by substituting for Km, from Eq. 38-4 (Kmax = eVitop)-
After a little rearranging we get

Visop = (4)r- 2 (38-6)

e

The ratios h/e and ®/e are constants, and so we would expect a plot of the mea-
sured stopping potential V..., versus the frequency f of the light to be a straight
line, as it is in Fig. 38-2. Further, the slope of that straight line should be h/e. As a
check, we measure ab and bc in Fig. 38-2 and write

ho ab | 2.35 V — 0.72 V

fe be (AL. X 104 —7.2 x 10") Hz

=41x 105 Ves.

 

1157
