37-1 SIMULTANEITY AND TIME DILATION 1119

ent spacetime coordinates to the same event. Note that an event does not
“belong” to any particular inertial reference frame. An event is just something
that happens, and anyone in any reference frame may detect it and assign space-
time coordinates to it.

Travel Times. Making such an assignment can be complicated by a practical
problem. For example, suppose a balloon bursts 1 km to your right while a fire-
cracker pops 2 km to your left, both at 9:00 a.m. However, you do not detect
either event precisely at 9:00 a.m. because at that instant light from the events has
not yet reached you. Because light from the firecracker pop has farther to go, it
arrives at your eyes later than does light from the balloon burst, and thus the pop
will seem to have occurred later than the burst.To sort out the actual times and to
assign 9:00 A.M. as the happening time for both events, you must calculate the
travel times of the light and then subtract these times from the arrival times.

This procedure can be very messy in more challenging situations, and we
need an easier procedure that automatically eliminates any concern about the
travel time from an event to an observer. To set up such a procedure, we shall
construct an imaginary array of measuring rods and clocks throughout the
observer’s inertial frame (the array moves rigidly with the observer). This
construction may seem contrived, but it spares us much confusion and calculation
and allows us to find the coordinates, as follows.

1. The Space Coordinates. We imagine the observer’s coordinate system fitted
with a close-packed, three-dimensional array of measuring rods, one set of
rods parallel to each of the three coordinate axes. These rods provide a way to
determine coordinates along the axes. Thus, if the event is, say, the turning on
of a small lightbulb, the observer, in order to locate the position of the event,
need only read the three space coordinates at the bulb’s location.

2. The Time Coordinate. For the time coordinate, we imagine that every point
of intersection in the array of measuring rods includes a tiny clock, which the
observer can read because the clock is illuminated by the light generated by
the event. Figure 37-3 suggests one plane in the “jungle gym” of clocks and
measuring rods we have described.

The array of clocks must be synchronized properly. It is not enough to
assemble a set of identical clocks, set them all to the same time, and then move
them to their assigned positions. We do not know, for example, whether mov-
ing the clocks will change their rates. (Actually, it will.) We must put the clocks
in place and then synchronize them.

If we had a method of transmitting signals at infinite speed, synchroniza-
tion would be a simple matter. However, no known signal has this property.
We therefore choose light (any part of the electromagnetic spectrum) to send
out our synchronizing signals because, in vacuum, light travels at the greatest
possible speed, the limiting speed c.

Here is one of many ways in which an observer might synchronize an
array of clocks using light signals: The observer enlists the help of a great num-
ber of temporary helpers, one for each clock. The observer then stands at a
point selected as the origin and sends out a pulse of light when the origin clock
reads t = 0. When the light pulse reaches the location of a helper, that helper
sets the clock there to read t = r/c, where r is the distance between the helper
and the origin. The clocks are then synchronized.

3. The Spacetime Coordinates. The observer can now assign spacetime
coordinates to an event by simply recording the time on the clock nearest the
event and the position as measured on the nearest measuring rods. If there are
two events, the observer computes their separation in time as the difference in
the times on clocks near each and their separation in space from the differ-
ences in coordinates on rods near each. We thus avoid the practical problem of
calculating the travel times of the signals to the observer from the events.

We use this array to assign
spacetime coordinates.

 

Figure 37-3 One section of a three-
dimensional array of clocks and measuring
rods by which an observer can assign
spacetime coordinates to an event, such as
a flash of light at point A. The event’s
space coordinates are approximately

x =3.6 rod lengths, y = 1.3 rod lengths,
and z = 0. The time coordinate is whatever
time appears on the clock closest to A at
the instant of the flash.
