1120 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

 

Event Blue Event Red
(a)

Sam detects both events

% Waves from the two events reach
Sam simultaneously but ...

sally detects event Red

oO. Sally receives the wave
from event Red first.

sally detects event Blue

4

(d)

Figure 37-4 The spaceships of Sally and Sam
and the occurrences of events from Sam’s
view. Sally’s ship moves rightward with
velocity V’. (a) Event Red occurs at posi-
tions RR’ and event Blue occurs at posi-
tions BB’; each event sends out a wave of
light. (b) Sam simultaneously detects the
waves from event Red and event Blue.

(c) Sally detects the wave from event Red.
(d) Sally detects the wave from event Blue.

The Relativity of Simultaneity

Suppose that one observer (Sam) notes that two independent events (event Red
and event Blue) occur at the same time. Suppose also that another observer
(Sally), who is moving at a constant velocity V with respect to Sam, also records
these same two events. Will Sally also find that they occur at the same time?

The answer is that in general she will not:

o If two observers are in relative motion, they will not, in general, agree as to
whether two events are simultaneous. If one observer finds them to be simultane-
ous, the other generally will not.

‘We cannot say that one observer is right and the other wrong. Their observations
are equally valid, and there is no reason to favor one over the other.

The realization that two contradictory statements about the same natural
events can be correct is a seemingly strange outcome of Einstein’s theory. How-
ever, in Chapter 17 we saw another way in which motion can affect measurement
without balking at the contradictory results: In the Doppler effect, the frequency
an observer measures for a sound wave depends on the relative motion of
observer and source. Thus, two observers moving relative to each other can mea-
sure different frequencies for the same wave, and both measurements are correct.

‘We conclude the following:

oO Simultaneity is not an absolute concept but rather a relative one, depending on
the motion of the observer.

If the relative speed of the observers is very much less than the speed of light,
then measured departures from simultaneity are so small that they are not
noticeable. Such is the case for all our experiences of daily living; that is why the
relativity of simultaneity is unfamiliar.

A Closer Look at Simultaneity

Let us clarify the relativity of simultaneity with an example based on the postulates
of relativity, no clocks or measuring rods being directly involved. Figure 37-4 shows
two long spaceships (the SS Sally and the SS Sam), which can serve as inertial refer-
ence frames for observers Sally and Sam. The two observers are stationed at the
midpoints of their ships. The ships are separating along a common x axis, the rela-
tive velocity of Sally with respect to Sam being V’. Figure 37-4a shows the ships with
the two observer stations momentarily aligned opposite each other.

Two large meteorites strike the ships, one setting off a red flare (event Red)
and the other a blue flare (event Blue), not necessarily simultaneously. Each
event leaves a permanent mark on each ship, at positions RR’ and BB’.

Let us suppose that the expanding wavefronts from the two events happen to
reach Sam at the same time, as Fig. 37-4b shows. Let us further suppose that, after
the episode, Sam finds, by measuring the marks on his spaceship, that he was
indeed stationed exactly halfway between the markers B and R on his ship when
the two events occurred. He will say:

Sam Light from event Red and light from event Blue reached me at the same time.
From the marks on my spaceship, I find that I was standing halfway between the
two sources. Therefore, event Red and event Blue were simultaneous events.

As study of Fig. 37-4 shows, Sally and the expanding wavefront from event Red
are moving toward each other, while she and the expanding wavefront from
event Blue are moving in the same direction. Thus, the wavefront from event Red
will reach Sally before the wavefront from event Blue does. She will say:
