 

1124 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

that the rate at which time passes on a clock is influenced by the gravitational
force on the clock, also plays a role in this experiment.)

A few years later, physicists at the University of Maryland flew an atomic
clock round and round over Chesapeake Bay for flights lasting 15h and suc-
ceeded in checking the time dilation prediction to better than 1%. Today, when
atomic clocks are transported from one place to another for calibration or other
purposes, the time dilation caused by their motion is always taken into account.

lv] Checkpoint 1

Standing beside railroad tracks, we are suddenly startled by a relativistic
boxcar traveling past us as shown in the figure. Inside, a well-equipped
hobo fires a laser pulse from the front of the boxcar to its rear. (a) Is our
measurement of the speed of the pulse greater than, less than, or the
same as that measured by the hobo? (b) Is his measurement of the flight
time of the pulse a proper time? (c) Are his measurement and our

measurement of the flight time related by Eq. 37-9?

 

Sample Problem 37.01 Time dilation for a space traveler who returns to Earth

Your starship passes Earth with a relative speed of 0.9990c.
After traveling 10.0y (your time), you stop at lookout post
LP13, turn, and then travel back to Earth with the same relative
speed. The trip back takes another 10.0 y (your time). How long
does the round trip take according to measurements made on
Earth? (Neglect any effects due to the accelerations involved
with stopping, turning, and getting back up to speed.)

KEY IDEAS

 

We begin by analyzing the outward trip:

1. This problem involves measurements made from two
(inertial) reference frames, one attached to Earth and
the other (your reference frame) attached to your ship.

2. The outward trip involves two events: the start of the
trip at Earth and the end of the trip at LP13.

3. Your measurement of 10.0 y for the outward trip is the
proper time Af) between those two events, because the
events occur at the same location in your reference
frame —namely, on your ship.

4, The Earth-frame measurement of the time interval At
for the outward trip must be greater than Af, according
to Eq.37-9 (At = y At) for time dilation.

Calculations: Using Eq. 37-8 to substitute for yin Eq. 37-9,
we find

Aty
v1 — (vic?
10.0 y
= = (22.37)(10.0 y) = 224 y.
VI — (0.9990c/e)2 \ ya00y) ¥
On the return trip, we have the same situation and the same
data. Thus, the round trip requires 20 y of your time but

Attotal = (2)(224 y) = 448 y (Answer)

of Earth time. In other words, you have aged 20 y while the
Earth has aged 448 y. Although you cannot travel into the
past (as far as we know), you can travel into the future of,
say, Earth, by using high-speed relative motion to adjust the
rate at which time passes.

At=

Sample Problem 37.02 Time dilation and travel distance for a relativistic particle

The elementary particle known as the positive kaon (K*)
is unstable in that it can decay (transform) into other par-
ticles. Although the decay occurs randomly, we find that,
on average, a positive kaon has a lifetime of 0.1237 ys
when stationary —that is, when the lifetime is measured in
the rest frame of the kaon. If a positive kaon has a speed
of 0.990c relative to a laboratory reference frame when
the kaon is produced, how far can it travel in that frame
during its lifetime according to classical physics (which is
a reasonable approximation for speeds much less than c)

and according to special relativity (which is correct for all
physically possible speeds)?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. We have two (inertial) reference frames, one attached to
the kaon and the other attached to the laboratory.

2. This problem also involves two events: the start of the
kaon’s travel (when the kaon is produced) and the end
of that travel (at the end of the kaon’s lifetime).
