1138

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

A New Look at Momentum

Suppose that a number of observers, each in a different inertial reference frame,
watch an isolated collision between two particles. In classical mechanics, we have
seen that—even though the observers measure different velocities for the col-
liding particles—they all find that the law of conservation of momentum holds.
That is, they find that the total momentum of the system of particles after the
collision is the same as it was before the collision.

How is this situation affected by relativity? We find that if we continue to
define the momentum 7 of a particle as mV, the product of its mass and its veloc-
ity, total momentum is not conserved for the observers in different inertial frames.
So, we need to redefine momentum in order to save that conservation law.

Consider a particle moving with constant speed v in the positive direction of
an x axis. Classically, its momentum has magnitude

(classical momentum), (37-40)

=m =m’
p at

in which Ax is the distance it travels in time At.To find a relativistic expression for
momentum, we start with the new definition

Ax
=m—.
p Ato

Here, as before, Ax is the distance traveled by a moving particle as viewed by an
observer watching that particle. However, Ato is the time required to travel that
distance, measured not by the observer watching the moving particle but by
an observer moving with the particle. The particle is at rest with respect to this
second observer; thus that measured time is a proper time.
Using the time dilation formula, At = y Af (Eq. 37-9), we can then write
Ax Ax At Ax

PEN AL Ato mar Y

 

However, since Ax/At is just the particle velocity v, we have
P= ymv_ (momentum). (37-41)

Note that this differs from the classical definition of Eq. 37-40 only by the
Lorentz factor y. However, that difference is important: Unlike classical momen-
tum, relativistic momentum approaches an infinite value as v approaches c.

We can generalize the definition of Eq. 37-41 to vector form as

B= ym¥ (momentum). (37-42)

This equation gives the correct definition of momentum for all physically possi-
ble speeds. For a speed much less than c, it reduces to the classical definition of
momentum (p= mv).

A New Look at Energy
Mass Energy

The science of chemistry was initially developed with the assumption that in
chemical reactions, energy and mass are conserved separately. In 1905, Einstein
showed that as a consequence of his theory of special relativity, mass can be con-
sidered to be another form of energy. Thus, the law of conservation of energy is
really the law of conservation of mass—energy.

In a chemical reaction (a process in which atoms or molecules interact), the
amount of mass that is transferred into other forms of energy (or vice versa) is such
