38-3 PHOTONS, MOMENTUM, COMPTON SCATTERING, LIGHT INTERFERENCE

Key Ideas
@ Although it is massless, a photon has momentum,
which is related to its energy E, frequency f, and
wavelength by

hf oh

pee A

@ In Compton scattering, x rays scatter as particles (as
photons) from loosely bound electrons in a target.
@ In the scattering, an x-ray photon loses energy and
momentum to the target electron.
@ The resulting increase (Compton shift) in the photon
wavelength is

momentum.

magnetic wave.

1159

h
AA= Tne — cos 4),

where m is the mass of the target electron and ¢ is the angle
at which the photon is scattered from its initial travel direction.
=— @ Photons: When light interacts with matter, the interaction is
particle-like, occurring at a point and transferring energy and

@ Wave: When a single photon is emitted by a source, we
interpret its travel as being that of a probability wave.

@ Wave: When many photons are emitted or absorbed by
matter, we interpret the combined light as a classical electro-

 

Photons Have Momentum

In 1916, Einstein extended his concept of light quanta (photons) by proposing
that a quantum of light has linear momentum. For a photon with energy /f, the
magnitude of that momentum is

p=—= 4 (photon momentum), (38-7)
where we have substituted for f from Eq. 38-1 (f = c/A). Thus, when a photon
interacts with matter, energy and momentum are transferred, as if there were
a collision between the photon and matter in the classical sense (as in Chapter 9).

In 1923, Arthur Compton at Washington University in St. Louis showed that
both momentum and energy are transferred via photons. He directed a beam of x
rays of wavelength A onto a target made of carbon, as shown in Fig. 38-3. An x ray
is a form of electromagnetic radiation, at high frequency and thus small wave-
length. Compton measured the wavelengths and intensities of the x rays that
were scattered in various directions from his carbon target.

Figure 38-4 shows his results. Although there is only a single wavelength
(A = 71.1 pm) in the incident x-ray beam, we see that the scattered x rays con-
tain a range of wavelengths with two prominent intensity peaks. One peak is
centered about the incident wavelength A, the other about a wavelength A’ that
is longer than A by an amount AA, which is called the Compton shift. The value
of the Compton shift varies with the angle at which the scattered x rays are de-
tected and is greater for a greater angle.

Figure 38-4 is still another puzzle for classical physics. Classically, the incident
x-ray beam is a sinusoidally oscillating electromagnetic wave. An electron in the

o=0° o=45°

Intensity
Intensity
Intensity

70 75 70 75 70
Wavelength (pm) Wavelength (pm)

Figure 38-4 Compton’s results for four values of the scattering angle . Note that the
Compton shift AA increases as the scattering angle increases.

Wavelength (pm)

Detector

Incident
Xx rays.

bia
Ii 7

Collimating
slits

   
 
   

    

Scattered
x rays

 

Figure 38-3 Compton’s apparatus. A beam

of x rays of wavelength A = 71.1 pmis
directed onto a carbon target T. The x rays
scattered from the target are observed at
various angles ¢ to the direction of the inci-
dent beam. The detector measures both the
intensity of the scattered x rays and their
wavelength.

Intensity

 

75 70 75
Wavelength (pm)
