37-5 DOPPLER EFFECT FOR LIGHT

Doppler Effect for Light

In Module 17-7 we discussed the Doppler effect (a shift in detected frequency)
for sound waves, finding that the effect depends on the source and detector veloc-
ities relative to the air. That is not the situation with light waves, which require no
medium (they can even travel through vacuum). The Doppler effect for light
waves depends on only the relative velocity V between source and detector, as
measured from the reference frame of either. Let fy represent the proper fre-
quency of the source —that is, the frequency that is measured by an observer in
the rest frame of the source. Let f represent the frequency detected by an ob-
server moving with velocity V relative to that rest frame. Then, when the direc-
tion of V is directly away from the source,

1
1+ 8B

 

f=h (source and detector separating), (37-31)
where 6 = vic.

Because measurements involving light are usually done in wavelengths
rather than frequencies, let’s rewrite Eq. 37-31 by replacing f with c/A and fy with
c/Ag, Where A is the measured wavelength and Ao is the proper wavelength (the
wavelength associated with fy). After canceling c from both sides, we then have

1+B
B

When the direction of V is directly toward the source, we must change the signs in
front of the 8 symbols in Eqs.37-31 and 37-32.

For an increasing separation, we can see from Eq. 37-32 (with an addition in the
numerator and a subtraction in the denominator) that the measured wavelength is
greater than the proper wavelength. Such a Doppler shift is described as being a red
shift, where red does not mean the measured wavelength is red or even visible. The
term merely serves as a memory device because red is at the long-wavelength end of
the visible spectrum. Thus A is longer than Ao. Similarly, for a decreasing separation, A
is shorter than Ap,and the Doppler shift is described as being a blue shift.

(source and detector separating). (37-32)

 

Low-Speed Doppler Effect

For low speeds (8 < 1), Eq. 37-31 can be expanded in a power series in 8 and
approximated as

f = fol — B + $8?) (source and detector separating, 8 <1). (37-33)

The corresponding low-speed equation for the Doppler effect with sound waves
(or any waves except light waves) has the same first two terms but a different
coefficient in the third term. Thus, the relativistic effect for low-speed light
sources and detectors shows up only with the £? term.

A police radar unit employs the Doppler effect with microwaves to measure
the speed v of a car.A source in the radar unit emits a microwave beam at a certain
(proper) frequency fy along the road. A car that is moving toward the unit inter-
cepts that beam but at a frequency that is shifted upward by the Doppler effect due
to the car’s motion toward the radar unit. The car reflects the beam back toward
the radar unit. Because the car is moving toward the radar unit, the detector in the
unit intercepts a reflected beam that is further shifted up in frequency. The unit
compares that detected frequency with fy and computes the speed v of the car.

Astronomical Doppler Effect

In astronomical observations of stars, galaxies, and other sources of light, we
can determine how fast the sources are moving, either directly away from us or

1135
