1168

   
 
   
 
  
 
  

Circular

| diffraction
Incident beam

(x rays or electrons)

Target

(aluminum :
crystals)

Photographic

film

(a)

 

(Y)

 

(

 

Parts (b) and (c) from PSSC film “Matter Waves,
Development Center, Newton, Massachusetts

* courtesy Education

Figure 38-10 (a) An experimental arrangement used to
demonstrate, by diffraction techniques, the wave-like
character of the incident beam. Photographs of the diffrac-
tion patterns when the incident beam is (b) an x-ray beam
(light wave) and (c) an electron beam (matter wave).

Note that the two patterns are geometrically identical to
each other.

CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

electrons were sent, one by one, through a double-slit apparatus.
The apparatus was like the ones we have previously used to demon-
strate optical interference, except that the viewing screen was similar
to an old-fashioned television screen. When an electron hit the
screen, it caused a flash of light whose position was recorded.

The first several electrons (top two photos) revealed nothing
interesting and seemingly hit the screen at random points.
However, after many thousands of electrons were sent through the
apparatus, a pattern appeared on the screen, revealing fringes
where many electrons had hit the screen and fringes where few
had hit the screen. The pattern is exactly what we would expect for
wave interference. Thus, each electron passed through the appara-
tus as a matter wave—the portion of the matter wave that trav-
eled through one slit interfered with the portion that traveled
through the other slit. That interference then determined the prob-
ability that the electron would materialize at a given point on the
screen, hitting the screen there. Many electrons materialized in re-
gions corresponding to bright fringes in optical interference, and
few electrons materialized in regions corresponding to dark
fringes.

Similar interference has been demonstrated with protons,
neutrons, and various atoms. In 1994, it was demonstrated with
iodine molecules I;, which are not only 500 000 times more mas-
sive than electrons but far more complex. In 1999, it was demon-
strated with the even more complex fullerenes (or buckyballs) Ceo
and Cy. (Fullerenes are molecules of carbon atoms that are
arranged in a structure resembling a soccer ball, 60 carbon atoms
in Cgp and 70 carbon atoms in Cy.) Apparently, such small objects
as electrons, protons, atoms, and molecules travel as matter waves.
However, as we consider larger and more complex objects, there
must come a point at which we are no longer justified in consider-
ing the wave nature of an object. At that point, we are back in our
familiar nonquantum world, with the physics of earlier chapters of
this book. In short, an electron is a matter wave and can undergo
interference with itself, but a cat is not a matter wave and cannot
undergo interference with itself (which must be a relief to cats).

The wave nature of particles and atoms is now taken for
granted in many scientific and engineering fields. For example,
electron diffraction and neutron diffraction are used to study the
atomic structures of solids and liquids, and electron diffraction is
used to study the atomic features of surfaces on solids.

Figure 38-10a shows an arrangement that can be used to
demonstrate the scattering of either x rays or electrons by crystals.
A beam of one or the other is directed onto a target consisting of a
layer of tiny aluminum crystals. The x rays have a certain wave-
length A. The electrons are given enough energy so that their de
Broglie wavelength is the same wavelength A. The scatter of x rays
or electrons by the crystals produces a circular interference pat-
tern on a photographic film. Figure 38-10b shows the pattern for
the scatter of x rays, and Fig. 38-10c shows the pattern for the scat-
ter of electrons. The patterns are the same—both x rays and elec-
trons are waves.

Waves and Particles

Figures 38-9 and 38-10 are convincing evidence of the wave nature
of matter, but we have countless experiments that suggest its parti-
