Vertebrate Development

Vertebrate development is a dynamic process in which cells
divide rapidly and move over each other as they first estab-
lish the basic geometry of the body (figure 17.3). At differ-
ent sites, particular cells then proceed to form the body’s
organs, and then the body grows to a size and shape that
will allow it to survive after birth. The entire process, de-
scribed more fully in chapter 60, is traditionally divided
into phases. As in mitosis, however, the boundaries be-
tween phases are somewhat artificial, and the phases, in
fact, grade into one another.

Cleavage

Vertebrates begin development as a single fertilized egg,
the zygote. Within an hour after fertilization, the zygote
begins to divide rapidly into a larger and larger number of
smaller and smaller cells called blastomeres, until a solid
ball of cells is produced (figure 17.4). This initial period of
cell division, termed cleavage, is not accompanied by any
increase in the overall size of the embryo; rather, the con-

 

tents of the zygote are simply partitioned into the daughter
cells. The two ends of the zygote are traditionally referred
to as the animal and vegetal poles. In general, the blas-
tomeres of the animal pole will go on to form the external started out as a single cell: a fertilized egg, or zygote. The
tissues of the body, while those of the vegetal pole will zygote’s daughter cells have been repeatedly dividing and
form the internal tissues. The initial top-bottom (dorsal- specializing to produce the distinguishable features of a fetus.
ventral) orientation of the embryo is determined at fertil-

ization by the location where
the sperm nucleus enters the
egg, a point that corresponds
roughly to the future belly.
After about 12 divisions, the
burst of cleavage divisions
slows, and transcription of
key genes begins within the
embryo cells.

FIGURE 17.3
The miracle of development. This nine-week-old human fetus

 

FIGURE 17.4

Cleavage divisions producing
a frog embryo. (2) The initial
divisions are, in this case, on the
side of the embryo facing you,
producing (0) a cluster of cells on
this side of the embryo, which
soon expands to become a
(compact mass of cells.

(d) This mass eventually
invaginates into the interior of
the embryo, forming a gastrula,
then a neurula.

  

@
Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 333
