39-5 THE HYDROGEN ATOM

The Bohr Model of Hydrogen, a Lucky Break

By the early 1900s, scientists understood that matter came in tiny pieces called
atoms and that an atom of hydrogen contained positive charge +e at its center
and negative charge —e (an electron) outside that center. However, no one un-
derstood why the electrical attraction between the electron and the positive
charge did not simply cause the two to collapse together.

Visible Wavelengths. One clue lay in the experimental fact that a hydrogen
atom can emit and absorb only four wavelengths in the visible spectrum (656 nm,
486 nm, 434 nm, and 410 nm). Why did it not emit all wavelengths as, say, a hot
blackbody radiator? In 1913, Niels Bohr had a remarkable idea that simultane-
ously explained not only the four visible wavelengths but also why the atom did
not simply collapse. However, as successful as his theory was on those two counts,
it turned out to be quite wrong in almost every other aspect of the atom and led
to very little success in explaining atoms more complicated than hydrogen.
Nevertheless, the Bohr model is historically important because it ushered in the
quantum physics of atoms.

Assumptions. To build his model, Bohr made two bold (completely unjusti-
fied) assumptions: (1) The electron in a hydrogen atom orbits the nucleus in a cir-
cle much like Earth orbits the Sun (Fig. 39-16a). (2) The magnitude of the angular
momentum F of the electron in its orbit is restricted (quantized) to the values

L=nh, forn=1,2,3,..., (39-23)

where fi (h-bar) is h27 and n is a positive integer (a quantum number). We are
going to follow Bohr’s relatively simple arguments to get an equation for the
quantized energies of the hydrogen atom, but let’s be explicit here: The electron
is not simply a particle in a planetary orbit and Eq. 39-23 does not correctly give
the angular momentum values. (For example, L = 0 is missing.)

Newton’s Second Law. In the orbit picture of Fig. 39-16a, the electron is in uni-
form circular motion and thus experiences a centripetal force (Fig. 39-16b), which
causes a centripetal acceleration. The force is the Coulomb force (Eq. 21-4) between
the electron (with charge —e) and the proton (with charge +e), separated by the or-
bital radius r.The centripetal acceleration has the magnitude a = v’/r (Eq. 4-34), where
vis the electron’s speed. So, we can write Newton’s second law fora radial axis as

F=ma

1 |ellel v2
im PO ml 7 (39-24)
where m is the electron mass.

We next introduce quantization by using Bohr’s assumption expressed in
Eg. 39-23. From Eq. 11-19, the magnitude ¢ of the angular momentum of a parti-
cle of mass m and speed v moving ina circle of radius r is £ = rmv sin ¢, where
¢ (the angle between 7 and V) is 90°. Replacing L in Eq. 39-23 with rm sin 90°
gives us

rmv = nh,
nh
-—. 30-
or ves (39-25)

Substituting this equation into Eq. 39-24, replacing f with h/27, and rearranging,

‘Nucleus

Figure 39-16 (a) Circular orbit of Bohr's model for

an electron in the Bohr model Circular orbit hydrogen resembles
of the hydrogen atom. (b) The ¥ the orbital model
Coulomb force F on the elec- Electron ie

tron is directed radially inward

toward the nucleus. (a () a star.

of a planet around

1203
