(c) How long does the trip take as measured in the refer-
ence frame of the proton?

KEY IDEAS

 

1. This problem involves measurements made from two
(inertial) reference frames: one is the Earth-Milky Way
frame and the other is attached to the proton.

2. This problem also involves two events: the first is when the
proton passes one end of the diameter along the Galaxy,
and the second is when it passes the opposite end.

3. The time interval between those two events as measured
in the proton’s reference frame is the proper time inter-
val Af) because the events occur at the same location in
that frame —namely, at the proton itself.

4. We can find the proper time interval Afy from the time

Review & Summary

The Postulates
on two postulates:

Einstein’s special theory of relativity is based

1. The laws of physics are the same for observers in all inertial
reference frames. No one frame is preferred over any other.

2. The speed of light in vacuum has the same value c in all
directions and in all inertial reference frames.

The speed of light c in vacuum is an ultimate speed that cannot be
exceeded by any entity carrying energy or information.

Coordinates of an Event Three space coordinates and one
time coordinate specify an event. One task of special relativity is to
relate these coordinates as assigned by two observers who are in
uniform motion with respect to each other.

Simultaneous Events If two observers are in relative
motion, they will not, in general, agree as to whether two events
are simultaneous.

Time Dilation If two successive events occur at the same place
in an inertial reference frame, the time interval Af) between them,
measured ona single clock where they occur, is the proper time be-
tween the events. Observers in frames moving relative to that frame
will measure a larger value for this interval. For an observer moving
with relative speed v, the measured time interval is

At =——So__ __ __ Ao _

Vi-weye Vi-#

(time dilation).

= y Aw
Here 8 = vic is the speed parameter and y= 1/V/1 — B’ is the

(37-7 to 37-9)

REVIEW & SUMMARY 1143

interval At measured in the Earth—Milky Way frame by
using Eq. 37-9 (At = y Ato) for time dilation. (Note that
we can use that equation because one of the time mea-
sures is a proper time. However, we get the same relation
if we use a Lorentz transformation.)

Calculation: Solving Eq. 37-9 for Aty and substituting y
from (a) and At from (b), we find

At _ 98 x 10+y
y 3.198 x 10!

= 3.06 X 10-7y = 97s.

Ay =
(Answer)

In our frame, the trip takes 98 000 y. In the proton’s frame, it
takes 9.7 s! As promised at the start of this chapter, relative
motion can alter the rate at which time passes, and we have
here an extreme example.

S$ Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Lorentz factor. An important result of time dilation is that moving
clocks run slow as measured by an observer at rest.

Length Contraction The length L, of an object measured by an
observer in an inertial reference frame in which the object is at rest is
called its proper length. Observers in frames moving relative to that
frame and parallel to that length will measure a shorter length. For an
observer moving with relative speed v, the measured length is

L
L=hV1-B= > (length contraction). (37-13)

The Lorentz Transformation The Lorentz transformation
equations relate the spacetime coordinates of a single event as
seen by observers in two inertial frames, S and S', where S’ is mov-
ing relative to S with velocity v in the positive x and x' direction.
The four coordinates are related by

 

y(x — vt),

ac (37-21)

 

z,
t= y(t — vxic?).

Relativity of Velocities When a particle is moving with speed

u’ in the positive x' direction in an inertial reference frame S" that

itself is moving with speed v parallel to the x direction of a second

inertial frame S, the speed u of the particle as measured in S is
uty

u=——
1+ u'vic

(37-29)

(relativistic velocity).

Relativistic Doppler Effect When a light source and a light
