1154

CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

The Photon, the Quantum of Light

Quantum physics (which is also known as quantum mechanics and quantum
theory) is largely the study of the microscopic world. In that world, many quanti-
ties are found only in certain minimum (elementary) amounts, or integer multi-
ples of those elementary amounts; these quantities are then said to be quantized.
The elementary amount that is associated with such a quantity is called the
quantum of that quantity (quanta is the plural).

Ina loose sense, U.S. currency is quantized because the coin of least value is the
penny, or $0.01 coin, and the values of all other coins and bills are restricted to inte-
ger multiples of that least amount. In other words, the currency quantum is $0.01,
and all greater amounts of currency are of the form n($0.01), where n is always a
positive integer. For example, you cannot hand someone $0.755 = 75.5($0.01).

In 1905, Einstein proposed that electromagnetic radiation (or simply light) is
quantized and exists in elementary amounts (quanta) that we now call photons.
This proposal should seem strange to you because we have just spent several
chapters discussing the classical idea that light is a sinusoidal wave, with a
wavelength A, a frequency f, and a speed c such that

c

fry

Furthermore, in Chapter 33 we discussed the classical light wave as being an

interdependent combination of electric and magnetic fields, each oscillating at

frequency f. How can this wave of oscillating fields consist of an elementary
amount of something—the light quantum? What is a photon?

The concept of a light quantum, or a photon, turns out to be far more subtle
and mysterious than Einstein imagined. Indeed, it is still very poorly understood.
In this book, we shall discuss only some of the basic aspects of the photon
concept, somewhat along the lines of Einstein’s proposal. According to that pro-
posal, the quantum of a light wave of frequency f has the energy

E = hf (photon energy). (38-2)

Here h is the Planck constant, the constant we first met in Eq. 32-23, and which
has the value

(38-1)

h = 663 X 10°*J-s =4.14 X 10-5 eV-s. (38-3)

The smallest amount of energy a light wave of frequency f can have is hf, the
energy of a single photon. If the wave has more energy, its total energy must be
an integer multiple of hf. The light cannot have an energy of, say, 0.6hf or 75.5hf.

Einstein further proposed that when light is absorbed or emitted by an object
(matter), the absorption or emission event occurs in the atoms of the object. When
light of frequency f is absorbed by an atom, the energy hf of one photon is trans-
ferred from the light to the atom. In this absorption event, the photon vanishes and
the atom is said to absorb it. When light of frequency fis emitted by an atom, an
amount of energy /f is transferred from the atom to the light. In this emission
event, a photon suddenly appears and the atom is said to emit it. Thus, we can have
photon absorption and photon emission by atoms in an object.

For an object consisting of many atoms, there can be many photon absorp-
tions (such as with sunglasses) or photon emissions (such as with lamps).
However, each absorption or emission event still involves the transfer of an
amount of energy equal to that of a single photon of the light.

When we discussed the absorption or emission of light in previous chapters,
our examples involved so much light that we had no need of quantum physics,
and we got by with classical physics. However, in the late 20th century, technology
became advanced enough that single-photon experiments could be conducted
and put to practical use. Since then quantum physics has become part of standard
engineering practice, especially in optical engineering.
