1188

An electron can be trapped
in the V=0 region.

 

x=0 x=L

Figure 39-1 The elements of an idealized
“trap” designed to confine an electron to
the central cylinder. We take the semi-
infinitely long end cylinders to be at an
infinitely great negative potential and the
central cylinder to be at zero potential.

An electron can be trapped
in the U=0 region.

U(X)

x
0 L

Figure 39-2 The electric potential energy
U(x) of an electron confined to the central
cylinder of the idealized trap of Fig, 39-1.
We see that U = 0 for0 <x < L,and

U > «forx <Oandx>L.

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

points at which the string is always at rest. There may be other nodes along the
string, but these two must always be present, as Fig. 16-21 shows.

The states, or discrete standing wave patterns in which the string can oscil-
late, are those for which the length L of the string is equal to an integer number
of half-wavelengths. That is, the string can occupy only states for which

L=— forn = 1,2,3,.... (39-1)
Each value of n identifies a state of the oscillating string; using the language of
quantum physics, we can call the integer n a quantum number.

For each state of the string permitted by Eq. 39-1, the transverse displace-
ment of the string at any position x along the string is given by

y(t) = A sin( 2 *), forn =1,2,3...., (39-2)
in which the quantum number n identifies the oscillation pattern and A depends
on the time at which you inspect the string. (Equation 39-2 is a short version of
Eq. 16-60.) We see that for all values of n and for all times, there is a point of zero
displacement (a node) at x = 0 and at x = L,as there must be. Figure 16-20 shows
time exposures of such a stretched string for n = 2,3, and 4.

Now let us turn our attention to matter waves. Our first problem is to physically
confine an electron that is moving along the x axis so that it remains within a finite
segment of that axis. Figure 39-1 shows a conceivable one-dimensional electron trap.
It consists of two semi-infinitely long cylinders, each of which has an electric poten-
tial approaching —%; between them is a hollow cylinder of length L, which has an
electric potential of zero. We put a single electron into this central cylinder to trap it.

The trap of Fig. 39-1 is easy to analyze but is not very practical. Single
electrons can, however, be trapped in the laboratory with traps that are more
complex in design but similar in concept. At the University of Washington, for
example, a single electron has been held in a trap for months on end, permitting
scientists to make extremely precise measurements of its properties.

Finding the Quantized Energies

Figure 39-2 shows the potential energy of the electron as a function of its posi-
tion along the x axis of the idealized trap of Fig. 39-1. When the electron is in
the central cylinder, its potential energy U (= —eV ) is zero because there the
potential V is zero. If the electron could get outside this region, its potential
energy would be positive and of infinite magnitude because there V > —~,
We call the potential energy pattern of Fig. 39-2 an infinitely deep potential
energy well or, for short, an infinite potential well. It is a “well” because an elec-
tron placed in the central cylinder of Fig. 39-1 cannot escape from it. As the
electron approaches either end of the cylinder, a force of essentially infinite
magnitude reverses the electron’s motion, thus trapping it. Because the elec-
tron can move along only a single axis, this trap can be called a one-dimensional
infinite potential well.

Just like the standing wave in a length of stretched string, the matter wave
describing the confined electron must have nodes at x = 0 and x = L. Moreover,
Eg. 39-1 applies to such a matter wave if we interpret A in that equation as the
de Broglie wavelength associated with the moving electron.

The de Broglie wavelength A is defined in Eq. 38-17 as A = h/p, where p is the
magnitude of the electron’s momentum. Because the electron is nonrelativistic,
this momentum magnitude p is related to the kinetic energy K by p = V2mK,
where m is the mass of the electron. For an electron moving within the central
cylinder of Fig. 39-1, where U = 0, the total (mechanical) energy E is equal to the
