1180

in which atomic oscillators produce the thermal radiation, we have

2m*h 1
S(A) = s~ ary (38-14)
where h is the Planck constant, k is the Boltzmann constant, and T
is the temperature of the radiating surface. Wien’s law relates the
temperature T of a blackbody radiator and the wavelength Amax at

which the spectral radiancy is maximum:

AwaxT = 2898 um  K. (38-15)
Matter Waves A moving particle such as an electron or a pro-
ton can be described as a matter wave; its wavelength (called the
de Broglie wavelength) is given by A = hip, where p is the magni-
tude of the particle’s momentum.

The Wave Function A matter wave is described by its wave
function V(x, y, z, f), which can be separated into a space-
dependent part (x, y, z) and a time-dependent part e'. For a
particle of mass m moving in the x direction with constant total en-
ergy E through a region in which its potential energy is U(x), W(x)
can be found by solving the simplified Schrédinger equation:

ap. 8m

= t+

dx? Ww
A matter wave, like a light wave, is a probability wave in the sense
that if a particle detector is inserted into the wave, the probability
that the detector will register a particle during any specified time in-
terval is proportional to ly, a quantity called the probability density.

For a free particle —that is, a particle for which U(x) = 0O—

moving in the x direction, ly? has a constant value for all positions
along the x axis.

 

[E — Ux]y=0. (38-19)

<Questions

1 Photon A has twice the energy of photon B. (a) Is the
momentum of A less than, equal to, or greater than that of B? (b) Is
the wavelength of A less than, equal to, or greater than that of B?

2 In the photoelectric effect (for a given target and a given fre-
quency of the incident light), which of these quantities, if any, de-
pend on the intensity of the incident light beam: (a) the maximum
kinetic energy of the electrons, (b) the maximum photoelectric cur-
rent, (c) the stopping potential, (d) the cutoff frequency?

3 According to the figure for Checkpoint 2, is the maximum
kinetic energy of the ejected electrons greater for a target made of
sodium or of potassium for a given frequency of incident light?

4 Photoelectric effect: Figure 38-20 V
gives the stopping voltage V versus
the wavelength A of light for three
different materials. Rank the mate-
rials according to their work func-
tion, greatest first.

 

5 A metal plate is illuminated
with light of a certain frequency.
Which of the following determine whether or not electrons are
ejected: (a) the intensity of the light, (b) how long the plate is ex-
posed to the light, (c) the thermal conductivity of the plate, (d) the
area of the plate, (e) the material of which the plate is made?

Figure 38-20 Question 4.

CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle The probabilistic
nature of quantum physics places an important limitation on de-
tecting a particle's position and momentum. That is, it is not possi-
ble to measure the position 7 and the momentum p ofa particle si-
multaneously with unlimited precision. The uncertainties in the
components of these quantities are given by

Ax-Ap, =f
Ay- Ap, =h
Az-Ap. = h.

(38-28)

Potential Step This term defines a region where a particle’s
potential energy increases at the expense of its kinetic energy.
According to classical physics, if a particle’s initial kinetic energy
exceeds the potential energy, it should never be reflected by the re-
gion. However, according to quantum physics, there is a reflection
coefficient R that gives a finite probability of reflection. The proba-
bility of transmission is T= 1—R.

Barrier Tunneling According to classical physics, an incident
particle will be reflected from a potential energy barrier whose
height is greater than the particle’s kinetic energy. According to
quantum physics, however, the particle has a finite probability
of tunneling through such a barrier, appearing on the other side
unchanged. The probability that a given particle of mass m and en-
ergy E will tunnel through a barrier of height U, and thickness L is
given by the transmission coefficient T:

 

 

T ~ el, (38-38)
where b=, | ae 5) (38-39)
6 Let K be the kinetic energy that a sta- K
tionary free electron gains when a photon 2
scatters from it. We can plot K versus the an- 1
gle ¢at which the photon scatters; see curve 3
1 in Fig. 38-21. If we switch the target to be a
stationary free proton, does the end point of
the graph shift (a) upward as suggested by é
curve 2, (b) downward as suggested by curve 180°
3, or (c) remain the same? Figure 38-21

Question 6.

7 Ina Compton-shift experiment, light (in
the x-ray range) is scattered in the forward
direction, at ¢ = 0 in Fig. 38-3. What

mes AA
fraction of the light’s energy does the
electron acquire?

8 Compton scattering. Figure 38-22
gives the Compton shift AA versus 2
scattering angle ¢ for three different
stationary target particles. Rank the
particles according to their mass,
greatest first.

 

Figure 38-22 Question 8.

9 (a) If you double the kinetic energy of a nonrelativistic particle,
how does its de Broglie wavelength change? (b) What if you dou-
ble the speed of the particle?
