37-1 SIMULTANEITY AND TIME DILATION 1123

With these replacements, we can rewrite Eq. 37-7 as
At=yAty (time dilation). (37-9)

The speed parameter £ is always less than unity, and, provided v is not zero, y is al-
ways greater than unity. However, the difference between y and 1 is not significant
unless v > 0.1c. Thus, in general, “old relativity” works well enough for v < 0.1c, but
‘we must use special relativity for greater values of v. As shown in Fig. 37-6, y increases
rapidly in magnitude as B approaches 1 (as v approaches c). Therefore, the greater
the relative speed between Sally and Sam is, the greater will be the time interval
measured by Sam, until at a great enough speed, the interval takes “forever.”

You might wonder what Sally says about Sam’s having measured a greater time
interval than she did. His measurement comes as no surprise to her, because to her,
he failed to synchronize his clocks C, and C, in spite of his insistence that he did.
Recall that observers in relative motion generally do not agree about simultaneity.
Here, Sam insists that his two clocks simultaneously read the same time when event 1
occurred. To Sally, however, Sam’s clock C was erroneously set ahead during the syn-
chronization process. Thus, when Sam read the time of event 2 on it, to Sally he was
reading off a time that was too large, and that is why the time interval he measured
between the two events was greater than the interval she measured.

Two Tests of Time Dilation

1. Microscopic Clocks. Subatomic particles called muons are unstable; that is,
when a muon is produced, it lasts for only a short time before it decays (trans-
forms into particles of other types). The lifetime of a muon is the time interval
between its production (event 1) and its decay (event 2). When muons are
stationary and their lifetimes are measured with stationary clocks (say, in a
laboratory), their average lifetime is 2.200 us. This is a proper time interval
because, for each muon, events 1 and 2 occur at the same location in the
reference frame of the muon—namely, at the muon itself. We can represent
this proper time interval with Afy; moreover, we can call the reference frame in
which it is measured the rest frame of the muon.

If, instead, the muons are moving, say, through a laboratory, then mea-
surements of their lifetimes made with the laboratory clocks should yield a
greater average lifetime (a dilated average lifetime). To check this conclusion,
measurements were made of the average lifetime of muons moving with a
speed of 0.9994c relative to laboratory clocks. From Eq. 37-8, with 8 = 0.9994,
the Lorentz factor for this speed is

1 1

=——— = —______ = 9887.
YO VI= BVT = 9994

Equation 37-9 then yields, for the average dilated lifetime,
At = yAfy = (28.87)(2.200 us) = 63.51 ys.

The actual measured value matched this result within experimental error.

2. Macroscopic Clocks. In October 1971, Joseph Hafele and Richard Keating
carried out what must have been a grueling experiment. They flew four
portable atomic clocks twice around the world on commercial airlines, once in
each direction. Their purpose was “to test Einstein’s theory of relativity with
macroscopic clocks.” As we have just seen, the time dilation predictions of
Einstein’s theory have been confirmed on a microscopic scale, but there is
great comfort in seeing a confirmation made with an actual clock. Such macro-
scopic measurements became possible only because of the very high precision
of modern atomic clocks. Hafele and Keating verified the predictions of the
theory to within 10%. (Einstein’s general theory of relativity, which predicts

As the speed parameter goes to 1.0
(as the speed approaches c),
the Lorentz factor approaches infinity.

0 02 04 06 08 10
B
Figure 37-6 A plot of the Lorentz factor y
as a function of the speed parameter

B(= vic).
