H A P T E R

Relativity

37-1 SiMULTANEITY AND TIME DILATION

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

37.01 Identify the two postulates of (special) relativity and the
type of frames to which they apply.

37.02 Identify the speed of light as the ultimate speed and
give its approximate value.

37.03 Explain how the space and time coordinates of an
event can be measured with a three-dimensional array of
clocks and measuring rods and how that eliminates the
need ofa signal's travel time to an observer.

37.04 Identify that the relativity of space and time has
to do with transferring measurements between two
inertial frames with relative motion but we still use
classical kinematics and Newtonian mechanics
within a frame.

37.05 Identify that for reference frames with relative motion,

Key Ideas

@ Einstein's special theory of relativity is based on two
postulates: (1) The laws of physics are the same for
observers in all inertial reference frames. (2) The speed
of light in vacuum has the same value c in all directions
and in all inertial reference frames.

@ Three space coordinates and one time coordinate
specify an event. One task of special relativity is to relate
these coordinates as assigned by two observers who are
in uniform motion with respect to each other.

@ If two observers are in relative motion, they

generally will not agree as to whether two events
are simultaneous.

simultaneous events in one of the frames will generally
not be simultaneous in the other frame.

37.06 Explain what is meant by the entanglement of the
spatial and temporal separations between two events.
37.07 Identify the conditions in which a temporal separation

of two events is a proper time.

37.08 Identify that if the temporal separation of two events is
a proper time as measured in one frame, that separation is
greater (dilated) as measured in another frame.

37.09 Apply the relationship between proper time Afo,
dilated time Ar, and the relative speed v between two
frames.

37.10 Apply the relationships between the relative speed v,
the speed parameter B, and the Lorentz factor y.

@ If two successive events occur at the same place in an
inertial reference frame, the time interval Afp between them,
measured on a single clock where they occur, is the proper
time between them. Observers in frames moving relative to
that frame will always measure a /arger value At for the time
interval, an effect known as time dilation.
@ If the relative speed between the two frames is v, then
At At
At = ———2.—_ = — =2_
V1 — (vic)? V1i-

where £ = vic is the speed parameter and y = 1/\V/1 — Bis
the Lorentz factor.

= yAbo,

 

What Is Physics?

One principal subject of physics is relativity, the field of study that measures
events (things that happen): where and when they happen, and by how much any
two events are separated in space and in time. In addition, relativity has to do
with transforming such measurements (and also measurements of energy and
momentum) between reference frames that move relative to each other. (Hence

the name relativity.)

Transformations and moving reference frames, such as those we discussed in
Modules 4-6 and 4-7, were well understood and quite routine to physicists in 1905.

1116
