1162

CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

Sample Problem 38.03 Compton scattering of light by electrons

X rays of wavelength A = 22 pm (photon energy = 56 keV)
are scattered from a carbon target, and the scattered rays
are detected at 85° to the incident beam.

(a) What is the Compton shift of the scattered rays?

KEY IDEA

 

The Compton shift is the wavelength change of the x rays
due to scattering from loosely bound electrons in a target.
Further, that shift depends on the angle at which the scat-
tered x rays are detected, according to Eq. 38-11. The shift is
zero for forward scattering at angle ¢ = 0°, and it is maximum
for backscattering at angle ¢ = 180°. Here we have an inter-
mediate situation at angle @ = 85°.

Calculation: Substituting 85° for that angle and 9.11 x
10~*!kg for the electron mass (because the scattering is
from electrons) in Eq. 38-11 gives us

h

AA =—(1 -
= (1 = c0s 6)
_ (6.63 x 10“ J-s)(1 — cos 85°)

~ (9.11 X 103! kg)(3.00 x 108 m/s)
= 2.21 x 10°? m ~ 22 pm. (Answer)

(b) What percentage of the initial x-ray photon energy is
transferred to an electron in such scattering?

KEY IDEA

 

We need to find the fractional energy loss (let us call it frac) for
photons that scatter from the electrons:
Fae SEnEIE loss_ _ E-E ;
initial energy Ey

Calculations: From Eq. 38-2 (E = hf), we can substitute
for the initial energy E and the detected energy E’ of the x
rays in terms of frequencies. Then, from Eq. 38-1 (f = c/A),
we can substitute for those frequencies in terms of the wave-
lengths. We find

_ hf=hf' _ clA—clA NAA
frac= Te a
_ Aa
A+ AN"
Substitution of data yields
frac = gzip = 0.091, or 9.1%. (Answer)

22 pm + 2.21 pm

Although the Compton shift AA is independent of the wave-
length A of the incident x rays (see Eq. 38-11), our result here
tells us that the fractional photon energy loss of the x rays
does depend on A, increasing as the wavelength of the inci-
dent radiation decreases.

Ss Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Light as a Probability Wave

Interference
fringes

Incident
light

 

B c
Figure 38-6 Light is directed onto screen B,
which contains two parallel slits. Light
emerging from these slits spreads out by
diffraction. The two diffracted waves over-
lap at screen C and form a pattern of inter-
ference fringes. A small photon detector D
in the plane of screen C generates a sharp
click for each photon that it absorbs.

The Standard Version

Figure 38-6 is a sketch of the original experiment carried out by Thomas Young in
1801 (see also Fig. 35-8). Light shines on screen B, which contains two narrow
parallel slits. The light waves emerging from the two slits spread out by diffraction
and overlap on screen C where, by interference, they form a pattern of
alternating intensity maxima and minima. In Module 35-2 we took the existence
of these interference fringes as compelling evidence for the wave nature of light.

Let us place a tiny photon detector D at one point in the plane of screen C.
Let the detector be a photoelectric device that clicks when it absorbs a photon.
We would find that the detector produces a series of clicks, randomly spaced
in time, each click signaling the transfer of energy from the light wave to the
screen via a photon absorption. If we moved the detector very slowly up or down
as indicated by the black arrow in Fig. 38-6, we would find that the click rate
increases and decreases, passing through alternate maxima and minima that cor-
respond exactly to the maxima and minima of the interference fringes.

A fundamental mystery in physics is how light can be a wave (which spreads out
over a region) in classical physics but be emitted and absorbed as photons (which
originate and vanish at points) in quantum physics. The double-slit experiment of
Module 35-2 lies at the heart of this mystery. Let us discuss three versions of it.
