1176 CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

‘We want to find the probability that electrons reflect from the barrier. Recall
that probability density is proportional to |i. Here let’s relate the probability den-
sity in the reflection (which is proportional to |B|?) to the probability density in the
incident beam (which is proportional to IAI?) by defining a reflection coefficient R:

_ 1BP
~ «(AP
This R gives the probability of reflection and thus is also the fraction of the in-

coming electrons that reflect. The transmission coefficient (the probability of
transmission) is

(38-36)

T=1-R. (38-37)

For example, suppose R = 0.010. Then if we send 10,000 electrons toward the
barrier, we find that about 100 are reflected. However, we could never guess
which 100 would be reflected. We have only the probability. The best we can say
about any one electron is that it has a 1.0% chance of being reflected and a 99%
chance of being transmitted. The wave nature of the electron does not allow us to
be any more precise than that.

To evaluate R for any given values of E and U,, we first solve Eqs. 38-34 and
38-35 for B in terms of A by eliminating C and then substitute the result into
Eg. 38-36. Finally, using Eqs. 38-29 and 38-31, we substitute values for k and k,.
The surprise is that R is not simply zero (and T is not simply 1) as we assumed
classically in earlier chapters.

38-9 TUNNELING THROUGH A POTENTIAL BARRIER

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

38.38 With a sketch, identify a potential barrier for an elec-
tron, indicating the barrier height U;, and thickness L.

38.39 Identify the energy argument about what is classically
required of a particle's energy if the particle is to pass
through a potential barrier.

38.40 Identify the transmission coefficient for tunneling.
38.41 For tunneling, calculate the transmission coefficient T
in terms of the particle's energy E and mass m and the

barrier's height U;, and thickness L.

Key Ideas

@ A potential energy barrier is a region where a traveling parti-

cle will have an increased potential energy U,.

@ The particle can pass through the barrier if its total energy
E>U;.

@ Classically, it cannot pass through it if E < U,, but in quan-
tum physics it can, an effect called tunneling.

38.42 Interpret a transmission coefficient in terms of the
probability of any one particle tunneling through a barrier
and also in terms of the average fraction of many particles
tunneling through the barrier.

38.43 Ina tunneling setup, describe the probability density in
front of the barrier, within the barrier, and then beyond the
barrier.

38.44 Describe how a scanning tunneling microscope
works.

@ For a particle with mass m and a barrier of thickness L, the
transmission coefficient is

T = el

where

 

Tunneling Through a Potential Barrier

Let’s replace the potential step of Fig. 38-14 with a potential barrier (or potential
energy barrier), which is a region of thickness L (the barrier thickness or length)
where the electric potential is V, (< 0) and the barrier height is U, (= qV), as
