39-1 ENERGIES OF A TRAPPED ELECTRON

In 1926, all these questions and many others were answered with the devel-
opment of quantum physics. Its basic premise is that moving electrons, protons,
and particles of any kind are best viewed as matter waves, whose motions are
governed by Schrédinger’s equation. Although quantum theory also applies to
larger objects, such as baseballs and planets, it yields the same results as
Newtonian physics, which is easier to use and more intuitive.

Before we can apply quantum physics to the problem of atomic structure,
we need to develop some insights by applying quantum ideas in a few simpler situa-
tions. Some of these situations may seem simplistic and unreal, but they allow us to
discuss the basic principles of the quantum physics of atoms without having to deal
with the often overwhelming complexity of atoms. Besides, with advances in nano-
technology, situations that were previously found only in textbooks are now being
produced in laboratories and put to use in modern electronics and materials science
applications. We are on the threshold of being able to use nanometer-scale construc-
tions called quantum corrals and quantum dots to create “designer atoms” whose
properties can be manipulated in the laboratory. For both natural atoms and these
artificial ones, the starting point in our discussion is the wave nature of an electron.

String Waves and Matter Waves

In Chapter 16 we saw that waves of two kinds can be set up ona stretched string.
If the string is so long that we can take it to be infinitely long, we can set up a trav-
eling wave of essentially any frequency. However, if the stretched string has only
a finite length, perhaps because it is rigidly clamped at both ends, we can set up
only standing waves on it; further, these standing waves can have only discrete
frequencies. In other words, confining the wave to a finite region of space leads to
quantization of the motion—to the existence of discrete states for the wave, each
state with a sharply defined frequency.

This observation applies to waves of all kinds, including matter waves.
For matter waves, however, it is more convenient to deal with the energy E of the
associated particle than with the frequency f of the wave. In all that follows we
shall focus on the matter wave associated with an electron, but the results apply
to any confined matter wave.

Consider the matter wave associated with an electron moving in the positive x
direction and subject to no net force—a so-called free particle. The energy of such
an electron can have any reasonable value, just as a wave traveling along a
stretched string of infinite length can have any reasonable frequency.

Consider next the matter wave associated with an atomic electron, perhaps
the valence (least tightly bound) electron. The electron—held within the atom by
the attractive Coulomb force between it and the positively charged nucleus—is
not a free particle. It can exist only in a set of discrete states, each having a dis-
crete energy E.This sounds much like the discrete states and quantized frequen-
cies that are available to a stretched string of finite length. For matter waves,
then, as for all other kinds of waves, we may state a confinement principle:

 

oO Confinement of a wave leads to quantization— that is, to the existence of discrete
states with discrete energies.

Energies of a Trapped Electron

One-Dimensional Traps

Here we examine the matter wave associated with a nonrelativistic electron
confined to a limited region of space. We do so by analogy with standing waves on
a string of finite length, stretched along an x axis and confined between rigid
supports. Because the supports are rigid, the two ends of the string are nodes, or

1187
