(a) the microwave range, with A = 3.0 cm; (b) the visible range,
with A = 500 nm; (c) the x-ray range, with A = 25 pm; and (d) the
gamma-ray range, with a gamma photon energy of 1.0 MeV.
(e) What are your conclusions about the feasibility of detecting the
Compton shift in these various regions of the electromagnetic
spectrum, judging solely by the criterion of energy loss in a single
photon -electron encounter?

 

+34 © A photon undergoes Compton scattering off a stationary
free electron. The photon scatters at 90.0° from its initial direction;
its initial wavelength is 3.00 10-!? m. What is the electron’s
kinetic energy?

°°35 Calculate the Compton wavelength for (a) an electron and
(b) a proton. What is the photon energy for an electromagnetic
wave with a wavelength equal to the Compton wavelength of
(c) the electron and (d) the proton?

36 Gamma rays of photon energy 0.511 MeV are directed onto
an aluminum target and are scattered in various directions by
loosely bound electrons there. (a) What is the wavelength of the in-
cident gamma rays? (b) What is the wavelength of gamma rays
scattered at 90.0° to the incident beam? (c) What is the photon en-
ergy of the rays scattered in this direction?

°°37 Consider a collision between an x-ray photon of initial en-
ergy 50.0 keV and an electron at rest, in which the photon is scat-
tered backward and the electron is knocked forward. (a) What is
the energy of the backscattered photon? (b) What is the kinetic
energy of the electron?

°*38 Show that when a photon of energy E is scattered from a
free electron at rest, the maximum kinetic energy of the recoiling
electron is given by
RE
Koo = 4 men”
E+ mez

°°39 Through what angle must a 200 keV photon be scattered by
a free electron so that the photon loses 10% of its energy?

40 © Whatis the maximum kinetic energy of electrons knocked
out of a thin copper foil by Compton scattering of an incident beam
of 17.5 keV x rays? Assume the work function is negligible.

°e41 What are (a) the Compton shift AA, (b) the fractional
Compton shift AA/A, and (c) the change AE in photon energy for
light of wavelength A = 590 nm scattering from a free, initially sta-
tionary electron if the scattering is at 90° to the direction of the
incident beam? What are (d) AA, (e) ANA, and (f) AE for 90° scat-
tering for photon energy 50.0 keV (x-ray range)?

Module 38-4 The Birth of Quantum Physics

42. The Sun is approximately an ideal blackbody radiator with a
surface temperature of 5800 K. (a) Find the wavelength at which its
spectral radiancy is maximum and (b) identify the type of electro-
magnetic wave corresponding to that wavelength. (See Fig. 33-1.)
(c) As we shall discuss in Chapter 44, the universe is approximately
an ideal blackbody radiator with radiation emitted when atoms
first formed. Today the spectral radiancy of that radiation peaks at
a wavelength of 1.06 mm (in the microwave region). What is the
corresponding temperature of the universe?

°43 Just after detonation, the fireball in a nuclear blast is approx-
imately an ideal blackbody radiator with a surface temperature of
about 1.0 X 10’ K. (a) Find the wavelength at which the thermal ra-
diation is maximum and (b) identify the type of electromagnetic
wave corresponding to that wavelength. (See Fig. 33-1.) This radia-

PROBLEMS 1183

tion is almost immediately absorbed by the surrounding air mole-
cules, which produces another ideal blackbody radiator with a sur-
face temperature of about 1.0 x 10° K. (c) Find the wavelength at
which the thermal radiation is maximum and (d) identify the type
of electromagnetic wave corresponding to that wavelength.

44 © For the thermal radiation from an ideal blackbody radi-
ator with a surface temperature of 2000 K, let /, represent the in-
tensity per unit wavelength according to the classical expression
for the spectral radiancy and J, represent the corresponding inten-
sity per unit wavelength according to the Planck expression. What
is the ratio [./[p for a wavelength of (a) 400 nm (at the blue end of
the visible spectrum) and (b) 200 ym (in the far infrared)?
(c) Does the classical expression agree with the Planck expression
in the shorter wavelength range or the longer wavelength range?

45 Assuming that your surface temperature is 98.6°F and that
you are an ideal blackbody radiator (you are close), find (a) the
wavelength at which your spectral radiancy is maximum, (b) the
power at which you emit thermal radiation in a wavelength range
of 1.00 nm at that wavelength, from a surface area of 4.00 cm?, and
(c) the corresponding rate at which you emit photons from that
area. Using a wavelength of 500 nm (in the visible range), (d) recal-
culate the power and (e) the rate of photon emission. (As you have
noticed, you do not visibly glow in the dark.)

Module 38-5 Electrons and Matter Waves
*46 Calculate the de Broglie wavelength of (a) a 1.00 keV elec-
tron, (b) a 1.00 keV photon, and (c) a 1.00 keV neutron.

°47 ssM Inanold-fashioned television set, electrons are acceler-
ated through a potential difference of 25.0kV. What is the
de Broglie wavelength of such electrons? (Relativity is not needed.)

48 The smallest dimension (resolving power) that can be
resolved by an electron microscope is equal to the de Broglie
wavelength of its electrons. What accelerating voltage would be re-
quired for the electrons to have the same resolving power as could
be obtained using 100 keV gamma rays?

#49 ssm www Singly charged sodium ions are accelerated
through a potential difference of 300 V. (a) What is the momentum
acquired by such an ion? (b) What is its de Broglie wavelength?

50 Electrons accelerated to an energy of 50 GeV have a de
Broglie wavelength A small enough for them to probe the structure
within a target nucleus by scattering from the structure. Assume
that the energy is so large that the extreme relativistic relation p =
Elc between momentum magnitude p and energy E applies. (In
this extreme situation, the kinetic energy of an electron is much
greater than its rest energy.) (a) What is A? (b) If the target nucleus
has radius R = 5.0 fm, what is the ratio R/A?

“51 SSM The wavelength of the yellow spectral emission line of
sodium is 590 nm. At what kinetic energy would an electron have
that wavelength as its de Broglie wavelength?

“52 A stream of protons, each with a speed of 0.9900c, are di-
rected into a two-slit experiment where the slit separation is 4.00 x
10-° m. A two-slit interference pattern is built up on the viewing
screen. What is the angle between the center of the pattern and the
second minimum (to either side of the center)?

*°53 What is the wavelength of (a) a photon with energy 1.00 eV,
(b) an electron with energy 1.00 eV, (c) a photon of energy
1.00 GeV, and (d) an electron with energy 1.00 GeV?

54 An electron and a photon each have a wavelength of 0.20 nm.
