38-3 PHOTONS, MOMENTUM, COMPTON SCATTERING, LIGHT INTERFERENCE

for the electron’s kinetic energy. Here m is the electron’s mass and y is the
Lorentz factor

1
vVI= (Wiep™

Substituting for K in the conservation of energy equation yields

hf = hf’ + mc*(y— 1).

y=

Substituting c/A for f and c/A' for f’ then leads to the new energy conservation
equation
ae -1 38-8)
ya a timely = 1). (
Next we apply the law of conservation of momentum to the x-ray—electron
collision of Fig. 38-5. From Eq. 38-7 (p = h/A), the magnitude of the momentum
of the incident photon is h/A, and that of the scattered photon is h/A'. From
Eg. 37-41, the magnitude for the recoiling electron’s momentum is p = ymv.
Because we have a two-dimensional situation, we write separate equations for
the conservation of momentum along the x and y axes, obtaining

 

h h
T= yes b+ ymv cos @  (xaxis) (38-9)
h. .
and 0= y Sin &- ymv sin @  (yaxis). (38-10)

We want to find AA (= A’ — A), the Compton shift of the scattered x rays. Of
the five collision variables (A, A’, v, 6, and 6) that appear in Eqs. 38-8, 38-9, and
38-10, we choose to eliminate v and 6, which deal only with the recoiling electron.
Carrying out the algebra (it is somewhat complicated) leads to

h
AA = —(1 — cos @) (Compton shift). (38-11)
mc

Equation 38-11 agrees exactly with Compton’s experimental results.

The quantity h/mc in Eq. 38-11 is a constant called the Compton wavelength.
Its value depends on the mass m of the particle from which the x rays scatter.
Here that particle is a loosely bound electron, and thus we would substitute the
mass of an electron for m to evaluate the Compton wavelength for Compton scat-
tering from an electron.

A Loose End

The peak at the incident wavelength A (= 71.1 pm) in Fig. 38-4 still needs to be ex-
plained. This peak arises not from interactions between x rays and the very loosely
bound electrons in the target but from interactions between x rays and the electrons
that are tightly bound to the carbon atoms making up the target. Effectively, each of
these latter collisions occurs between an incident x ray and an entire carbon atom. If
we substitute for m in Eq. 38-11 the mass of a carbon atom (which is about 22 000
times that of an electron), we see that AA becomes about 22 000 times smaller than
the Compton shift for an electron—too small to detect. Thus, the x rays scattered in
these collisions have the same wavelength as the incident x rays and give us the un-
shifted peaks in Fig. 38-4.

lv] Checkpoint 3

Compare Compton scattering for x rays (A ~ 20 pm) and visible light (A ~ 500 nm) at a
particular angle of scattering, Which has the greater (a) Compton shift, (b) fractional
wavelength shift, (c) fractional energy loss, and (d) energy imparted to the electron?

1161
