1156 CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

Quartz
window

Incident
light

 

Figure 38-1 An apparatus used to study the
photoelectric effect. The incident light
shines on target T, ejecting electrons, which
are collected by collector cup C. The elec-
trons move in the circuit in a direction op-
posite the conventional current arrows. The
batteries and the variable resistor are used
to produce and adjust the electric potential
difference between T and C.

The Photoelectric Effect

If you direct a beam of light of short enough wavelength onto a clean metal
surface, the light will cause electrons to leave that surface (the light will eject the
electrons from the surface). This photoelectric effect is used in many devices,
including camcorders. Einstein’s photon concept can explain it.

Let us analyze two basic photoelectric experiments, each using the apparatus
of Fig. 38-1, in which light of frequency f is directed onto target T and ejects
electrons from it. A potential difference V is maintained between target T and
collector cup C to sweep up these electrons, said to be photoelectrons. This col-
lection produces a photoelectric current i that is measured with meter A.

First Photoelectric Experiment

We adjust the potential difference V by moving the sliding contact in Fig. 38-1 so
that collector C is slightly negative with respect to target T. This potential dif-
ference acts to slow down the ejected electrons. We then vary V until it reaches
a certain value, called the stopping potential V,.,, at which point the reading of
meter A has just dropped to zero. When V = V.,.,, the most energetic ejected
electrons are turned back just before reaching the collector. Then Kqax, the
kinetic energy of these most energetic electrons, is

Konux = eV stops (38-4)

where e¢ is the elementary charge.

Measurements show that for light of a given frequency, K max does not depend
on the intensity of the light source. Whether the source is dazzling bright or so
feeble that you can scarcely detect it (or has some intermediate brightness), the
maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electrons always has the same value.

This experimental result is a puzzle for classical physics. Classically, the in-
cident light is a sinusoidally oscillating electromagnetic wave. An electron in
the target should oscillate sinusoidally due to the oscillating electric force on it
from the wave’s electric field. If the amplitude of the electron’s oscillation is
great enough, the electron should break free of the target’s surface — that is, be
ejected from the target. Thus, if we increase the amplitude of the wave and its
oscillating electric field, the electron should get a more energetic “kick” as it is
being ejected. However, that is not what happens. For a given frequency, intense
light beams and feeble light beams give exactly the same maximum kick to
ejected electrons.

The actual result follows naturally if we think in terms of photons. Now the
energy that can be transferred from the incident light to an electron in the target
is that of a single photon. Increasing the light intensity increases the number of
photons in the light, but the photon energy, given by Eq. 38-2 (E = hf), is
unchanged because the frequency is unchanged. Thus, the energy transferred to
the kinetic energy of an electron is also unchanged.

Second Photoelectric Experiment

Now we vary the frequency f of the incident light and measure the associated
stopping potential V..o,. Figure 38-2 is a plot of Vio, versus f. Note that the photo-
electric effect does not occur if the frequency is below a certain cutoff frequency
fo or, equivalently, if the wavelength is greater than the corresponding cutoff
wavelength Ag = c/fy. This is so no matter how intense the incident light is.

This is another puzzle for classical physics. If you view light as an electro-
magnetic wave, you must expect that no matter how low the frequency, electrons
can always be ejected by light if you supply them with enough energy—that is,
if you use a light source that is bright enough. That is not what happens. For light
below the cutoff frequency fo, the photoelectric effect does not occur, no matter
how bright the light source.
