37-1 SIMULTANEITY AND TIME DILATION 1117

Then Albert Einstein (Fig. 37-1) published his special theory of relativity. The
adjective special means that the theory deals only with inertial reference frames,
which are frames in which Newton’s laws are valid. (Einstein’s general theory of
relativity treats the more challenging situation in which reference frames can
undergo gravitational acceleration; in this chapter the term relativity implies only
inertial reference frames.)

Starting with two deceivingly simple postulates, Einstein stunned the scien-
tific world by showing that the old ideas about relativity were wrong, even though
everyone was so accustomed to them that they seemed to be unquestionable
common sense. This supposed common sense, however, was derived only from
experience with things that move rather slowly. Einstein’s relativity, which turns
out to be correct for all physically possible speeds, predicted many effects that
were, at first study, bizarre because no one had ever experienced them.

Entangled. In particular, Einstein demonstrated that space and time are en-
tangled; that is, the time between two events depends on how far apart they oc-
cur, and vice versa. Also, the entanglement is different for observers who move
relative to each other. One result is that time does not pass at a fixed rate, as if it
were ticked off with mechanical regularity on some master grandfather clock that
controls the universe. Rather, that rate is adjustable: Relative motion can change
the rate at which time passes. Prior to 1905, no one but a few daydreamers would
have thought that. Now, engineers and scientists take it for granted because their
experience with special relativity has reshaped their common sense. For example,
any engineer involved with the Global Positioning System of the NAVSTAR
satellites must routinely use relativity (both special relativity and general relativ-
ity) to determine the rate at which time passes on the satellites because that rate
differs from the rate on Earth’s surface. If the engineers failed to take relativity
into account, GPS would become almost useless in less than one day.

Special relativity has the reputation of being difficult. It is not difficult math-
ematically, at least not here. However, it is difficult in that we must be very careful
about who measures what about an event and just how that measurement is
made—and it can be difficult because it can contradict routine experience.

The Postulates

‘We now examine the two postulates of relativity, on which Einstein’s theory is
based:

oe) 1. The Relativity Postulate: The laws of physics are the same for observers in all
inertial reference frames. No one frame is preferred over any other.

Galileo assumed that the laws of mechanics were the same in all inertial refer-
ence frames. Einstein extended that idea to include all the laws of physics, espe-
cially those of electromagnetism and optics. This postulate does not say that the
measured values of all physical quantities are the same for all inertial observers;
most are not the same. It is the Jaws of physics, which relate these measurements
to one another, that are the same.

Ok] 2, The Speed of Light Postulate: The speed of light in vacuum has the same value c
in all directions and in all inertial reference frames.

‘We can also phrase this postulate to say that there is in nature an ultimate speed c,
the same in all directions and in all inertial reference frames. Light happens to
travel at this ultimate speed. However, no entity that carries energy or informa-
tion can exceed this limit. Moreover, no particle that has mass can actually reach
speed c, no matter how much or for how long that particle is accelerated. (Alas,

   

 

 

© Corbis-Bettmann
Figure 37-1 Einstein posing for a photograph
as fame began to accumulate.
