38-4 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 1165

The Birth of Quantum Physics

Now that we have seen how the photoelectric effect and Compton 50

  
    
 

   

scattering propelled physicists into quantum physics, let’s back up = © 7

to the very beginning, when the idea of quantized energies gradu- = Experiment, T= 2000K
ally emerged out of experimental data. The story begins with what ' 40 .

might seem mundane these days but which was a fixation pointfor = 7

physicists of 1900. The subject was the thermal radiation emitted = 39 ‘

by an ideal blackbody radiator—that is, a radiator whose emitted 5 ‘Classical
radiation depends only on its temperature and not on the material ‘theory

from which it is made, the nature of its surface, or anything other
than temperature. In a nutshell here was the trouble: the
experimental results differed wildly from the theoretical predic-
tions and no one had a clue as to why.

Experimental Setup. We can make an ideal radiator by form-
ing a cavity within a body and keeping the cavity walls at a uniform 0 1
temperature. The atoms on the inner wall of the body oscillate (they
have thermal energy), which causes them to emit electromagnetic
waves, the thermal radiation. To sample that internal radiation, we diancy for a cavity at 2000 K. Note the failure of the classical
drill a small hole through the wall so that some of the radiation can theory, which is shown as a dashed curve. The range of visible
escape to be measured (but not enough to alter the radiation inside wavelengths is indicated.
the cavity). We are interested in how the intensity of the radiation
depends on wavelength.

That intensity distribution is handled by defining a spectral
radiancy S(A) of the radiation emitted at given wavelength A:

Wavelength (um)

Figure 38-8 The solid curve shows the experimental spectral ra-

intensity __ power
unit unit area unit :
wavelength of emitter /\ wavelength
If we multiply S(A) by a narrow wavelength range dA, we have the intensity (that
is, the power per unit area of the hole in the wall) that is being emitted in the
wavelength range Ato A + dA.

The solid curve in Fig. 38-8 shows the experimental results for a cavity with a
wall temperature of 2000 K, for a range of wavelengths. Although such a radiator
would glow brightly in a dark room, we can tell from the figure that only a small
part of its radiated energy actually lies in the visible range (which is colorfully
indicated). At that temperature, most of the radiated energy lies in the infrared
region, with longer wavelengths.

Theory. The prediction of classical physics for the spectral radiancy, for a
given temperature Tin kelvins, is
2ackT

we
where k is the Boltzmann constant (Eq. 19-7) with the value
k = 1.38 x 10-8 J/K = 8.62 X 10-5 eV/K.

This classical result is plotted in Fig. 38-8 for T = 2000 K. Although the theoreti-
cal and experimental results agree well at long wavelengths (off the graph to the
right), they are not even close in the short wavelength region. Indeed, the theo-
retical prediction does not even include a maximum as seen in the measured
results and instead “blows up” up to infinity (which was quite disturbing, even
embarrassing, to the physicists).

Planck’s Solution. In 1900, Planck devised a formula for S(A) that neatly
fitted the experimental results for all wavelengths and for all temperatures:

Qnch 1
sa = ganer (Planck raditiontaw). (38-14)
gic —

S(A) = (38-12)

S(A) =

 

(classical radiation law), (38-13)
