1126

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

      
 

at fy

)

(a) x4(to) xp (to)

 

(b) x4 (to) x(t)

Tv You measure a width at
) an instant, not spread
} Position out over time.

The Relativity of Length

If you want to measure the length of a rod that is at rest with respect to you, you
can—at your leisure—note the positions of its end points on a long stationary
scale and subtract one reading from the other. If the rod is moving, however, you
must note the positions of the end points simultaneously (in your reference
frame) or your measurement cannot be called a length. Figure 37-7 suggests the
difficulty of trying to measure the length of a moving penguin by locating its front
and back at different times. Because simultaneity is relative and it enters into
length measurements, length should also be a relative quantity. It is.

Let Lo be the length of a rod that you measure when the rod is stationary (mean-
ing you and it are in the same reference frame, the rod’s rest frame). If, instead, there
is relative motion at speed v between you and the rod along the length of the rod, then
with simultaneous measurements you obtain a length L given by

L
L=L)V1— 62 =— (length contraction). (37-13)
Y

Because the Lorentz factor y is always greater than unity if there is relative
motion, L is less than Lo. The relative motion causes a length contraction, and L is
called a contracted length. A greater speed v results in a greater contraction.

o The length Ly of an object measured in the rest frame of the object is its
proper length or rest length. Measurements of the length from any reference frame
that is in relative motion parallel to that length are always less than the proper length.

Be careful: Length contraction occurs only along the direction of relative
motion. Also, the length that is measured does not have to be that of an object
like a rod or a circle. Instead, it can be the length (or distance) between two
objects in the same rest frame—for example, the Sun and a nearby star (which
are, at least approximately, at rest relative to each other).

Does a moving object really shrink? Reality is based on observations and mea-
surements; if the results are always consistent and if no error can be determined, then
what is observed and measured is real. In that sense, the object really does shrink.
However, a more precise statement is that the object is really measured to shrink —
motion affects that measurement and thus reality.

‘When you measure a contracted length for, say, a rod, what does an observer
moving with the rod say of your measurement? To that ob-
server, you did not locate the two ends of the rod simulta-
neously. (Recall that observers in motion relative to each
other do not agree about simultaneity.) To the observer,
you first located the rod’s front end and then, slightly later,
its rear end, and that is why you measured a length that is
less than the proper length.

Proof of Eq. 37-13

Length contraction is a direct consequence of time dilation.
Consider once more our two observers. This time, both
Sally, seated on a train moving through a station, and Sam,
again on the station platform, want to measure the length of
the platform. Sam, using a tape measure, finds the length to
be Lo, a proper length because the platform is at rest with

Figure 37-7 If you want to measure the front-to-back respect to him. Sam also notes that Sally, on the train,

length of a penguin while it is moving, you must mark
the positions of its front and back simultaneously (in
your reference frame), as in (a), rather than at differ-

ent times, as in (b).

moves through this length in a time At = Lo/v, where v is
the speed of the train; that is,

Lo =vAt (Sam). (37-14)
