1144 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

detector move directly relative to each other, the wavelength of
the light as measured in the rest frame of the source is the proper
wavelength dy. The detected wavelength A is either longer (a red
shift) or shorter (a blue shift) depending on whether the
source-detector separation is increasing or decreasing. When the
separation is increasing, the wavelengths are related by

1*8 (37-32)

(source and detector separating),

 

where 8 = w/c and v is the relative radial speed (along a line con-
necting the source and detector). If the separation is decreasing, the
signs in front of the 6 symbols are reversed. For speeds much less
than c, the magnitude of the Doppler wavelength shift (AA = A — Ao)
is approximately related to v by
[Aa
Ao

 

c W<o). (37-36)
Transverse Doppler Effect Ifthe relative motion of the light
source is perpendicular to a line joining the source and detector,
the detected frequency fis related to the proper frequency fy by

f=fV1- Pp. (37-37)

<Questions

1 A rod is to move at constant
speed v along the x axis of reference
frame S, with the rod’s length parallel
to that axis. An observer in frame S is
to measure the length L of the rod.
Which of the curves in Fig. 37-15 best
gives length L (vertical axis of the
graph) versus speed parameter ?

2 Figure 37-16 shows a ship (at-
tached to reference frame S') pass- 9 0.2 04 06 08
ing us (standing in reference frame B

5S). A proton is fired at nearly the Figure 37-15

speed of light along the length of the Questions 1 and 3.
ship, from the front to the rear. (a) Is

the spatial separation Ax' between the point at which the proton is
fired and the point at which it hits the ship’s rear wall a positive or
negative quantity? (b) Is the temporal separation At’ between
those events a positive or negative quantity?

 

y

 

m is’

s Proton Jog
| +
x x!

Figure 37-16 Question 2 and Problem 68.

 

 

 

3 Reference frame S' is to pass reference frame S at speed v
along the common direction of the x" and x axes, as in Fig. 37-9. An
observer who rides along with frame S’ is to count off 25 s on his
wristwatch. The corresponding time interval At is to be measured
by an observer in frame S. Which of the curves in Fig. 37-15 best

Momentum and Energy The following definitions of linear
momentum p , kinetic energy K, and total energy E for a particle of
mass are valid at any physically possible speed:

p= ymv (momentum), (37-42)
E= me? +K=ymc? (total energy), (37-47, 37-48)
K =mce?(y- 1) (kinetic energy). (37-52)

Here yis the Lorentz factor for the particle’s motion, and mec? is
the mass energy, or rest energy, associated with the mass of the par-
ticle. These equations lead to the relationships

(pe? = K? + 2Kme2 (37-54)

and E2 = (pce)? + (me. (37-55)

When a system of particles undergoes a chemical or nuclear
reaction, the Q of the reaction is the negative of the change in the
system’s total mass energy:

Q=Me- Mjc2= -AM 2, (37-50)

where M;is the system’s total mass before the reaction and Myis its
total mass after the reaction.

gives At (vertical axis of the graph) versus
speed parameter 8?

4 Figure 37-17 shows two clocks in sta-
tionary frame 5" (they are synchronized in
that frame) and one clock in moving frame
S. Clocks C; and C; read zero when they
pass each other. When clocks C, and C}
pass each other, (a) which clock has the
smaller reading and (b) which clock mea-
sures a proper time?

 

5 Figure 37-18 shows two clocks in stationary
frame S (they are synchronized in that frame)
and one clock in moving frame S’. Clocks C; and
Cj read zero when they pass each other. When
clocks C{ and C; pass each other, (a) which
clock has the smaller reading and (b) which
clock measures a proper time?

 

Figure 37-18

6 Sam leaves Venus in a spaceship headed to Question 5.

Mars and passes Sally, who is on Earth, with a

relative speed of 0.5c. (a) Each measures the Venus—Mars voyage
time. Who measures a proper time:
Sam, Sally, or neither? (b) On the
way, Sam sends a pulse of light to
Mars. Each measures the travel time
of the pulse. Who measures a proper
time: Sam, Sally, or neither?

7 The plane of clocks and measur-
ing rods in Fig, 37-19 is like that in
Fig, 37-3. The clocks along the x axis
are separated (center to center) by 1

 

Figure 37-19 Question 7.
