1160 CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

carbon target should oscillate sinusoidally due to the oscillating electric force on
it from the wave’s electric field. Further, the electron should oscillate at the same
frequency as the wave and should send out waves at this same frequency, as if it
were a tiny transmitting antenna. Thus, the x rays scattered by the electron should
have the same frequency, and the same wavelength, as the x rays in the incident
beam—but they don’t.

Compton interpreted the scattering of x rays from carbon in terms of energy
and momentum transfers, via photons, between the incident x-ray beam and
loosely bound electrons in the carbon target. Let’s see how this quantum physics
interpretation leads to an understanding of Compton’s results.

Suppose a single photon (of energy E = hf) is associated with the interac-
tion between the incident x-ray beam and a stationary electron. In general, the
direction of travel of the x ray will change (the x ray is scattered), and the elec-
tron will recoil, which means that the electron has obtained some kinetic energy.
Energy is conserved in this isolated interaction. Thus, the energy of the scattered
photon (E’ = hf’) must be less than that of the incident photon. The scattered x
rays must then have a lower frequency f’ and thus a longer wavelength A’ than
the incident x rays, just as Compton’s experimental results in Fig. 38-4 show.

For the quantitative part, we first apply the law of conservation of energy.
Figure 38-5 suggests a “collision” between an x ray and an initially stationary free
electron in the target. As a result of the collision, an x ray of wavelength A’ moves
off at an angle ¢ and the electron moves off at an angle 0, as shown. Conservation
of energy then gives us

hf =hf' + K,
in which hf is the energy of the incident x-ray photon, hf’ is the energy of the
scattered x-ray photon, and K is the kinetic energy of the recoiling electron.
Because the electron may recoil with a speed comparable to that of light, we must
use the relativistic expression of Eq. 37-52,

K =mcey~ 1),

 

         
 

©) The x ray can bypass No energy is
An xray heads toward the electron at scattering transferred
a target electron. angle @ =0. to the electron.
X ray Electron Xray

Electron

 

  

V=0 a
(a) (4)
Intermediate Or it can backscatter Maximum
Or it can scatter at some energy is at the maximum angle energy is
intermediate angle @. y transferred. @=180°. y transferred.
Xray Electron
Xfectron
(9) y (@

v
Figure 38-5 (a) An x ray approaches a stationary electron. The x ray can (>) bypass the electron (forward scatter) with
no energy or momentum transfer, (c) scatter at some intermediate angle with an intermediate energy and momentum
transfer, or (d) backscatter with the maximum energy and momentum transfer.
