Insect Development

Like all animals, insects develop through

an orchestrated series of cell changes, but

the path of development is quite differ-

ent from that of a vertebrate. Many in-

sects produce two different kinds of bod-

ies during their development, the first a

tubular eating machine called a larva,

and the second a flying machine with

legs and wings. The passage from one “
body form to the other is called meta- LE
morphosis and involves a radical shift in f
development. Here we will describe de-
velopment in the fruit fly Drosophila (fig- |
ure 17.6), which is the subject of much
genetic research.

Maternal Genes

The development of an insect like
Drosophila begins before fertilization,
with the construction of the egg. Spe-
cialized nurse cells that help the egg to
grow move some of their own mRNA into the end of the
egg nearest them (figure 17.72). As a result, mRNAs pro-
duced by maternal genes are positioned in particular loca-

FIGURE 17.6

tions in the egg, so that after repeated divisions subdivide
the fertilized egg, different daughter cells will contain dif-
ferent maternal products. Thus, the action of maternal
(rather than zygotic) genes determines the initial course
of development.

Syncytial Blastoderm

After fertilization, 12 rounds of nuclear division without
cytokinesis produce about 6000 nuclei, all within a single
cytoplasm. All of the nuclei within this syncytial blasto-
derm (figure 17.74) can freely communicate with one an-
other, but nuclei located in different sectors of the egg ex-
perience different maternal products. The nuclei then
space themselves evenly along the surface of the blasto-
derm, and membranes grow between them. Folding of the
embryo and primary tissue development soon follow, in a
process fundamentally similar to that seen in vertebrate de-
velopment. The tubular body that results within a day of
fertilization is a larva.

Larval Instars

The larva begins to feed immediately, and as it does so, it
grows. Its chitinous exoskeleton cannot stretch much, how-
ever, and within a day it sheds the exoskeleton. Before the
new exoskeleton has had a chance to harden, the larva ex-

336 =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

 

The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. A dorsal view of Drosophila, one of the most
intensively studied animals in development.

pands in size. A total of three larval stages, or instars, are
produced over a period of four days (figure 17.7c).

Imaginal Discs

During embryonic growth, about a dozen groups of cells
called imaginal discs are set aside in the body of the larva
(figure 17.7d). Imaginal discs play no role in the life of the
larva, but are committed to form key parts of the adult fly’s
body.

Metamorphosis

After the last larval stage, a hard outer shell forms, and
the larva is transformed into a pupa (figure 17.7e).
Within the pupa, the larval cells break down and release
their nutrients, which are used in the growth and devel-
opment of the various imaginal discs (eye discs, wing
discs, leg discs, and so on). The imaginal discs then asso-
ciate with one another, assembling themselves into the
body of the adult fly (figure 17.7f). The metamorphosis
of a Drosophila larva into a pupa and then into adult fly
takes about four days, after which the pupal shell splits
and the fly emerges.

 

Drosophila development proceeds through two discrete
phases, the first a larval phase that gathers food, then
an adult phase that is capable of flight and
reproduction.

 
