Photons and Matter Waves

38-1 THE PHOTON, THE QUANTUM OF LIGHT

Learning Objectives

 

Atter reading this module, you should be able to...

 

38.01 Explain the absorption and emission of light in terms relationships between energy, power, intensity, rate of
of quantized energy and photons. photons, the Planck constant, the associated frequency,
38.02 For photon absorption and emission, apply the and the associated wavelength.
Key Ideas
@ An electromagnetic wave (light) is quantized (allowed @ For light of frequency f and wavelength A, the photon energy is

only in certain quantities), and the quanta are called

photons. where h is the Planck constant.

What Is Physics?

One primary focus of physics is Einstein’s theory of relativity, which took us into
a world far beyond that of ordinary experience—the world of objects moving at
speeds close to the speed of light. Among other surprises, Einstein’s theory pre-
dicts that the rate at which a clock runs depends on how fast the clock is moving
relative to the observer: the faster the motion, the slower the clock rate. This and
other predictions of the theory have passed every experimental test devised thus
far, and relativity theory has led us to a deeper and more satisfying view of the
nature of space and time.

Now you are about to explore a second world that is outside ordinary
experience—the subatomic world. You will encounter a new set of surprises that,
though they may sometimes seem bizarre, have led physicists step by step to a
deeper view of reality.

Quantum physics, as our new subject is called, answers such questions as:
Why do the stars shine? Why do the elements exhibit the order that is so appar-
ent in the periodic table? How do transistors and other microelectronic devices
work? Why does copper conduct electricity but glass does not? In fact, scientists
and engineers have applied quantum physics in almost every aspect of everyday
life, from medical instrumentation to transportation systems to entertainment in-
dustries. Indeed, because quantum physics accounts for all of chemistry, including
biochemistry, we need to understand it if we are to understand life itself.

Some of the predictions of quantum physics seem strange even to the phys-
icists and philosophers who study its foundations. Still, experiment after
experiment has proved the theory correct, and many have exposed even stranger
aspects of the theory. The quantum world is an amusement park full of wonderful
rides that are guaranteed to shake up the commonsense world view you have
developed since childhood. We begin our exploration of that quantum park with
the photon.

1153
