39-2 WAVE FUNCTIONS OF A TRAPPED ELECTRON

well length L, then we can usually approximate the integral in Eq. 39-13 as being
equal to the product p(x) Ax, with p(x) evaluated in the center of Ax.

If classical physics prevailed, we would expect the trapped electron to be
detectable with equal probabilities in all parts of the well. From Fig. 39-6 we see that it
is not. For example, inspection of that figure or of Eq. 39-12 shows that for the state
with n = 2, the electron is most likely to be detected near x = 25 pm and x = 75 pm.
It can be detected with near-zero probability near x = 0,x = 50 pm, and x = 100 pm.

The case of n = 15 in Fig. 39-6 suggests that as n increases, the probability of
detection becomes more and more uniform across the well. This result is an
instance of a general principle called the correspondence principle:

ke] At large enough quantum numbers, the predictions of quantum physics merge
smoothly with those of classical physics.

This principle, first advanced by Danish physicist Niels Bohr, holds for all quantum.
predictions.

Iv] Checkpoint 2
The figure shows three
infinite potential wells of i 2b 3L

widths L, 2L, and 3L; (a) (b) ()

each contains an elec-

tron in the state for which n = 10. Rank the wells according to (a) the number of maxima
for the probability density of the electron and (b) the energy of the electron, greatest first.

Normalization

The product (x) dx gives the probability that an electron in an infinite well can
be detected in the interval of the x axis that lies between x and x + dx. We know
that the electron must be somewhere in the infinite well; so it must be true that

as
I w5(x)dx = 1 (normalization equation), (39-14)

because the probability 1 corresponds to certainty. Although the integral is taken
over the entire x axis, only the region from x = 0 to x = L makes any contribu-
tion to the probability. Graphically, the integral in Eq. 39-14 represents the area
under each of the plots of Fig. 39-6. If we substitute Y7(x) from Eq. 39-12 into Eq.
39-14, we find that A = V/2/L. This process of using Eq. 39-14 to evaluate the am-
plitude of a wave function is called normalizing the wave function. The process
applies to all one-dimensional wave functions.

Zero-Point Energy

Substituting n = 1 in Eq. 39-4 defines the state of lowest energy for an electron in
an infinite potential well, the ground state. That is the state the confined electron
will occupy unless energy is supplied to it to raise it to an excited state.

The question arises: Why can’t we include n = 0 among the possibilities listed
for n in Eq. 39-4? Putting n = 0 in this equation would indeed yield a ground-state
energy of zero. However, putting n=0 in Eq. 39-12 would also yield
W(x) = 0 for all x, which we can interpret only to mean that there is no electron in
the well. We know that there is;so n = 0 is not a possible quantum number.

It is an important conclusion of quantum physics that confined systems
cannot exist in states with zero energy. They must always have a certain minimum
energy called the zero-point energy.

1193
