39-4 TWO- AND THREE-DIMENSIONAL ELECTRON TRAPS

in the two insulating layers, causing the central layer to act as a potential energy
well. Figure 39-11b is a photograph of an actual quantum dot; the well in which
individual electrons can be trapped is the purple region.

The lower (but not the upper) insulating layer in Fig. 39-1 1a is thin enough to
permit electrons to tunnel through it if an appropriate potential difference is
applied between the leads. In this way the number of electrons confined to the
well can be controlled. The arrangement does indeed behave like an artificial
atom with the property that the number of electrons it contains can be con-
trolled. Quantum dots can be constructed in two-dimensional arrays that could
well form the basis for computing systems of great speed and storage capacity.

Quantum Corrals

When a scanning tunneling microscope (described in Module 38-9) is in
operation, its tip exerts a small force on isolated atoms that may be located on an
otherwise smooth surface. By careful manipulation of the position of the tip, such
isolated atoms can be “dragged” across the surface and deposited at another
location. Using this technique, scientists at IBM’s Almaden Research Center
moved iron atoms across a carefully prepared copper surface, forming the atoms
into a circle (Fig. 39-12), which they named a quantum corral. Each iron atom in
the circle is nestled in a hollow in the copper surface, equidistant from three
nearest-neighbor copper atoms. The corral was fabricated at a low temperature
(about 4 K) to minimize the tendency of the iron atoms to move randomly about
on the surface because of their thermal energy.

The ripples within the corral are due to matter waves associated with elec-
trons that can move over the copper surface but are largely trapped in the poten-
tial well of the corral. The dimensions of the ripples are in excellent agreement
with the predictions of quantum theory.

 

From M. F. Crommie, C. P. Lutz, D.M. Eigler, Science, 262:218, 1993. Reprinted with permission
from AAAS,

Figure 39-12 A quantum corral during four stages of construction. Note the appearance
of ripples caused by electrons trapped in the corral when it is almost complete.

1199
