38-3 PHOTONS, MOMENTUM, COMPTON SCATTERING, LIGHT INTERFERENCE

The point of this thought experiment is as follows. We cannot predict when a
photon will be detected at any particular point on screen C; photons are detected
at individual points at random times. We can, however, predict that the relative
probability that a single photon will be detected at a particular point in a speci-
fied time interval is proportional to the light intensity at that point.

We know from Eq. 33-26 (J = E2ns/cuo) in Module 33-2 that the intensity J of
a light wave at any point is proportional to the square of E,,,, the amplitude of the
oscillating electric field vector of the wave at that point. Thus,

Oo The probability (per unit time interval) that a photon will be detected in any
small volume centered on a given point in a light wave is proportional to the
square of the amplitude of the wave’s electric field vector at that point.

We now have a probabilistic description of a light wave, hence another way to
view light. It is not only an electromagnetic wave but also a probability wave. That is,
to every point in a light wave we can attach a numerical probability (per unit time
interval) that a photon can be detected in any small volume centered on that point.

The Single-Photon Version

A single-photon version of the double-slit experiment was first carried out by
G. I. Taylor in 1909 and has been repeated many times since. It differs from the
standard version in that the light source in the Taylor experiment is so extremely
feeble that it emits only one photon at a time, at random intervals. Astonishingly,
interference fringes still build up on screen C if the experiment runs long enough
(several months for Taylor’s early experiment).

What explanation can we offer for the result of this single-photon double-slit
experiment? Before we can even consider the result, we are compelled to ask ques-
tions like these: If the photons move through the apparatus one at a time, through
which of the two slits in screen B does a given photon pass? How does a given pho-
ton even “know” that there is another slit present so that interference is a possibil-
ity? Can a single photon somehow pass through both slits and interfere with itself?

Bear in mind that the only thing we can know about photons is when light
interacts with matter—we have no way of detecting them without an interaction
with matter, such as with a detector or a screen. Thus, in the experiment of Fig. 38-6,
all we can know is that photons originate at the light source and vanish at the screen.
Between source and screen, we cannot know what the photon is or does. However,
because an interference pattern eventually builds up on the screen, we can speculate
that each photon travels from source to screen as a wave that fills up the space be-
tween source and screen and then vanishes in a photon absorption at some point on
the screen, with a transfer of energy and momentum to the screen at that point.

We cannot predict where this transfer will occur (where a photon will be
detected) for any given photon originating at the source. However, we can pre-
dict the probability that a transfer will occur at any given point on the screen.
Transfers will tend to occur (and thus photons will tend to be absorbed) in the
regions of the bright fringes in the interference pattern that builds up on
the screen. Transfers will tend not to occur (and thus photons will tend not to be
absorbed) in the regions of the dark fringes in the built-up pattern. Thus, we can
say that the wave traveling from the source to the screen is a probability wave,
which produces a pattern of “probability fringes” on the screen.

The Single-Photon, Wide-Angle Version

In the past, physicists tried to explain the single-photon double-slit experiment in
terms of small packets of classical light waves that are individually sent toward the
slits. They would define these small packets as photons. However, modern
experiments invalidate this explanation and definition. One of these experiments, re-
ported in 1992 by Ming Lai and Jean-Claude Diels of the University of New Mexico,

1163
