1130

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

We can derive them from the postulates of relativity, but here we shall instead
first examine them and then justify them by showing them to be consistent with
our results for simultaneity, time dilation, and length contraction. Assuming that
t = ¢' = 0 when the origins of S and S’ coincide in Fig. 37-9 (event 1), then the
spatial and temporal coordinates of any other event are given by

x= yx — vt),

v ma (Lorentz transformation equations;

cee Sane eee ere elt eee ence en)
t' = y(t — vxic?)

Note that the spatial values x and the temporal values f are bound together in the first
and last equations. This entanglement of space and time was a prime message of
Einstein’s theory, a message that was long rejected by many of his contemporaries.

It is a formal requirement of relativistic equations that they should reduce to fa-
miliar classical equations if we let c approach infinity. That is, if the speed of light
were infinitely great, all finite speeds would be “low” and classical equations would
never fail. If we let c — ~ in Eqs.37-21, y > 1 and these equations reduce —as we
expect —to the Galilean equations (Eqs. 37-20). You should check this.

Equations 37-21 are written in a form that is useful if we are given x and tand
wish to find x’ and t'. We may wish to go the other way, however. In that case we
simply solve Eqs. 37-21 for x and ¢, obtaining

x= y(x'+ vt) and t= p(t! + vx'/c?). (37-22)

Comparison shows that, starting from either Eqs. 37-21 or Eqs. 37-22, you can
find the other set by interchanging primed and unprimed quantities and revers-
ing the sign of the relative velocity v. (For example, if the S’ frame has a positive
velocity relative to an observer in the S frame as in Fig. 37-9, then the S frame has
a negative velocity relative to an observer in the S’ frame.)

Equations 37-21 relate the coordinates of a second event when the first event is
the passing of the origins of S and S' at t = t’ = 0. However, in general we do not want
to restrict the first event to being such a passage. So, let’s rewrite the Lorentz transfor-
mations in terms of any pair of events 1 and 2, with spatial and temporal separations

Ax=x,-x, and At=h—t,
as measured by an observer in S,and
Ax’ =x5—x, and Af =t)—- th,

as measured by an observer in S’. Table 37-2 displays the Lorentz equations in
difference form, suitable for analyzing pairs of events. The equations in the table
were derived by simply substituting differences (such as Ax and Ax’) for the four
variables in Eqs. 37-21 and 37-22.

Be careful: When substituting values for these differences, you must be con-
sistent and not mix the values for the first event with those for the second event.

Also, if, say, Ax is a negative quantity, you must be certain to include the minus
sign in a substitution.

Table 37-2 The Lorentz Transformation Equations for Pairs of Events
L. Av = y(Ax' + v Ar’) 1’, Ax’ = y(Ax—v AD
2. At= (At! + vAx'/c?) 2'. At’ = At — v Axic?)

1 1

Vi-(iep VIB

Frame S' moves at velocity v relative to frame S.
