3.1 Molecules are the building blocks of life.

The Chemistry of Carbon

In chapter 2 we discussed how atoms combine to form
molecules. In this chapter, we will focus on organic mole-
cules, those chemical compounds that contain carbon. The
frameworks of biological molecules consist predominantly
of carbon atoms bonded to other carbon atoms or to atoms
of oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur or hydrogen. Because carbon
atoms possess four valence electrons and so can form four
covalent bonds, molecules containing carbon can form
straight chains, branches, or even rings. As you can imag-
ine, all of these possibilities generate an immense range of
molecular structures and shapes.

Organic molecules consisting only of carbon and hydro-
gen are called hydrocarbons. Covalent bonds between car-
bon and hydrogen are energy-rich. We use hydrocarbons
from fossil fuels as a primary source of energy today.
Propane gas, for example, is a hydrocarbon consisting of a
chain of three carbon atoms, with eight hydrogen atoms
bound to it:

HH H

1 tol
H—C—C—C_H

ito

HHH

Because carbon-hydrogen covalent bonds store consider-
able energy, hydrocarbons make good fuels. Gasoline, for
example, is rich in hydrocarbons.

Functional Groups

Carbon and hydrogen atoms both have very similar elec-
tronegativities, so electrons in C—C and C—H bonds are
evenly distributed, and there are no significant differences
in charge over the molecular surface. For this reason, hy-
drocarbons are nonpolar. Most organic molecules that are
produced by cells, however, also contain other atoms. Be-
cause these other atoms often have different electronegativ-
ities, molecules containing them exhibit regions of positive
or negative charge, and so are polar. These molecules can
be thought of as a C—H core to which specific groups of
atoms called functional groups are attached. For example,
a hydrogen atom bonded to an oxygen atom (—OH) is a
functional group called a hydroxyl group.

Functional groups have definite chemical properties that
they retain no matter where they occur. The hydroxyl
group, for example, is polar, because its oxygen atom, being
very electronegative, draws electrons toward itself (as we
saw in chapter 2). Figure 3.2 illustrates the hydroxyl group
and other biologically important functional groups. Most
chemical reactions that occur within organisms involve the
transfer of a functional group as an intact unit from one
molecule to another.

36 Part. The Origin of Living Things

Biological Macromolecules

Some organic molecules in organisms are small and sim-
ple, containing only one or a few functional groups. Oth-
ers are large complex assemblies called macromolecules.
In many cases, these macromolecules are polymers, mole-
cules built by linking together a large number of small,
similar chemical subunits, like railroad cars coupled to
form a train. For example, complex carbohydrates like
starch are polymers of simple ring-shaped sugars, pro-
teins are polymers of amino acids, and nucleic acids
(DNA and RNA) are polymers of nucleotides. Biological
macromolecules are traditionally grouped into four major
categories: proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, and carbohy-

drates (table 3.1).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Group Structural Ball-and- Found In:
Formula Stick Model
_ » _ | Carbohydrates,
bibclegl Gil +9 alcohols
4
Carbonyl 1 Formaldehyde
°
°
4 Amino acids,
Catboxyl | CC ine
a
OH +H
| @
amino | —N any ‘Ammonia
H Y
Proteins,
Sulfhydryl —S—-H 43-1 ) ic
oe
| Phospholipids,
Phosphate | —O—P—O- nucleic acids,
ll ATP
°
i
Methyl =e + Methane
| gas
H
«

 

FIGURE 3.2

The primary functional chemical groups. These groups tend to
act as units during chemical reactions and confer specific chemical
properties on the molecules that possess them. Amino groups, for
example, make a molecule more basic, while carboxyl groups
make a molecule more acidic.
