what viewing distance from a wing puts you at the limit of resolv-
ing the different colored patches according to Rayleigh’s criterion?
Use 550 nm as the wavelength of light and 3.00 mm as the diame-
ter of your pupil.

29 (a) What is the angular separation of two stars if their im-
ages are barely resolved by the Thaw refracting telescope at the
Allegheny Observatory in Pittsburgh? The lens diameter is 76 cm
and its focal length is 14m. Assume A = 550 nm. (b) Find the dis-
tance between these barely resolved stars if each of them is 10
light-years distant from Earth. (c) For the image of a single star in
this telescope, find the diameter of the first dark ring in the diffrac-
tion pattern, as measured on a photographic plate placed at the
focal plane of the telescope lens. Assume that the structure of
the image is associated entirely with diffraction at the lens aper-
ture and not with lens “errors.”

+30 © <%= Floaters. The floaters you see when viewing a
bright, featureless background are diffraction patterns of defects
in the vitreous humor that fills most of your eye. Sighting through
a pinhole sharpens the diffraction pattern. If you also view a
small circular dot, you can approximate the defect’s size. Assume
that the defect diffracts light as a circular aperture does. Adjust the
dot’s distance L from your eye (or eye lens) until the dot and the
circle of the first minimum in the diffraction pattern appear to
have the same size in your view. That is, until they have the same
diameter D' on the retina at distance L' = 2.0 cm from the front of
the eye, as suggested in Fig. 36-42a, where the angles on the two
sides of the eye lens are equal. Assume that the wavelength of visi-
ble light is A = 550 nm. If the dot has diameter D = 2.0 mm and is
distance L = 45.0 cm from the eye and the defect is x = 6.0 mm in
front of the retina (Fig. 36-425), what is the diameter of the defect?

 

Eye yo.
Circular Jens Retina
dot Defect

1p:
, bo tee |
4 t -/#——x Sp
k-— LL
(a) (b)
Figure 36-42 Problem 30.

Retina

31 SSM Millimeter-wave radar generates a narrower beam than
conventional microwave radar, making it less vulnerable to anti-
radar missiles than conventional radar. (a) Calculate the angular
width 26 of the central maximum, from first minimum to first mini-
mum, produced by a 220 GHz radar beam emitted by a 55.0-cm-
diameter circular antenna. (The frequency is chosen to coincide
with a low-absorption atmospheric “window.”) (b) What is 26 for a
more conventional circular antenna that has a diameter of 2.3 m
and emits at wavelength 1.6 cm?

32 (a) A circular diaphragm 60cm in diameter oscillates at a
frequency of 25 kHzas an underwater source of sound used for sub-
marine detection. Far from the source, the sound intensity is distrib-
uted as the diffraction pattern of a circular hole whose diameter
equals that of the diaphragm. Take the speed of sound in water to be
1450 m/s and find the angle between the normal to the diaphragm
anda line from the diaphragm to the first minimum. (b) Is there such
a minimum for a source having an (audible) frequency of 1.0 kHz?

33 @ Nuclear-pumped x-ray lasers are seen as a possible
weapon to destroy ICBM booster rockets at ranges up to 2000 km.

PROBLEMS 1111

One limitation on such a device is the spreading of the beam due to
diffraction, with resulting dilution of beam intensity. Consider such
a laser operating at a wavelength of 1.40 nm. The element that
emits light is the end of a wire with diameter 0.200 mm.
(a) Calculate the diameter of the central beam at a target 2000 km
away from the beam source. (b) What is the ratio of the beam in-
tensity at the target to that at the end of the wire? (The laser is
fired from space,so neglect any atmospheric absorption.)

34 @ <= A circular obstacle produces the same diffraction
pattern as a circular hole of the same diameter (except very near
@= 0). Airborne water drops are examples of such obstacles. When
you see the Moon through suspended water drops, such as ina fog,
you intercept the diffraction pattern from many drops. The com-
posite of the central diffraction maxima of those drops forms a
white region that surrounds the Moon and may obscure it. Figure
36-43 is a photograph in which the Moon is obscured. There are
two faint, colored rings around the Moon (the larger one may be
too faint to be seen in your copy of the photograph). The smaller
ring is on the outer edge of the central maxima from the drops; the
somewhat larger ring is on the outer edge of the smallest of the
secondary maxima from the drops (see Fig. 36-10). The color is visi-
ble because the rings are adjacent to the diffraction minima (dark
rings) in the patterns. (Colors in other parts of the pattern overlap
too much to be visible.)

(a) What is the color of these rings on the outer edges of
the diffraction maxima? (b) The colored ring around the central max-
ima in Fig. 36-43 has an angular diameter that is 1.35 times the angu-
lar diameter of the Moon, which is 0.50°. Assume that the drops all
have about the same diameter. Approximately what is that diameter?

 

Pekka Parvianen/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Figure 36-43 Problem 34. The corona around the Moon is a composite
of the diffraction patterns of airborne water drops.

Module 36-4 Diffraction by a Double Slit

°35 Suppose that the central diffraction envelope of a double-slit
diffraction pattern contains 11 bright fringes and the first diffrac-
tion minima eliminate (are coincident with) bright fringes. How
many bright fringes lie between the first and second minima of the
diffraction envelope?

*36 A beam of light of a single wavelength is incident perpendic-
ularly ona double-slit arrangement, as in Fig, 35-10. The slit widths
