1122

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

source to mirror by

2D
Aty = ~~ (Sally). (37-3)

The two events occur at the same location in Sally’s reference frame, and she
needs only one clock C at that location to measure the time interval. Clock C is
shown twice in Fig. 37-5a, at the beginning and end of the interval.

Consider now how these same two events are measured by Sam, who is
standing on the station platform as the train passes. Because the equipment
moves with the train during the travel time of the light, Sam sees the path of the
light as shown in Fig. 37-5). For him, the two events occur at different places in
his reference frame, and so to measure the time interval between events, Sam
must use two synchronized clocks, C, and C>, one at each event. According to
Einstein’s speed of light postulate, the light travels at the same speed c for Sam as
for Sally. Now, however, the light travels distance 2L between events | and 2. The
time interval measured by Sam between the two events is

At = 26 (Sam), (37-4)

in which L= V@v ar? + D*. (37-5)
From Eq. 37-3, we can write this as
L = Vvaip + Ge Ai. (37-6)
If we eliminate L between Eqs. 37-4 and 37-6 and solve for At, we find
Ao

At = ——=2__ (37-7)
v1 — (vie?

Equation 37-7 tells us how Sam’s measured interval At between the events com-
pares with Sally’s interval Afy. Because v must be less than c, the denominator in Eq.
37-7 must be less than unity. Thus, At must be greater than Af: Sam measures a
greater time interval between the two events than does Sally. Sam and Sally have
measured the time interval between the same two events, but the relative motion be-
tween Sam and Sally made their measurements different. We conclude that relative
motion can change the rate at which time passes between two events; the key to this
effect is the fact that the speed of light is the same for both observers.

We distinguish between the measurements of Sam and Sally in this way:

) When two events occur at the same location in an inertial reference frame, the
time interval between them, measured in that frame, is called the proper time
interval or the proper time. Measurements of the same time interval from any
other inertial reference frame are always greater.

Thus, Sally measures a proper time interval, and Sam measures a greater time
interval. (The term proper is unfortunate in that it implies that any other mea-
surement is improper or nonreal. That is just not so.) The amount by which a
measured time interval is greater than the corresponding proper time interval
is called time dilation. (To dilate is to expand or stretch; here the time interval is
expanded or stretched.)

Often the dimensionless ratio v/c in Eq. 37-7 is replaced with £, called the
speed parameter, and the dimensionless inverse square root in Eq. 37-7 is often
replaced with y, called the Lorentz factor:

——— (37-8)
Vi- Bp VI -— (vic)?
