1206

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

For example, if we replace my with 2 in Eq. 39-36 and then restrict mig, to be
3, 4,5, and 6, we generate the four visible wavelengths at which hydrogen can
emit or absorb light: 656 nm, 486 nm, 434 nm, and 410 nm.

The Hydrogen Spectrum

Figure 39-18a shows the energy levels corresponding to various values of n in
Eg. 39-34. The lowest level, for n = 1, is the ground state of hydrogen. Higher
levels correspond to excited states, just as we saw for our simpler potential traps.
Note several differences, however. (1) The energy levels now have negative
values rather than the positive values we previously chose in, for instance, Figs.
39-3 and 39-9. (2) The levels now become progressively closer as we move to
higher levels. (3) The energy for the greatest value of n—namely,n = ~—is now
E., =0. For any energy greater than E,, = 0, the electron and proton are not
bound together (there is no hydrogen atom), and the E > 0 region in Fig. 39-18a
is like the nonquantized region for the finite well of Fig. 39-9.

A hydrogen atom can jump between quantized energy levels by emitting or
absorbing light at the wavelengths given by Eq. 39-36. Any such wavelength is
often called a line because of the way it is detected with a spectroscope; thus, a
hydrogen atom has absorption lines and emission lines. A collection of such
lines, such as in those in the visible range, is called a spectrum of the hydrogen
atom.

Series. The lines for hydrogen are said to be grouped into series, according to
the level at which upward jumps start and downward jumps end. For example, the
emission and absorption lines for all possible jumps up from the n = 1 level and
down to the n = | level are said to be in the Lyman series (Fig. 39-18b), named af-
ter the person who first studied those lines. Further, we can say that the Lyman
series has a home-base level of n = 1.Similarly, the Balmer series has a home-base
level of n = 2 (Fig. 39-18c), and the Paschen series has a home-base level of n = 3
(Fig. 39-18d).

Some of the downward quantum jumps for these three series are shown in
Fig. 39-18. Four lines in the Balmer series are in the visible range and are repre-
sented in Fig. 39-18c with arrows corresponding to their colors. The shortest of
those arrows represents the shortest jump in the series, from the n = 3 level to
the n = 2 level. Thus, that jump involves the smallest change in the electron’s
energy and the smallest amount of emitted photon energy for the series. The
emitted light is red. The next jump in the series, from n = 4 to n = 2, is longer,
the photon energy is greater, the wavelength of the emitted light is shorter, and
the light is green. The third, fourth, and fifth arrows represent longer jumps and
shorter wavelengths. For the fifth jump, the emitted light is in the ultraviolet
range and thus is not visible.

The series limit of a series is the line produced by the jump between the
home-base level and the highest energy level, which is the level with the limiting
quantum number n = ~. Thus, the series limit corresponds to the shortest wave-
length in the series.

Ifa jump is upward into the nonquantized portion of Fig. 39-18, the electron’s
energy is no longer given by Eq. 39-34 because the electron is no longer trapped
in the atom. That is, the hydrogen atom has been jonized, meaning that the
electron has been removed to a distance so great that the Coulomb force on it
from the nucleus is negligible. The atom can be ionized if it absorbs any wave-
length shorter than the series limit. The free electron then has only kinetic energy
K(= zmv?, assuming a nonrelativistic situation).

Quantum Numbers for the Hydrogen Atom

Although the energies of the hydrogen atom states can be described by the single
quantum number n, the wave functions describing these states require three
quantum numbers, corresponding to the three dimensions in which the electron
