1136 CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

 

Figure 37-12 A light source S travels with
velocity V past a detector at D. The spe-
cial theory of relativity predicts a trans-
verse Doppler effect as the source passes
through point P, where the direction of
travel is perpendicular to the line extend-
ing through D. Classical theory predicts
no such effect.

directly toward us, by measuring the Doppler shift of the light that reaches us. If a
certain star were at rest relative to us, we would detect light from it with a certain
proper frequency fo. However, if the star is moving either directly away from us
or directly toward us, the light we detect has a frequency f that is shifted from fy
by the Doppler effect. This Doppler shift is due only to the radial motion of the
star (its motion directly toward us or away from us), and the speed we can deter-
mine by measuring this Doppler shift is only the radial speed v of the star—that
is, only the radial component of the star’s velocity relative to us.

Suppose a star (or any other light source) moves away from us with a radial
speed v that is low enough (£ is small enough) for us to neglect the 6? term in
Eq. 37-33.Then we have

f= fol - 6). (37-34)

Because astronomical measurements involving light are usually done in wave-
lengths rather than frequencies, let’s rewrite Eq. 37-34 as

c c
T= yt ~ B),
or A= Al — B).

Because we assume is small, we can expand (1 — 8)! in a power series.
Doing so and retaining only the first power of 8, we have

 

A= Ag(1 + B),
A=%
or =——. 37-35.
B % (37-35)
Replacing 6 with v/c and A — Ag with |AA| leads to
[dal
v= rs C (radial speed of light source, v < c). (37-36)

The difference AA is the wavelength Doppler shift of the light source. We enclose
it with an absolute sign so that we always have a magnitude of the shift. Equation
37-36 is an approximation that can be applied whether the light source is moving
toward or away from us but only when v <c.

Iv] Checkpoint 3

The figure shows a source that emits

‘Detector ‘Source
Tenteieere een eerie om
eee ee eter hese henner ( ( ((
c/4as measured from reference frame S.
The reee nate eiertetetes
Se eee ener ett

the emitted light. (a) Is the detector

moving toward the left or the right? (b) Is the speed of the detector as measured from
reference frame S more than c/4, less than c/4, or equal to c/4?

Transverse Doppler Effect

So far, we have discussed the Doppler effect, here and in Chapter 17, only for
situations in which the source and the detector move either directly toward or
directly away from each other. Figure 37-12 shows a different arrangement, in
which a source S moves past a detector D. When S reaches point P, the velocity of
S is perpendicular to the line joining P and D, and at that instant S is moving
neither toward nor away from D. If the source is emitting sound waves of fre-
quency fo, D detects that frequency (with no Doppler effect) when it intercepts the
