Induction

In Drosophila the initial cells created by cleavage divisions
contain different developmental signals (called determi-
nants) from the egg, setting individual cells off on different
developmental paths. This pattern of development is called
mosaic development. In mammals, by contrast, all of the
blastomeres receive equivalent sets of determinants; body
form is determined by cell-cell interactions, a pattern called
regulative development.

We can demonstrate the importance of cell-cell inter-
actions in development by separating the cells of an early
blastula and allowing them to develop independently.
Under these conditions, animal pole blastomeres develop
features of ectoderm and vegetal pole blastomeres de-
velop features of endoderm, but none of the cells ever de-
velop features characteristic of mesoderm. However, if
animal pole and vegetal pole cells are placed next to each
other, some of the animal pole cells will develop as meso-
derm. The interaction between the two cell types triggers
a switch in the developmental path of the cells! When a
cell switches from one path to another as a result of in-
teraction with an adjacent cell, induction has taken place
(figure 17.9).

How do cells induce developmental changes in neigh-
boring cells? Apparently, the inducing cells secrete proteins
that act as intercellular signals. Signal molecules, which we
discussed in detail in chapter 7, are capable of producing
abrupt changes in the patterns of gene transcription.

In some cases, particular groups of cells called organiz-
ers produce diffusible signal molecules that convey posi-
tional information to other cells. Organizers can have a
profound influence on the development of surrounding tis-
sues (see chapter 60). Working as signal beacons, they in-
form surrounding cells of their distance from the organizer.
The closer a particular cell is to an organizer, the higher
the concentration of the signal molecule, or morphogen, it
experiences (figure 17.10). Although only a few mor-
phogens have been isolated, they are thought to be part of a
widespread mechanism for determining relative position
during development.

A single morphogen can have different effects, depend-
ing upon how far away from the organizer the affected
cell is located. Thus, low levels of the morphogen activin
will cause cells of the animal pole of an early Xenopus em-
bryo to develop into epidermis, while slightly higher lev-
els will induce the cells to develop into muscles, and levels
a little higher than that will induce them to form noto-
chord (figure 17.11).

 

Cells migrate by extending probes to neighboring cells
which they use to pull themselves along. Interactions
between cells strongly influence the developmental
paths they take. Signal molecules from an inducing cell
alter patterns of transcription in cells which come in
contact with it.

 

    

3
&
E
. 3
Organizercells
secreting morphogen =
=
f > 8& frgan A Organ B Organ
/ Distance trom secretion site
\ \V

Decreasing
morphogen
concentration
gradient

FIGURE 17.10

An organizer creates a morphogen gradient. As a morphogen
diffuses from the organizer site, it becomes less concentrated.
Different concentrations of the morphogen stimulate the
development of different organs.

Animal pole Develops into

notochord
Develops into
muscle
Develops into
epidermis

Secretion
of morphogen

   
  

 

Vegetal pole

FIGURE 17.11

Fate of cells in an early Xenopus embryo. The fates of the
individual cells are determined by the concentration of
morphogen washing over them.

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 341
