38-9 TUNNELING THROUGH A POTENTIAL BARRIER

shown in Fig. 38-16. To the right of the barrier is region 3 with V = 0. As before,
we'll send a beam of nonrelativistic electrons toward the barrier, each with en-
ergy E. If we again consider E > U;, we have a more complicated situation than
our previous potential step because now electrons can possibly reflect from two
boundaries, at x = Oand x = L.

Instead of sorting that out, let’s consider the situation where E < U;,—that is,
where the mechanical energy is less than the potential energy that would be
demanded of an electron in region 2. Such a demand would require that the
electron’s kinetic energy (= E — U,) be negative in region 2, which is, of course,
simply absurd because kinetic energies must always be positive (nothing in the
expression amv? can be negative). Therefore, region 2 is classically forbidden to
anelectron with E < U;.

Tunneling. However, because an electron is a matter wave, it actually has a
finite probability of leaking (or, better, tunneling) through the barrier and materi-
alizing on the other side. Once past the barrier, it again has its full mechanical
energy E as though nothing (strange or otherwise) has happened in the region
0 =x = L. Figure 38-17 shows the potential barrier and an approaching electron,
with an energy less than the barrier height. We are interested in the probability of
the electron appearing on the other side of the barrier. Thus, we want the trans-
mission coefficient T.

To find an expression for T we would in principle follow the procedure for
finding R for a potential step. We would solve Schrédinger’s equation for the gen-
eral solutions in each of three regions in Fig. 38-16. We would discard the region-3
solution for a wave traveling in the —x direction (there is no electron source off
to the right). Then we would determine the coefficients in terms of the coefficient
A of the incident electrons by applying the boundary conditions—that is, by
matching the values and slopes of the wave functions at the two boundaries.
Finally, we would determine the relative probability density in region 3 in terms
of the incident probability density. However, because all this requires a lot of
mathematical manipulation, here we shall just examine the general results.

Figure 38-18 shows a plot of the probability densities in the three regions. The
oscillating curve to the left of the barrier (for x < 0) is a combination of the inci-
dent matter wave and the reflected matter wave (which has a smaller amplitude
than the incident wave). The oscillations occur because these two waves, traveling
in opposite directions, interfere with each other, setting up a standing wave pattern.

Within the barrier (for 0 <x < L) the probability density decreases exponentially
with x. However, if L is small, the probability density is not quite zero at x = L.

To the right of the barrier (for x > L), the probability density plot describes a
transmitted (through the barrier) wave with low but constant amplitude. Thus,
the electron can be detected in this region but with a relatively small probability.
(Compare this part of the figure with Fig. 38-13.)

As we did with a step potential, we can assign a transmission coefficient T to
the incident matter wave and the barrier. This coefficient gives the probability
with which an approaching electron will be transmitted through the barrier —
that is, that tunneling will occur. As an example, if T = 0.020, then of every 1000
electrons fired at the barrier, 20 (on average) will tunnel through it and 980 will be
reflected. The transmission coefficient Tis approximately

Tx oe, (38-38)
2y
in which p=, |87 aie BE) (38-39)

and e is the exponential function. Because of the exponential form of Eq. 38-38,
the value of Tis very sensitive to the three variables on which it depends: particle
mass m, barrier thickness L, and energy difference U, — E. (Because we do not
include relativistic effects here, E does not include mass energy.)

1177

Can the electron pass
through the region of
negative potential?

 

x=0 x=L

Figure 38-16 The elements of a narrow tube
in which an electron (the dot) approaches a
negative electric potential V, in the region
x=Otox=L.

Classically, the electron
lacks the energy to pass
through the barrier region.

Energy

-=-Fe—»-
Electron

 

Figure 38-17 An energy diagram containing
two plots for the situation of Fig. 38-16:

(1) The electron’s mechanical energy Eis
plotted when the electron is at any coordi-
nate x < 0. (2) The electron’s electric po-
tential energy Uis plotted as a function of
the electron’s position x, assuming that the
electron can reach any value of x. The
nonzero part of the plot (the potential
barrier) has height U, and thickness L.

Probability
density |y(x[?

WK _

0 L
Figure 38-18 A plot of the probability density
|W? of the electron matter wave for the
situation of Fig. 38-17. The value of |p"? is
nonzero to the right of the potential barrier.

 
