Formation of the Blastula

The outermost blastomeres (figure 17.5a) in the ball of
cells produced during cleavage are joined to one another by
tight junctions, which, as you may recall from chapter 7,
are belts of protein that encircle a cell and weld it firmly to
its neighbors. These tight junctions create a seal that iso-
lates the interior of the cell mass from the surrounding
medium. At about the 16-cell stage, the cells in the interior
of the mass begin to pump Na* from their cytoplasm into
the spaces between cells. The resulting osmotic gradient
causes water to be drawn into the center of the cell mass,
enlarging the intercellular spaces. Eventually, the spaces
coalesce to form a single large cavity within the cell mass.
The resulting hollow ball of cells is called a blastula, or
blastocyst in mammals (figure 17.50).

Gastrulation

Some cells of the blastula then push inward, forming a
gastrula that is invaginated. Cells move by using exten-
sions called lamellipodia to crawl over neighboring cells,
which respond by forming lamellipodia of their own.
Soon a sheet of cells contracts on itself and shoves inward,
starting the invagination. Called gastrulation (figure
17.50), this process creates the main axis of the vertebrate
body, converting the blastula into a bilaterally symmetri-
cal embryo with a central gut. From this point on, the
embryo has three germ layers whose organization fore-
shadows the future organization of the adult body. The
cells that invaginate and form the tube of the primitive
gut are endoderm; they give rise to the stomach, lungs,

 

(g) Growth

liver, and most of the other internal organs. The cells that
remain on the exterior are ectoderm, and their derivatives
include the skin on the outside of the body and the ner-
vous system. The cells that break away from the invagi-
nating cells and invade the space between the gut and the
exterior wall are mesoderm; they eventually form the no-
tochord, bones, blood vessels, connective tissues, and
muscles.

Neurulation

Soon after gastrulation is complete, a broad zone of ecto-
derm begins to thicken on the dorsal surface of the embryo,
an event triggered by the presence of the notochord be-
neath it. The thickening is produced by the elongation of
certain ectodermal cells. Those cells then assume a wedge
shape by contracting bundles of actin filaments at one end.
This change in shape causes the neural tissue to roll up into
a tube, which eventually pinches off from the rest of the ec-
toderm and gives rise to the brain and spinal cord. This
tube is called the neural tube, and the process by which it
forms is termed neurulation (figure 17.54).

Cell Migration

During the next stage of vertebrate development, a variety
of cells migrate to form distant tissues, following specific
paths through the embryo to particular locations (figure
17.5e). These migrating cells include those of the neural
crest, which pinch off from the neural tube and form a
number of structures, including some of the body’s sense
organs; cells that migrate from central blocks of muscle
tissue called somites and form the skeletal muscles of the
body; and the precursors of blood cells and gametes.
When a migrating cell reaches its destination, receptor
proteins on its surface interact with proteins on the sur-
faces of cells in the destination tissue, triggering changes
in the cytoskeleton of the migrating cell that cause it to
cease moving.

Organogenesis and Growth

At the end of this wave of cell migration and colonization,
the basic vertebrate body plan has been established, al-
though the embryo is only a few millimeters long and has
only about 10° cells. Over the course of subsequent devel-
opment, tissues will develop into organs (figure 17.5f), and
the embryo will grow to be a hundred times larger, with a
million times as many cells (figure 17.59).

 

Vertebrates develop in a highly orchestrated fashion.
The zygote divides rapidly, forming a hollow ball of
cells that then pushes inward, forming the main axis of
an embryo that goes on to develop tissues, and after a
process of cell migration, organs.

 

Chapter 17 Cellular Mechanisms of Development 335
