1134

CHAPTER 37 RELATIVITY

Dividing the numerator and denominator of the right side by At’, we find
Ax AWA +
At 1+ v(Ax'/At' ic?”
However, in the differential limit, Ax/At is wu, the velocity of the particle as meas-

ured in S, and Ax’/At’ is u’, the velocity of the particle as measured in S’. Then
we have, finally,

 

uty

0S Tule

(relativistic velocity transformation) (37-29)
as the relativistic velocity transformation equation. (Caution: Be careful to sub-
stitute the correct signs for the velocities.) Equation 37-29 reduces to the classi-

cal, or Galilean, velocity transformation equation,
u=u'+v (37-30)

when we apply the formal test of letting c > %. In other words, Eq. 37-29 is
correct for all physically possible speeds, but Eq. 37-30 is approximately correct

(classical velocity transformation),

for speeds much less than c.

37-5 DOPPLER EFFECT FOR LIGHT

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

37.22 Identify that the frequency of light as measured in a
frame attached to the light source (the rest frame) is the
proper frequency.

37.23 For source—detector separations increasing and
decreasing, identify whether the detected frequency is
shifted up or down from the proper frequency, identify that
the shift increases with an increase in relative speed, and
apply the terms blue shift and red shift.

37.24 Identify radial speed.

37.25 For source—detector separations increasing and
decreasing, apply the relationships between proper
frequency fo, detected frequency f, and radial speed v.

Key Ideas

37.26 Convert between equations for frequency shift and
wavelength shift.

37.27 When a radial speed is much less than light speed,
apply the approximation relating wavelength shift AA,
proper wavelength Ao, and radial speed v.

37.28 Identify that for light (not sound) there isa shift in the
frequency even when the velocity of the source is perpen-
dicular to the line between the source and the detector, an
effect due to time dilation.

37.29 Apply the relationship for the transverse Doppler effect
by relating detected frequency f, proper frequency fo, and
relative speed v.

 

@ When a light source and a light detector move relative to
each other, the wavelength of the light as measured in the
rest frame of the source is the proper wavelength Ap. The de-
tected wavelength A is either longer (a red shift) or shorter (a
blue shift) depending on whether the source—detector sepa-
ration is increasing or decreasing.

@ When the separation is increasing, the wavelengths are
related by

1+
A= 1-8 (source and detector separating),

where £ = v/c and vis the relative radial speed (along a
line through the source and detector). If the separation is

decreasing, the signs in front of the 8 symbols are reversed.
@ For speeds much less than c, the magnitude of the
Doppler wavelength shift AA = A — Ag is approximately
related to v by
_ al
do
@ If the relative motion of the light source is perpendicular to a
line through the source and detector, the detected frequency
fis related to the proper frequency fy by

f=hV1- Bp.

This transverse Doppler effect is due to time dilation.

v

 

Cc (v<c).

 
