1164

A single photon can take
widely different paths and
still interfere with itself.

Asingle molecule

 

Figure 38-7 The light from a single photon.
emission in source S travels over two
widely separated paths and interferes with
itself at detector D after being recombined
by beam splitter B. (Based on Ming Lai and
Jean-Claude Diels, Journal of the Optical
Society of America B,9,2290-2294,
December 1992.)

CHAPTER 38 PHOTONS AND MATTER WAVES

is depicted in Figure 38-7. Source S contains molecules that emit photons at well-
separated times. Mirrors M, and Mj are positioned to reflect light that the source
emits along two distinct paths, 1 and 2, that are separated by an angle 6, which is
close to 180°. This arrangement differs from the standard two-slit experiment, in
which the angle between the paths of the light reaching two slits is very small.

After reflection from mirrors M, and Mb, the light waves traveling along
paths 1 and 2 meet at beam splitter B, which transmits half the incident light and
reflects the other half. On the right side of B in Fig. 38-7, the light wave traveling
along path 2 and reflected by B combines with the light wave traveling along path
1 and transmitted by B. These two waves then interfere with each other at detec-
tor D (a photomultiplier tube that can detect individual photons).

The output of the detector is a randomly spaced series of electronic pulses,
one for each detected photon. In the experiment, the beam splitter is moved
slowly in a horizontal direction (in the reported experiment, a distance of only
about 50 4m maximum), and the detector output is recorded on a chart recorder.
Moving the beam splitter changes the lengths of paths 1 and 2, producing a phase
shift between the light waves arriving at detector D. Interference maxima and
minima appear in the detector’s output signal.

This experiment is difficult to understand in traditional terms. For example,
when a molecule in the source emits a single photon, does that photon travel
along path 1 or path 2 in Fig. 38-7 (or along any other path)? Or can it move in
both directions at once? To answer, we assume that when a molecule emits a pho-
ton, a probability wave radiates in all directions from it. The experiment samples
this wave in two of those directions, chosen to be nearly opposite each other.

We see that we can interpret all three versions of the double-slit experiment
if we assume that (1) light is generated in the source as photons, (2) light is
absorbed in the detector as photons, and (3) light travels between source and
detector as a probability wave.

38-4 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

38.15 Identify an ideal blackbody radiator and its spectral

radiancy S(A).

38.18 For a narrow wavelength range and for a given wave-
length and temperature, find the intensity in blackbody

38.16 Identify the problem that physicists had with blackbody
radiation prior to Planck's work, and explain how Planck
and Einstein solved the problem.

38.17 Apply Planck's radiation law for a given wavelength
and temperature.

Key Ideas
@ As ameasure of the emission of thermal radiation by an
ideal blackbody radiator, we define the spectral radiancy in
terms of the emitted intensity per unit wavelength at a given
wavelength A:

intensity
(unit wavelength) *
@ The Planck radiation law, in which atomic oscillators
produce the thermal radiation, is
2mc*h 1
—s

SQ) =

SQ) =

 

radiation.
38.19 Apply the relationship between intensity, power, and area.
38.20 Apply Wien's law to relate the surface temperature of
an ideal blackbody radiator to the wavelength at which the
spectral radiancy is maximum.

where / is the Planck constant, k is the Boltzmann con-
stant, and T is the temperature of the radiating surface (in
kelvins).

@ Planck's law was the first suggestion that the energies
of the atomic oscillators producing the radiation are
quantized.

@ Wien's law relates the temperature T of a blackbody radia-
tor and the wavelength Agax at which the spectral radiancy is
maximum:

Yeux T = 2898 pum - K.

 
