1300 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

established by the central core, thus preserving the central feature of the
independent-particle model. These outside nucleons also interact with the
core, deforming it and setting up “tidal wave” motions of rotation or vibration
within it. These collective motions of the core preserve the central feature of
the collective model. Such a model of nuclear structure thus succeeds in com-
bining the seemingly irreconcilable points of view of the collective and
independent-particle models. It has been remarkably successful in explaining
observed nuclear properties.

Sample Problem 42.09 Lifetime of a compound nucleus made by neutron capture

Consider the neutron capture reaction

MAg +n—MWAg— "Ag + y, (42-35)

in which a compound nucleus ('!°Ag) is formed. Figure
42-15 shows the relative rate at which such events take
place, plotted against the energy of the incoming neutron.
Find the mean lifetime of this compound nucleus by using
the uncertainty principle in the form

AE-At~h. (42-36)

Here AE is a measure of the uncertainty with which the
energy of a state can be defined. The quantity Ar is a mea-
sure of the time available to measure this energy. In fact,
here Af is just fy, the average life of the compound nucleus
before it decays to its ground state.

Reasoning: We sce that the relative reaction rate peaks
sharply at a neutron energy of about 5.2 eV. This suggests
that we are dealing with a single excited energy level of the
compound nucleus !!Ag. When the available energy (of the
incoming neutron) just matches the energy of this level above
the Ag ground state, we have “resonance” and the reaction
of Eq. 42-35 really “goes.”

However, the resonance peak is not infinitely sharp but has
an approximate half-width (AF in the figure) of about 0.20 eV.
‘We can account for this resonance-peak width by saying that the
excited level is not sharply defined in energy but has an energy
uncertainty AE of about 0.20 eV.

Review & Summary

The Nuclides Approximately 2000 nuclides are known to exist.
Each is characterized by an atomic number Z (the number of pro-
tons),a neutron number N, and a mass number A (the total number
of nucleons—protons and neutrons). Thus, A = Z + N. Nuclides
with the same atomic number but different neutron numbers are
isotopes of one another. Nuclei have a mean radius r given by

r= nA, (42-3)
where ry ~ 1.2 fm.

Mass and Binding Energy Atomic masses are often re-

Here the energy of the
incident neutron matches
the excited state energy
of the nucleus.

     

Relative rate

45 47 49 51 53 5.5 57 59
Neutron energy (eV)

Figure 42-15 A plot of the relative number of reaction events of the
type described by Eq. 42-35 as a function of the energy of the inci-
dent neutron. The half-width AE of the resonance peak is about
0.20 eV.

Calculation: Substituting that uncertainty of 0.20 eV into
Eq. 42-36 gives us
— h (4.14 x 10-5 eV-s)/2a
“EAE 0.20 eV

=3x 10s. (Answer)
This is several hundred times greater than the time a 5.2
eV neutron takes to cross the diameter of a Ag nucleus.

Therefore, the neutron is spending this time of 3 x 10s
as part of the nucleus.

At=

US Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

ported in terms of mass excess
A=M-A (42-6)

where M is the actual mass of an atom in atomic mass units and A
is the mass number for that atom’s nucleus. The binding energy of a
nucleus is the difference

AE y. = 2(mc2) — Mc? (42-7)

where (mc?) is the total mass energy of the individual protons
and neutrons. The binding energy per nucleon is

(mass excess),

(binding energy),
