1302 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

9 Att =0 we begin to observe two identical radioactive nuclei that
have a half-life of 5 min. At f= 1 min, one of the nuclei decays. Does
that event increase or decrease the chance that the second nucleus
will decay in the next 4 min, or is there no effect on the second nu-
cleus? (Are the events cause and effect, or random?)

10 Figure 42-17 shows the curve for the binding energy per nu-
cleon AEyeq Versus mass number A. Three isotopes are indicated.
Rank them according to the energy required to remove a nucleon
from the isotope, greatest first.

AByen 2

A
Figure 42-17 Question 10.

11 Att =0,asample of radionuclide A has twice the decay rate as a
sample of radionuclide B. The disintegration constants are A, and Ag,

_
<Problems

2

SSM _ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
+ ~ see Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

with A, > Ag. Will the two samples ever
have (simultaneously) the same decay rate?

12. Figure 42-18 is a plot of mass num-
ber A versus charge number Z. The loca-
tion of a certain nucleus is represented by
a dot. Which of the arrows extending from
the dot would best represent the transi-
tion were the nucleus to undergo (a) a B™
decay and (b) an a decay?

13 (a) Which of the following nuclides
are magic: "Sn, "Sn, Cd, Au, Pb?
(b) Which, if any, are doubly magic?

 

Figure 42-18
Question 12.

14 If the mass of a radioactive sample is doubled, do (a) the ac-
tivity of the sample and (b) the disintegration constant of the
sample increase, decrease, or remain the same?

15. The magic nucleon numbers for nuclei are given in Module 42-8
as 2, 8, 20,28, 50,82, and 126. Are nuclides magic (that is, especially sta-
ble) when (a) only the mass number A, (b) only the atomic number Z,
(c) only the neutron number N, or (d) either Z or N (or both) is equal
to one of these numbers? Pick all correct phrases.

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
WWW Worked-out solution is at

ILW Interactive solution is at

28S Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 42-1 Discovering the Nucleus

*1 ALi nucleus with a kinetic energy of 3.00 MeV is sent toward
a Th nucleus. What is the least center-to-center separation be-
tween the two nuclei, assuming that the (more massive) Th nu-
cleus does not move?

*2 Calculate the distance of closest approach for a head-on colli-
sion between a 5.30 MeV alpha particle and a copper nucleus.

°*3 A 10.2 MeV Li nucleus is shot directly at the center of a Ds
nucleus. At what center-to-center distance does the Li momentar-
ily stop, assuming the Ds does not move?

4 © Ina Rutherford scattering experiment, assume that an
incident alpha particle (radius 1.80 fm) is headed directly toward a
target gold nucleus (radius 6.23 fm). What energy must the alpha
particle have to just barely “touch” the gold nucleus?

+5 © When an alpha particle collides elastically with a nucleus,
the nucleus recoils. Suppose a 5.00 MeV alpha particle has a head-
on elastic collision with a gold nucleus that is initially at rest. What
is the kinetic energy of (a) the recoiling nucleus and (b) the re-
bounding alpha particle?

Module 42-2 Some Nuclear Properties

*6 The strong neutron excess (defined as N — Z) of high-mass
nuclei is illustrated by noting that most high-mass nuclides could
never fission into two stable nuclei without neutrons being left
over. For example, consider the spontaneous fission of aU nu-
cleus into two stable daughter nuclei with atomic numbers 39 and
53. From Appendix F, determine the name of the (a) first and (b)
second daughter nucleus. From Fig, 42-5, approximately how many

neutrons are in the (c) first and (d) second? (e) Approximately
how many neutrons are left over?

°7 What is the nuclear mass density p,, of (a) the fairly low-mass
nuclide Mn and (b) the fairly high-mass nuclide “Bi? (c)
Compare the two answers, with an explanation. What is the nuclear
charge density p, of (d) *Mn and (e) Bi? (f) Compare the two
answers, with an explanation.

°8 (a) Show that the mass M of an atom is given approximately
by M,) = Am,, where A is the mass number and m, is the proton
mass. For (b) 'H, (c) 2'P, (d) "2°Sn, (e) Au, and (f) “°Pu, use Table

42-1 to find the percentage deviation between M,,,, and M:
Mapp — M
percentage deviation = M 100.

(g) Is a value of M,, accurate enough to be used in a calculation of
anuclear binding energy?

+9 The nuclide “C contains (a) how many protons and (b) how
many neutrons?

*10 What is the mass excess A; of 'H (actual mass is 1.007 825 u) in
(a) atomic mass units and (b) MeV/c?? What is the mass excess A, of
a neutron (actual mass is 1.008 665 u) in (c) atomic mass units and
(d) MeVic?? What is the mass excess Ajo) of Sn (actual mass is
119.902 197 u) in (e) atomic mass units and (f) Me V/c2?

*11 SSM Nuclear radii may be measured by scattering high-
energy (high speed) electrons from nuclei. (a) What is the de
Broglie wavelength for 200 MeV electrons? (b) Are these elec-
trons suitable probes for this purpose?
