1242

Figure 40-18 The interaction of radiation and
matter in the processes of (a) absorption,
(b) spontaneous emission, and (c) stimu-
lated emission. An atom (matter) is repre-
sented by the red dot; the atomis in either a
lower quantum state with energy E) ora
higher quantum state with energy E,.

In (a) the atom absorbs a photon of energy
hf from a passing light wave. In (5) it emits
a light wave by emitting a photon of energy
hf. In (c) a passing light wave with photon
energy /if causes the atom to emit a photon
of the same energy, increasing the energy of
the light wave.

CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

How Lasers Work

Because the word “laser” is an acronym for “light amplification by the stimulated
emission of radiation,” you should not be surprised that stimulated emission is
the key to laser operation. Einstein introduced this concept in 1917 in the paper
where he explained the Planck formula for an ideal blackbody radiator (Eq. 38-14).
Although the world had to wait until 1960 to see an operating laser, the ground-
work for its development was put in place decades earlier.

Consider an isolated atom that can exist either in its state of lowest energy
(its ground state), whose energy is Eo, or in a state of higher energy (an excited
state), whose energy is E,. Here are three processes by which the atom can move
from one of these states to the other:

1. Absorption. Figure 40-18a shows the atom initially in its ground state. If
the atom is placed in an electromagnetic field that is alternating at frequency f,
the atom can absorb an amount of energy hf from that field and move to the
higher-energy state. From the principle of conservation of energy we have

hf =E, — Ey. (40-28)
‘We call this process absorption.

2. Spontaneous emission. In Fig. 40-18b the atom is in its excited state and no
external radiation is present. After a time, the atom will de-excite to its ground
state, emitting a photon of energy hfin the process. We call this process spon-
taneous emission—spontaneous because the event is random and set by
chance. The light from the filament of an ordinary lightbulb or any other com-
mon light source is generated in this way.

Normally, the mean life of excited atoms before spontaneous emission
occurs is about 10~* s. However, for some excited states, this mean life is per-
haps as much as 10° times longer. We call such long-lived states metastable;
they play an important role in laser operation.

3. Stimulated emission. In Fig. 40-18c the atom is again in its excited state, but
this time radiation with a frequency given by Eq. 40-28 is present. A photon of
energy hf can stimulate the atom to move to its ground state, during which
process the atom emits an additional photon, whose energy is also Af. We call
this process stimulated emission —stimulated because the event is triggered by
the external photon. The emitted photon is in every way identical to the stimu-
lating photon. Thus, the waves associated with the photons have the same
energy, phase, polarization, and direction of travel.

Process ‘After

None

 

These are three
ways that radiation

 

7 f :
ON ‘ ie (light) can interact
one i
—E — with matter. The
° ° third way is the
basis of lasing.
yy —*£, — Fk Wf
Nara aad
(Orn PaAAad
—F —F if
Radiation Matter Matter Radiation
