1290

CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

The @ particle is “trapped”

 
 
   
   

30
inside the nucleus but can
U() still tunnel through the
20 potential barrier to escape.

S

°

 
   

Energy (MeV)

40 60
Separation (fm)

 

Figure 42-10 A potential energy function for the emission of an alpha particle by 7U.

The horizontal black line marked Q = 4.25 MeV shows the disintegration energy for the
process. The thick gray portion of this line represents separations r that are classically for-
bidden to the alpha particle. The alpha particle is represented by a dot, both inside this
potential energy barrier (at the left) and outside it (at the right), after the particle has
tunneled through. The horizontal black line marked Q' = 6.81 MeV shows the disintegra-
tion energy for the alpha decay of ”*U. (Both isotopes have the same potential energy
function because they have the same nuclear charge.)

products is less than the mass energy of the original nuclide. As defined by
Eq. 37-50 (O = —AM c?), in such a process the difference between the initial
mass energy and the total final mass energy is called the Q of the process.

For a nuclear decay, we say that the difference in mass energy is the decay’s
disintegration energy Q. The Q for the decay in Eq. 42-22 is 4.25 MeV—that
amount of energy is said to be released by the alpha decay of *U, with the
energy transferred from mass energy to the kinetic energy of the two products.

The half-life of *U for this decay process is 4.5 X 10° y. Why so long? If8U can
decay in this way, why doesn’t every **U nuclide ina sample of **U atoms simply de-
cay at once? To answer the questions, we must examine the process of alpha decay.

‘We choose a model in which the alpha particle is imagined to exist (already
formed) inside the nucleus before it escapes from the nucleus. Figure 42-10 shows
the approximate potential energy U(r) of the system consisting of the alpha parti-
cle and the residual *Th nucleus, as a function of their separation r. This energy
is a combination of (1) the potential energy associated with the (attractive)
strong nuclear force that acts in the nuclear interior and (2) a Coulomb potential
associated with the (repulsive) electric force that acts between the two particles
before and after the decay has occurred.

The horizontal black line marked Q = 4.25 MeV shows the disintegration
energy for the process. If we assume that this represents the total energy of the
alpha particle during the decay process, then the part of the U(r) curve above this
line constitutes a potential energy barrier like that in Fig. 38-17. This barrier can-
not be surmounted. If the alpha particle were able to be at some separation r
within the barrier, its potential energy U would exceed its total energy E. This
would mean, classically, that its kinetic energy K (which equals E — U) would be
negative, an impossible situation.

Tunneling. We can see now why the alpha particle is not immediately emitted
from the **U nucleus. That nucleus is surrounded by an impressive potential bar-
rier, occupying —if you think of it in three dimensions—the volume lying between
two spherical shells (of radii about 8 and 60 fm). This argument is so convincing
that we now change our last question and ask: Since the particle seems perma-
