42-1 DISCOVERING THE NUCLEUS 1277

Figure 42-1. An arrangement (top view) used in Rutherford’s laboratory in 1911-1913 to
study the scattering of a particles by thin metal foils. The detector can be rotated to vari-
ous values of the scattering angle ¢. The alpha source was radon gas, a decay product of
radium. With this simple “tabletop” apparatus, the atomic nucleus was discovered.

 

In Rutherford’s day it was known that certain elements, called radioactive,
transform into other elements spontaneously, emitting particles in the process. One
such element is radon, which emits alpha (q) particles that have an energy of about
5.5 MeV. We now know that these particles are helium nuclei.

Rutherford’s idea was to direct energetic alpha particles at a thin target foil
and measure the extent to which they were deflected as they passed through the
foil. Alpha particles, which are about 7300 times more massive than electrons,
have acharge of +2e.

Figure 42-1 shows the experimental arrangement of Geiger and Marsden.
Their alpha source was a thin-walled glass tube of radon gas. The experiment
involves counting the number of alpha particles that are deflected through vari-
ous scattering angles ¢.

Figure 42-2 shows their results. Note especially that the vertical scale is log-
arithmic. We see that most of the particles are scattered through rather small
angles, but—and this was the big surprise—a very small fraction of them are
scattered through very large angles, approaching 180°. In Rutherford’s words: “It
was quite the most incredible event that ever happened to me in my life. It was
almost as incredible as if you had fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper
and it [the shell] came back and hit you.”

Why was Rutherford so surprised? At the time of these experiments, most
physicists believed in the so-called plum pudding model of the atom, which had
been advanced by J. J. Thomson. In this view the positive charge of the atom was
thought to be spread out through the entire volume of the atom. The electrons
(the “plums”) were thought to vibrate about fixed points within this sphere of
positive charge (the “pudding”).

The maximum deflecting force that could act on an alpha particle as it passed
through such a large positive sphere of charge would be far too small to deflect the
alpha particle by even as much as 1°. (The expected deflection has been compared
to what you would observe if you fired a bullet through a sack of snowballs.) The
electrons in the atom would also have very little effect on the massive, energetic
alpha particle. They would, in fact, be themselves strongly deflected, much as a
swarm of gnats would be brushed aside by a stone thrown through them.

Rutherford saw that, to deflect the alpha particle backward, there must be a
large force; this force could be provided if the positive charge, instead of being
spread throughout the atom, were concentrated tightly at its center. Then the
incoming alpha particle could get very close to the positive charge without pene-
trating it; such a close encounter would result in a large deflecting force.

Figure 42-3 shows possible paths taken by typical alpha particles as they pass
through the atoms of the target foil. As we see, most are either undeflected or only
slightly deflected, but a few (those whose incoming paths pass, by chance, very close
to a nucleus) are deflected through large angles. From an analysis of the data,
Rutherford concluded that the radius of the nucleus must be smaller than the radius
of an atom by a factor of about 10+. In other words, the atom is mostly empty space.

Figure 42-3 The angle through which an incident alpha particle is scattered depends on how
close the particle’s path lies to an atomic nucleus. Large deflections result only from very
close encounters.

    

Detector

107), Theory
10° Data

z
zg
g
z
2
g
g
5
a
&
3
S
a
3
g
g
Zz

0° 20° 40° 60° 80° 100°120°140°
Scattering angle @

Figure 42-2 The dots are alpha-particle
scattering data for a gold foil, obtained by
Geiger and Marsden using the apparatus of
Fig, 42-1. The solid curve is the theoretical
prediction, based on the assumption that the
atom has a small, massive, positively charged
nucleus. The data have been adjusted to fit the
theoretical curve at the experimental point
that is enclosed in a circle.

Incident @ particles

Target
foil

 

Atom
Nucleus
