1270 CHAPTER 41 CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

Sample Problem 41.07 Light-emitting diode (LED)

An LED is constructed from a p-n junction based on a cer- he _ (6.63 X 10-J-s)(3.00 x 108 m/s)
tain Ga-As-P semiconducting material whose energy gap is iad ~“G.9ev)\1.60 X10 ev)
1.9 eV. What is the wavelength of the emitted light? 2 me)
= 65 X 10-7 m = 650 nm. (Answer)

Calculation: For jumps from the bottom of the conduction
band to the top of the valence band, Eq. 41-11 tells us Light of this wavelength is red.

G

 

+o

€

Figure 41-19 A circuit containing a general-
ized field-effect transistor through which
electrons flow from the source terminal S
to the drain terminal D. (The conventional
current [psis in the opposite direction.)
The magnitude of [ps is controlled by the
electric field set up within the FET bya
potential applied to G, the gate terminal.

 

. pype
HiMeal  Beemiconductor

 

Insulator n-type

(SiO,) Bee conductor
Figure 41-20 A particular type of field-effect
transistor known as a MOSFET.The mag-
nitude of the drain-to-source conventional
current Ips through the n channel is con-
trolled by the potential difference Ves
applied between the source S and the gate
G.A depletion zone that exists between the
n-type material and the p-type substrate is
not shown.

 

 

 

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

The Transistor

A transistor is a three-terminal semiconducting device that can be used to amplify
input signals. Figure 41-19 shows a generalized field-effect transistor (FET); in it,
the flow of electrons from terminal S (the source) leftward through the shaded
region to terminal D (the drain) can be controlled by an electric field (hence
field effect) set up within the device by a suitable electric potential applied to
terminal G (the gate). Transistors are available in many types; we shall discuss
only a particular FET called a MOSFET, or metal-oxide-semiconductor-field-ef-
fect transistor. The MOSFET has been described as the workhorse of the mod-
ern electronics industry.

For many applications the MOSFET is operated in only two states: with
the drain-to-source current Ips ON (gate open) or with it OFF (gate closed). The
first of these can represent a 1 and the other a 0 in the binary arithmetic on which
digital logic is based, and therefore MOSFETs can be used in digital logic circuits.
Switching between the ON and OFF states can occur at high speed, so that binary
logic data can be moved through MOSFET-based circuits very rapidly. MOSFETs
about 500 nm in length—about the same as the wavelength of yellow light—are
routinely fabricated for use in electronic devices of all kinds.

Figure 41-20 shows the basic structure of a MOSFET. A single crystal of sili-
con or other semiconductor is lightly doped to form p-type material that serves as
the substrate. Embedded in this substrate, by heavily “overdoping” with n-type
dopants, are two “islands” of n-type material, forming the drain D and the source
S. The drain and source are connected by a thin channel of n-type material,
called the n channel. A thin insulating layer of silicon dioxide (hence the O in
MOSFET) is deposited on the crystal and penetrated by two metallic terminals
(hence the M) at D and S, so that electrical contact can be made with the drain
and the source. A thin metallic layer—the gate G—is deposited facing the n
channel. Note that the gate makes no electrical contact with the transistor proper,
being separated from it by the insulating oxide layer.

Consider first that the source and p-type substrate are grounded (at zero
potential) and the gate is “floating”; that is, the gate is not connected to an exter-
nal source of emf. Let a potential Vps be applied between the drain and the
source, such that the drain is positive. Electrons will then flow through the n
channel from source to drain, and the conventional current Ips, as shown in Fig.
41-20, will be from drain to source through the n channel.

Now let a potential Vgs be applied to the gate, making it negative with
respect to the source. The negative gate sets up within the device an electric field
(hence the “field effect”) that tends to repel electrons from the n channel down
into the substrate. This electron movement widens the (naturally occurring)
depletion zone between the n channel and the substrate, at the expense of the n
channel. The reduced width of the n channel, coupled with a reduction in the
number of charge carriers in that channel, increases the resistance of that channel
