Is Determination Irreversible?

Until very recently, biologists thought
determination was irreversible. Exper-

Mammary cell is extracted and
grown in nutrient-deficient media
<=, that arrests cell cycle

 

Nucleus containing
source DNA P

iments carried out in the 1950s and
1960s by John Gurdon and others
made what seemed a convincing case:
using very fine pipettes (hollow glass
tubes) to suck the nucleus out of a frog is
or toad egg, these researchers replaced
the egg nucleus with a nucleus sucked
out of a body cell taken from another
individual (see figure 14.3). If the
transplanted nucleus was obtained
from an advanced embryo, the egg
went on to develop into a tadpole, but
died before becoming an adult.

Nuclear transplant experiments
were attempted without success by
many investigators, until finally, in
1984, Steen Willadsen, a Danish em-
bryologist working in Texas, suc-
ceeded in cloning a sheep using the
nucleus from a cell of an early embryo.
The key to his success was in picking a
cell very early in development. This
exciting result was soon replicated by
others in a host of other organisms,
including pigs and monkeys.

Only early embryo cells seemed to
work, however. Researchers became
convinced, after many attempts to
transfer older nuclei, that animal cells
become irreversibly committed after
the first few cell divisions of the devel-
oping embryo.

We now know this conclusion to
have been unwarranted. The key ad-
vance unraveling this puzzle was made
in Scotland by geneticists Keith
Campbell and Ian Wilmut, who rea-
soned that perhaps the egg and the donated nucleus needed
to be at the same stage in the cell cycle. They removed
mammary cells from the udder of a six-year-old sheep. The
origin of these cells gave the clone its name, “Dolly,” after
the country singer Dolly Parton. The cells were grown in
tissue culture; then, in preparation for cloning, the re-
searchers substantially reduced for five days the concentra-
tion of serum nutrients on which the sheep mammary cells
were subsisting. Starving the cells caused them to pause at
the beginning of the cell cycle. In parallel preparation, eggs
obtained from a ewe were enucleated (figure 17.13).

Mammary cells and egg cells were then surgically com-
bined in January of 1996, inserting the mammary cells in-
side the covering around the egg cell. The researchers then
applied a brief electrical shock. This caused the plasma
membranes surrounding the two cells to become leaky, so

 

 

FIGURE 17.13

d
: ot Mammary cell

a7

    

Lis inserted inside
covering of
egg cell

A 8

Egg cell is extracted and
nucleus removed from egg
cell with a micropipette

   
 
    
 
   
 
  
   
  
  
 

Electric shock opens
cell membranes and
triggers cell division

Embryo begins to
develop in vitro

Blastula stage
embryo

Embryo is
implanted into
surrogate mother __

After a five-month pregnancy,
alamb genetically identical
to the sheep the mammary
cell was extracted from

is born

Proof that determination is reversible. This experiment by Campbell and Wilmut was
the first successful cloning of an adult animal.

that the nucleus of the mammary cell passed into the egg
cell—a neat trick. The shock also kick-started the cell
cycle, causing the cell to begin to divide.

After six days, in 30 of 277 tries, the dividing embryo
reached the hollow-ball “blastula” stage, and 29 of these
were transplanted into surrogate mother sheep. A little
over five months later, on July 5, 1996, one sheep gave
birth to a lamb, Dolly, the first clone generated from a
fully differentiated animal cell. Dolly established beyond
all dispute that determination is reversible, that with the
right techniques the fate of a fully differentiated cell can
be altered.

 

The commitment of particular cells to certain
developmental fates is fully reversible.

 

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 343
