1284 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

bound; that is, we would have to supply a great amount of energy per nucleon to
break apart one of those nuclei. The nuclei that are lower on the plot, at the left
and right sides, are less tightly bound, and less energy per nucleon would be
required to break them apart.

These simple statements about Fig. 42-7 have profound consequences. The
nucleons in a nucleus on the right side of the plot would be more tightly bound if
that nucleus were to split into two nuclei that lie near the top of the plot. Such a
process, called fission, occurs naturally with large (high mass number A) nuclei
such as uranium, which can undergo fission spontaneously (that is, without an
external cause or source of energy). The process can also occur in nuclear
weapons, in which many uranium or plutonium nuclei are made to fission all at
once, to create an explosion.

The nucleons in any pair of nuclei on the left side of the plot would be
more tightly bound if the pair were to combine to form a single nucleus that
lies near the top of the plot. Such a process, called fusion, occurs naturally in
stars. Were this not true, the Sun would not shine and thus life could not exist
on Earth. As we shall discuss in the next chapter, fusion is also the basis of
thermonuclear weapons (with an explosive release of energy) and anticipated
power plants (with a sustained and controlled release of energy).

Nuclear Energy Levels

The energy of nuclei, like that of atoms, is quantized.
That is, nuclei can exist only in discrete quantum
states, each with a well-defined energy. Figure 42-8
shows some of these energy levels for “Al, a typical
low-mass nuclide. Note that the energy scale is in mil-

3

2 lions of electron-volts, rather than the electron-volts
z used for atoms. When a nucleus makes a transition
é from one level to a level of lower energy, the emitted
& photon is typically in the gamma-ray region of the
a electromagnetic spectrum.

Nuclear Spin and Magnetism

Many nuclides have an intrinsic nuclear angular mo-
mentum, or spin, and an associated intrinsic nuclear
magnetic moment. Although nuclear angular mo-
menta are roughly of the same magnitude as the an-
Figure 42-8 Energy levelsfor gular momenta of atomic electrons, nuclear mag-
the nuclide *Al, deduced netic moments are much smaller than typical

from nuclearreaction atomic magnetic moments.
experiments.

 

0

28a]

The Nuclear Force

The force that controls the motions of atomic electrons is the familiar electro-
magnetic force. To bind the nucleus together, however, there must be a strong
attractive nuclear force of a totally different kind, strong enough to overcome the
repulsive force between the (positively charged) nuclear protons and to bind
both protons and neutrons into the tiny nuclear volume. The nuclear force must
also be of short range because its influence does not extend very far beyond the
nuclear “surface.”

The present view is that the nuclear force that binds neutrons and protons in
the nucleus is not a fundamental force of nature but is a secondary, or “spillover,”
effect of the strong force that binds quarks together to form neutrons and
protons. In much the same way, the attractive force between certain neutral
molecules is a spillover effect of the Coulomb electric force that acts within each
molecule to bind it together.
