1224

CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

where m is the mass of the particle, here an electron. The minus sign means that
the two vectors in Eq. 40-5 are in opposite directions, which is due to the fact that
an electron is negatively charged.

An electron in an atom also has an orbital magnetic dipole moment given by
Eq. 40-5, but 7,,, is quantized. We find allowed values of the magnitude by substi-
tuting from Eq. 40-2:

Mors = Gor VEE + Di (40-6)

As with the angular momentum, 7, can have a definite magnitude but does not
have a definite direction. The best we can do is to measure its component on a
z axis, and that component can have a definite value as given by

eh
Hor,z = Mea = Mee, (40-7)

where pp is the Bohr magneton:

= th 974 x 10-4 I/T Bohr magneton). (40-8)
4am 2m
If the electron has a definite value of jo,y,, it cannot have definite values of poryx

and Horby-

 

HB.

Spin Angular Momentum

Every electron, whether in an atom or free, has an intrinsic angular momentum
that has no classical counterpart (it is not of the form 7 X P).Itis called spin an-
gular momentum S (or simply spin), but the name is misleading because the elec-
tron is not spinning. Indeed there is nothing at all rotating in an electron, and yet
the electron has angular momentum. The magnitude of Sis quantized, with val-
ues restricted to

S=Vs(s+1)h, fors =3, (40-9)

where s is the spin quantum number. For every electron, s = 3 and the electron is
said to be a spin particle. (Protons and neutrons are also spin particles.) The
language here can be confusing, because both Sand s are often referred to as spin.

As with the angular momentum associated with motion, this intrinsic angular
momentum can have a definite magnitude but does not have a definite direction.
The best we can do is to measure its component on a Z axis, and that component
can have only the definite values given by

S,=mi, form, = +s = +5. (40-10)

Here m, is the spin magnetic quantum number, which can have only two values:
m, = +s = + (the electron is said to be spin up) and m, = —s = — (the elec-
tron is said to be spin down). Also, if S, has a definite value, then S, and S, do not.
Figure 40-6 is another figure that you should not take literally but it serves to
show the possible values of S...

The existence of electron spin was postulated on experimental evidence by
two Dutch graduate students, George Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit, from
their studies of atomic spectra. The theoretical basis for spin was provided a few
years later by British physicist P. A. M. Dirac, who developed a relativistic quan-
tum theory of the electron.

We have now seen the full set of quantum numbers for an electron, as
listed in Table 40-1. If an electron is free, it has only its intrinsic quantum num-
bers s and m,. If it is trapped in an atom, it has also has the quantum numbers
n,€,and me.
