1234 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

Of these three possible jumps, the one requiring the least
energy change AE is the last one. We could consider even
more possible jumps, but none would require less energy.
Thus, for the system to jump from its ground state to its first
excited state, the electron in the E,, level must jump to the
unoccupied, degenerate level of E;; and E;,, and the re-
quired energy is

Rh

aT

(Answer)

40-5 BuiLbine THE PERIODIC TABLE

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

40.28 Identify that all states in a subshell have the same en-
ergy that is determined primarily by quantum number n but
to alesser extent by quantum number €.

40.29 Identify the labeling system for the orbital angular mo-
mentum quantum number.

40.30 Identify the procedure for filling up the shells and sub-
shells in building up the periodic table for as long as the
electron-electron interaction can be neglected.

Key Ideas

@ In the periodic table, the elements are listed in order of in-
creasing atomic number Z, where Z is the number of protons
in the nucleus. For a neutral atom, Z is also the number of
electrons.

@ States with the same value of quantum number n form a
shell.

The energy E;, of the first excited state of the system is then

 

Ee = Ege + AE
re he I
= 32 Smi2 a 2 eae = 34 Balz (Answer)

‘We can represent this energy and the energy E,, for the
ground state of the system on an energy-level diagram for
the system, as shown in Fig. 40-12g.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

40.31 Distinguish the noble gases from the other elements in
terms of chemical interactions, net angular momentum,
and ionization energy.

40.32 For a transition between two given atomic energy lev-
els, for either emission or absorption of light, apply the
relationship between the energy difference and the fre-
quency and wavelength of the light.

@ States with the same values of quantum numbers n and €
form a subshell.

@ Aclosed shell and a closed subshell contain the maximum
number of electrons as allowed by the Pauli exclusion princi-
ple. The net angular momentum and net magnetic moment of
such closed structures are zero.

Building the Periodic Table

The four quantum numbers n, f, my, and m, identify the quantum states of indi-
vidual electrons in a multielectron atom. The wave functions for these states,
however, are not the same as the wave functions for the corresponding states of
the hydrogen atom because, in multielectron atoms, the potential energy associ-
ated with a given electron is determined not only by the charge and position of
the atom’s nucleus but also by the charges and positions of all the other electrons
in the atom. Solutions of Schrédinger’s equation for multielectron atoms can be
carried out numerically —in principle at least —using a computer.

Shells and Subshells

As we discussed in Module 40-1, all states with the same n form a shell, and all
states with the same value of n and € form a subshell. For a given f, there are 2€ + 1
possible values of quantum number m, and, for each m,, there are two possible val-
ues for the quantum number m, (spin up and spin down). Thus, there are 2(2¢ + 1)
