41-2 SEMICONDUCTORS AND DOPING

The resistivity of copper increases with temperature (that is, dp/dT > 0) because
collisions of copper’s charge carriers occur more frequently at higher tempera-
tures. Thus, a is positive for copper.

The collision frequency also increases with temperature for silicon. However,
the resistivity of silicon actually decreases with temperature (dp/dT <0) because
the number of charge carriers n (electrons in the conduction band and holes
in the valence band) increases so rapidly with temperature. (More electrons jump
the gap from the valence band to the conduction band.) Thus, the fractional
change a is negative for silicon.

Doped Semiconductors

The usefulness of semiconductors in technology can be greatly improved by
introducing a small number of suitable replacement atoms (called impurities)
into the semiconductor lattice—a process called doping. Typically, only about
1 silicon atom in 10’ is replaced by a dopant atom in the doped semiconductor.
Essentially all modern semiconducting devices are based on doped material.
Such materials are of two types, called n-type and p-type; we discuss each in turn.

n-Type Semiconductors
The electrons in an isolated silicon atom are arranged in subshells according to

the scheme
1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p?,

in which, as usual, the superscripts (which add to 14, the atomic number of sili-
con) represent the numbers of electrons in the specified subshells.

Figure 41-10a is a flattened-out representation of a portion of the lattice of
pure silicon in which the portion has been projected onto a plane; compare the
figure with Fig. 41-1), which represents the unit cell of the lattice in three
dimensions. Each silicon atom contributes its pair of 3s electrons and its pair of
3p electrons to form a rigid two-electron covalent bond with each of its four near-
est neighbors. (A covalent bond is a link between two atoms in which the atoms
share a pair of electrons.) The four atoms that lie within the unit cell in Fig. 41-1b
show these four bonds.

The electrons that form the silicon—silicon bonds constitute the valence band
of the silicon sample. If an electron is torn from one of these bonds so that it
becomes free to wander throughout the lattice, we say that the electron has been
raised from the valence band to the conduction band. The minimum energy
required to do this is the gap energy E,.

Because four of its electrons are involved in bonds, each silicon “atom” is
actually an ion consisting of an inert neon-like electron cloud (containing 10
electrons) surrounding a nucleus whose charge is +14e, where 14 is the atomic
number of silicon. The net charge of each of these ions is thus +4e, and the ions
are said to have a valence number of 4.

In Fig. 41-10b the central silicon ion has been replaced by an atom of phos-
phorus (valence = 5). Four of the valence electrons of the phosphorus form
bonds with the four surrounding silicon ions. The fifth (“extra”) electron is
only loosely bound to the phosphorus ion core. On an energy-band diagram,
we usually say that such an electron occupies a localized energy state that lies
within the energy gap, at an average energy interval E, below the bottom of
the conduction band; this is indicated in Fig. 41-11a. Because E, < E,, the en-
ergy required to excite electrons from these levels into the conduction band is
much less than that required to excite silicon valence electrons into the con-
duction band.

The phosphorus atom is called a donor atom because it readily donates an
electron to the conduction band. In fact, at room temperature virtually all the

1263

 

 

 

Figure 41-10 (a) A flattened-out representa-
tion of the lattice structure of pure silicon.
Each silicon ion is coupled to its four near-
est neighbors by a two-electron covalent
bond (represented by a pair of red dots
between two parallel black lines). The elec-
trons belong to the bond —not to the indi-
vidual atoms—and form the valence band
of the sample. (b) One silicon atom is re-
placed by a phosphorus atom (valence = 5).
The “extra” electron is only loosely bound
to its ion core and may easily be elevated to
the conduction band, where it is free to
wander through the volume of the lattice.
(c) One silicon atom is replaced by an alu-
minum atom (valence = 3).There is nowa
hole in one of the covalent bonds and thus
in the valence band of the sample.The hole
can easily migrate through the lattice as
electrons from neighboring bonds move in
to fill it. Here the hole migrates rightward.
