1254 CHAPTER 41

Figure 41-2 (a) Two copper atoms separated
by a large distance; their electron distributions
are represented by dot plots. (b) Each copper
atom has 29 electrons distributed among a set
of subshells. In the neutral atom in its ground
state, all subshells up through the 3d level are
filled, the 4s subshell contains one electron (it
can hold two), and higher subshells are empty.
For simplicity, the subshells are shown as be-
ing evenly spaced in energy.

Figure 41-3 The band-gap pattern of
energy levels for an idealized crystalline
solid. As the magnified view suggests,each
band consists of a very large number of
very closely spaced energy levels. (In many
solids, adjacent bands may overlap; for
clarity, we have not shown this condition.)

In an insulator,
electrons need
a big energy
jump.

 

Figure 41-4 The
band-gap pattern for
an insulator; filled
levels are shown in
red and empty levels
in blue.

IT

Insulator

CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS ———

~tesccccces 3,
—seeese 3,

——_*+2_—__ 3;

Energy

   

—seseee 94
*Electron
——_*+2_—__ »

(a) (0)

Energy Levels in a Crystalline Solid

The distance between adjacent copper atoms in solid copper is 260 pm. Figure
41-2a shows two isolated copper atoms separated by a distance r that is much
greater than that. As Fig. 41-2b shows, each of these isolated neutral atoms stacks
up its 29 electrons in an array of discrete subshells as follows:

1s? 2s? 2p® 3s? 3p% 3d'° 4st.

Here we use the shorthand notation of Module 40-5 to identify the subshells.
Recall, for example, that the subshell with principal quantum number n =3
and orbital quantum number ¢ = | is called the 3p subshell; it can hold up to
2(2€ + 1) = 6 electrons; the number it actually contains is indicated by a nu-
merical superscript. We see above that the first six subshells in copper are filled,
but the (outermost) 4s subshell, which can hold two electrons, holds only one.

If we bring the atoms of Fig. 41-2a closer, their wave functions begin to over-
lap, starting with those of the outer electrons. We then have a single two-atom
system with 58 electrons, not two independent atoms. The Pauli exclusion princi-
ple requires that each of these electrons occupy a different quantum state. In fact,
58 quantum states are available because each energy level of the isolated atom
splits into two levels for the two-atom system.

If we bring up more atoms, we gradually assemble a lattice of solid copper.
For N atoms, each level of an isolated copper atom must split into N levels in the
solid. Thus, the individual energy levels of the solid form energy bands, adjacent
bands being separated by an energy gap, with the gap representing a range of en-
ergies that no electron can possess. A typical band ranges over only a few elec-
tron-volts. Since N may be of the order of 10, the individual levels within a band
are very close together indeed, and there are a vast number of levels.

Figure 41-3 suggests the band-gap structure of the energy levels in a gener-
alized crystalline solid. Note that bands of lower energy are narrower than those
of higher energy. This occurs because electrons that occupy the lower energy
bands spend most of their time deep within the atom’s electron cloud. The wave
functions of these core electrons do not overlap as much as the wave functions of
the outer electrons do. Hence the splitting of the lower energy levels (core elec-
trons) is less than that of the higher energy levels (outer electrons).

Insulators

A solid is said to be an electrical insulator if no current exists within it when we
apply a potential difference across it. For a current to exist, the kinetic energy of
the average electron must increase. In other words, some electrons in the solid
must move to a higher energy level. However, as Fig. 41-4 shows, in an insulator
the highest band containing any electrons is fully occupied. Because the Pauli
exclusion principle keeps electrons from moving to occupied levels, no electrons in
the solid are allowed to move. Thus, the electrons in the filled band of an insulator
have no place to go; they are in gridlock, like a child ona ladder filled with children.
