1310

CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

Table 43-1 Energy Released by 1 kg of Matter

 

Form of Matter Process Time"
Water A50 m waterfall Ss
Coal Burning 8h
Enriched UO, Fission in a reactor 690 y
235 Complete fission 3x 10ty
Hot deuterium gas Complete fusion 3x 10ty
Matter and antimatter Complete annihilation 3x 10'y

“This column shows the time interval for which the generated energy could power a 100 W lightbulb.

In both atomic and nuclear burning, the release of energy is accompanied by
a decrease in mass, according to the equation Q = —Am c*. The central differ-
ence between burning uranium and burning coal is that, in the former case, a much
larger fraction of the available mass (again, by a factor of a few million) is con-
sumed.

The different processes that can be used for atomic or nuclear burning pro-
vide different levels of power, or rates at which the energy is delivered. In the
nuclear case, we can burn a kilogram of uranium explosively in a bomb or slowly
in a power reactor. In the atomic case, we might consider exploding a stick of
dynamite or digesting a jelly doughnut.

Table 43-1 shows how much energy can be extracted from 1 kg of matter by
doing various things to it. Instead of reporting the energy directly, the table shows
how long the extracted energy could operate a 100 W lightbulb. Only processes
in the first three rows of the table have actually been carried out; the remaining
three represent theoretical limits that may not be attainable in practice. The
bottom row, the total mutual annihilation of matter and antimatter, is an ultimate
energy production goal. In that process, all the mass energy is transferred to other
forms of energy.

The comparisons of Table 43-1 are computed on a per-unit-mass basis. Kilo-
gram for kilogram, you get several million times more energy from uranium than
you do from coal or from falling water. On the other hand, there is a lot of coal
in Earth’s crust, and water is easily backed up behind a dam.

Nuclear Fission: The Basic Process

In 1932 English physicist James Chadwick discovered the neutron. A few years
later Enrico Fermi in Rome found that when various elements are bombarded
by neutrons, new radioactive elements are produced. Fermi had predicted that
the neutron, being uncharged, would be a useful nuclear projectile; unlike the
proton or the alpha particle, it experiences no repulsive Coulomb force when it
nears a nuclear surface. Even thermal neutrons, which are slowly moving neu-
trons in thermal equilibrium with the surrounding matter at room temperature,
with a kinetic energy of only about 0.04 eV, are useful projectiles in nuclear
studies.

In the late 1930s physicist Lise Meitner and chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz
Strassmann, working in Berlin and following up on the work of Fermi and his
co-workers, bombarded solutions of uranium salts with such thermal neutrons.
They found that after the bombardment a number of new radionuclides were
present. In 1939 one of the radionuclides produced in this way was positively
identified, by repeated tests, as barium. But how, Hahn and Strassmann won-
dered, could this middle-mass element (Z = 56) be produced by bombarding
uranium (Z = 92) with neutrons?
