1274 CHAPTER 41

28 @ What is the Fermi energy of gold (a monovalent metal
with molar mass 197 g/mol and density 19.3 g/em’)?

*°29 Use the result of Problem 23 to calculate the total transla-
tional kinetic energy of the conduction electrons in 1.00 cm? of
copper at T= 0K.

30 @ A certain metal has 1.70 X 10” conduction electrons per
cubic meter. A sample of that metal has a volume of 6.00 x 10~°
m? and a temperature of 200 K. How many occupied states are in
the energy range of 3.20 X 10° J that is centered on the energy
4.00 x 10° J? (Caution: Avoid round-off in the exponential.)

Module 41-2 Semiconductors and Doping

°31 ssM (a) What maximum light wavelength will excite an elec-
tron in the valence band of diamond to the conduction band? The
energy gap is 5.50 eV. (b) In what part of the electromagnetic spec-
trum does this wavelength lie?

32 The compound gallium arsenide is a commonly used semi-
conductor, having an energy gap E, of 1.43 eV. Its crystal structure
is like that of silicon, except that half the silicon atoms are replaced
by gallium atoms and half by arsenic atoms. Draw a flattened-out
sketch of the gallium arsenide lattice, following the pattern of Fig.
41-10a. What is the net charge of the (a) gallium and (b) arsenic ion
core? (c) How many electrons per bond are there? (Hint: Consult
the periodic table in Appendix G.)

33. The occupancy probability function (Eq. 41-6) can be
applied to semiconductors as well as to metals. In semiconductors
the Fermi energy is close to the midpoint of the gap between the
valence band and the conduction band. For germanium, the gap
width is 0.67 eV. What is the probability that (a) a state at the
bottom of the conduction band is occupied and (b) a state at the
top of the valence band is not occupied? Assume that T= 290 K.
(Note: In a pure semiconductor, the Fermi energy lies symmetri-
cally between the population of conduction electrons and the pop-
ulation of holes and thus is at the center of the gap. There need not
be an available state at the location of the Fermi energy.)

+34 In a simplified model of an undoped semiconductor, the ac-
tual distribution of energy states may be replaced by one in which
there are N, states in the valence band, all these states having the
same energy E,, and N, states in the conduction band, all these
states having the same energy E,. The number of electrons in the
conduction band equals the number of holes in the valence band.
(a) Show that this last condition implies that

N,

exp(AE./kT) +1 exp(AE,/kT) + 1°

 

in which

AE, =E.- Ey and AE, = —(E, — Ex).

(b) If the Fermi level is in the gap between the two bands and its dis-
tance from each band is large relative to kT, then the exponentials
dominate in the denominators. Under these conditions, show that

pesca BE), EPn(IN)

and that, if N, ~ N,, the Fermi level for the undoped semiconduc-
tor is close to the gap’s center.

°°35 SSM WWW What mass of phosphorus is needed to dope 1.0
g of silicon so that the number density of conduction electrons in
the silicon is increased by a multiply factor of 10° from the 10! m~
in pure silicon.

CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

“36 ® A silicon sample is doped with atoms having donor states
0.110 eV below the bottom of the conduction band. (The energy
gap in silicon is 1.11 eV.) If each of these donor states is occupied
with a probability of 5.00 x 10-5 at T = 300 K, (a) is the Fermi
level above or below the top of the silicon valence band and (b)
how far above or below? (c) What then is the probability that a
state at the bottom of the silicon conduction band is occupied?

37 © Doping changes the Fermi
energy of a semiconductor. Consider
silicon, with a gap of 1.11eV be-
tween the top of the valence band
and the bottom of the conduction
band. At 300 K the Fermi level of
the pure material is nearly at the
mid-point of the gap. Suppose that
silicon is doped with donor atoms,
each of which has a state 0.15 eV be-
low the bottom of the silicon con-
duction band, and suppose further
that doping raises the Fermi level to 0.11 eV below the bottom of
that band (Fig. 41-22). For (a) pure and (b) doped silicon, calculate
the probability that a state at the bottom of the silicon conduction
band is occupied. (c) Calculate the probability that a state in the
doped material (at the donor level) is occupied.

 

 

 

t Fermi X Donor

1lleV level level

Figure 41-22 Problem 37.

38 Pure silicon at room temperature has an electron number den-
sity in the conduction band of about 5 x 10! m-? and an equal den-
sity of holes in the valence band. Suppose that one of every 10’ silicon
atoms is replaced by a phosphorus atom. (a) Which type will the
doped semiconductor be, n or p? (b) What charge carrier number
density will the phosphorus add? (c) What is the ratio of the charge
carrier number density (electrons in the conduction band and holes
in the valence band) in the doped silicon to that in pure silicon?

Module 41-3 The p-n Junction and the Transistor

*39 ssM When a photon enters the depletion zone of a p-n junc-
tion, the photon can scatter from the valence electrons there, trans-
ferring part of its energy to each electron, which then jumps to the
conduction band. Thus, the photon creates electron-hole pairs.
For this reason, the junctions are often used as light detectors, es-
pecially in the x-ray and gamma-ray regions of the electromag-
netic spectrum. Suppose a single 662 keV gamma-ray photon
transfers its energy to electrons in multiple scattering events in-
side a semiconductor with an energy gap of 1.1 eV, until all the
energy is transferred. Assuming that each electron jumps the gap
from the top of the valence band to the bottom of the conduction
band, find the number of electron-hole pairs created by the
process,

40 Foran ideal p-n junction rectifier with a sharp boundary be-
tween its two semiconducting sides, the current J is related to the
potential difference V across the rectifier by

T= 1(e"4? = 1),

where Jy, which depends on the materials but not on J or V, is
called the reverse saturation current. The potential difference V is
positive if the rectifier is forward-biased and negative if it is back-
biased. (a) Verify that this expression predicts the behavior of a
junction rectifier by graphing / versus V from —0.12 V to +0.12 V.
Take T= 300K and J) = 5.0 nA. (b) For the same temperature,
calculate the ratio of the current for a 0.50 V forward bias to the
current for a 0.50 V back bias.
