embryos will develop normally. If it is injected into the op-
posite (posterior) end of normal embryos, a head and tho-
rax will develop at that end.

Bicoid protein exerts this profound effect on the organi-
zation of the embryo by activating genes that encode the
first mRNAs to be transcribed after fertilization. Within
the first two hours, before cellularization of the syncytial
blastoderm, a group of six genes called the gap genes be-
gins to be transcribed. These genes map out the coarsest
subdivision of the embryo (figure 17.14). One of them is a
gene called hunchback (because an embryo without bunch-
back lacks a thorax and so, takes on a hunched shape). Al-
though hunchback mRNA is distributed throughout the em-
bryo, its translation is controlled by the protein product of
another maternal mRNA called manos (named after the
Greek word for “dwarf,” as mutants without manos genes
lack abdominal segments and hence, are small). The nanos
protein binds to hunchback mRNA, preventing it from
being translated. The only place in the embryo where there
is too little nanos protein to block translation of hunchback
mRNA is the far anterior end. Consequently, hunchback
protein is made primarily at the anterior end of the em-
bryo. As it diffuses back toward the posterior end, it sets up
a second morphogen gradient responsible for establishing
the thoracic and abdominal segments.

FIGURE 17.15

A gene controlling organ
formation in Drosophila.
Called tinman, this gene is
responsible for the formation
of gut musculature and the
heart. The dye shows
expression of the tinman in
five-hour (a) and seventeen-
hour (#) Drosophila embryos.
‘The gut musculature then
appears along the edges of
normal embryos (c) but is not
present in embryos in which
the gene has been mutated (d).
The heart tissue develops
along the center of normal
embryos () but is missing in
tinman mutant embryos (f).

Other gap genes act in more posterior regions of the
embryo. They, in turn, activate 11 or more pair-rule
genes. (When mutated, each of these genes alters every
other body segment.) One of the pair-rule genes, named
hairy, produces seven bands of protein, which look like
stripes when visualized with fluorescent markers. These
bands establish boundaries that divide the embryo into
seven zones. Finally, a group of 16 or more segment po-
larity genes subdivide these zones. The engrailed gene, for
example, divides each of the seven zones established by
hairy into anterior and posterior compartments. The 14
compartments that result correspond to the three head seg-
ments, three thoracic segments, and eight abdominal seg-
ments of the embryo.

Thus, within three hours after fertilization, a highly or-
chestrated cascade of segmentation gene activity produces
the fly embryo’s basic body plan. The activation of these
and other developmentally important genes (figure 17.15)
depends upon the free diffusion of morphogens that is pos-
sible within a syncytial blastoderm. In mammalian embryos
with cell partitions, other mechanisms must operate.

 

In Drosophila diffusion of chemical inducers produces
the embryo’s basic body plan, a cascade of genes
dividing it into 14 compartments.

 

 

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 345
