To find d, we conserve the total mechanical energy between
the initial state i and this later state f, writing

Kj, + Uj; = Ky + U;
1 4a
d GRO 0 eee
a é 4m d
(We are assuming that the alpha particle is not affected by
the force holding the nucleus together, which acts over only

a short distance.) Solving for d and then substituting for the
charges and initial kinetic energy lead to

42-2 SOME NUCLEAR PROPERTIES

Learning Objectives

42-2 SOME NUCLEAR PROPERTIES 1279
je (2e)(79e)
Ame ok,
_ (2  79)(1.60 x 10719 CP
~ “Gir, (5.30MeV)(1.60 X 10-2 J/MeV)
= 4.29 x 10-4 m. (Answer)

This distance is considerably larger than the sum of the radii
of the gold nucleus and the alpha particle. Thus, this alpha
particle reverses its motion (Fig. 42-4d) without ever actu-
ally “touching” the gold nucleus.

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.03 Identify nuclides, atomic number (or proton number),
neutron number, mass number, nucleon, isotope, disinte-
gration, neutron excess, isobar, zone of stable nuclei, and
island of stability, and explain the symbols used for nuclei
(such as '97Au).

42.04 Sketch a graph of proton number versus neutron
number and identify the approximate location of the
stable nuclei, the proton-rich nuclei, and the neutron-rich
nuclei.

42.05 For spherical nuclei, apply the relationship between
radius and mass number and calculate the nuclear density.

42.06 Work with masses in atomic mass units, relate the

mass number and the approximate nuclear mass, and
convert between mass units and energy.

42.07 Calculate mass excess.

42.08 For a given nucleus, calculate the binding energy AF...
and the binding energy per nucleon AE}.,, and explain the
meaning of each term.

42.09 Sketch a graph of the binding energy per nucleon ver-
sus mass number, indicating the nuclei that are the most
tightly bound, those that can undergo fission with a release
of energy, and those that can undergo fusion with a re-
lease of energy.

42.10 Identify the force that holds nucleons together.

 

Key Ideas

© Different types of nuclei are called nuclides. Each is charac-
terized by an atomic number Z (the number of protons), a
neutron number N, and amass number A (the total number
of nucleons—protons and neutrons). Thus, A = Z + N.A
nuclide is represented with a symbol such as '°7Au or 19 Au,
where the chemical symbol carries a superscript with the
value of A and (possibly) a subscript with the value of Z.

@ Nuclides with the same atomic number but different neu-
tron numbers are isotopes of one another.

@ Nuclei have a mean radius r given by

r= HAls

where ry ~ 1.2 fm.

@ Atomic masses are often reported in terms of mass excess
A=M-—A,

where M is the actual mass of an atom in atomic mass units

and A is the mass number for that atom's nucleus.

@ The binding energy of a nucleus is the difference
AE, = (me?) — Mc’,

where >(mc?) is the total mass energy of the individual protons
and neutrons. The binding energy of a nucleus is the amount
of energy needed to break the nucleus into its constituent
parts (and is not an energy that resides in the nucleus).

@ The binding energy per nucleon is

AEy.

7"

@ The energy equivalent of one mass unit (u) is 931.494 013 MeV.

AE yea =

@ A plot of the binding energy per nucleon AEF,,., versus mass
number A shows that middle-mass nuclides are the most
stable and that energy can be released both by fission of
high-mass nuclei and by fusion of low-mass nuclei.
