40-1 PROPERTIES OF ATOMS

Figure 40-3 A classical model showing a particle of mass m
and charge —e moving with speed v ina circle of radius r.
The moving particle has an angular momentum F given

by F X p, where p is its linear momentum mV..The parti-
cle’s motion is equivalent to a current loop that has an asso-
ciated magnetic moment ZZ that is directed opposite L.

 

of the ionization energy of the elements; the energy required to remove the most
loosely bound electron from a neutral atom is plotted as a function of the
position in the periodic table of the element to which the atom belongs. The
remarkable similarities in the chemical and physical properties of the elements in
each vertical column of the periodic table are evidence enough that the atoms are
constructed according to systematic rules.

The elements are arranged in the periodic table in six complete horizontal
periods (and a seventh incomplete period): except for the first, each period starts
at the left with a highly reactive alkali metal (lithium, sodium, potassium, and so
on) and ends at the right with a chemically inert noble gas (neon, argon, krypton,
and so on). Quantum physics accounts for the chemical properties of these
elements. The numbers of elements in the six periods are

2,8, 8, 18, 18, and 32.

Quantum physics predicts these numbers.

Atoms Emit and Absorb Light

We have already seen that atoms can exist only in discrete quantum states, each
state having a certain energy. An atom can make a transition from one state to
another by emitting light (to jump to a lower energy level Ej,y) or by absorbing
light (to jump to a higher energy level Eyig,). As we first discussed in Module 39-1,
the light is emitted or absorbed as a photon with energy

Af = Exigh — Etow- (40-1)

Thus, the problem of finding the frequencies of light emitted or absorbed by an
atom reduces to the problem of finding the energies of the quantum states of that
atom. Quantum physics allows us—in principle at least—to calculate these energies.

Atoms Have Angular Momentum and Magnetism

Figure 40-3 shows a negatively charged particle moving in a circular orbit around
a fixed center. As we discussed in Module 32-5, the orbiting particle has both an
angular momentum L and (because its path is equivalent to a tiny current loop) a
magnetic dipole moment 7. As Fig. 40-3 shows, vectors Land Z are both perpen-
dicular to the plane of the orbit but, because the charge is negative, they point in
opposite directions.

The model of Fig. 40-3 is strictly classical and does not accurately represent an
electron in an atom. In quantum physics, the rigid orbit model has been replaced
by the probability density model, best visualized as a dot plot. In quantum physics,
however, it is still true that in general, each quantum state of an electron in an
atom involves an angular momentum Landa magnetic dipole moment # that
have opposite directions (those vector quantities are said to be coupled ).

1221
