The Fruit Fly

The tiny fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster has been a favorite
of geneticists for over 90 years and is now playing a key
role in our growing understanding of the cellular mecha-
nisms of development. Over the last 10 years, researchers
have pieced together a fairly complete picture of how genes
expressed early in fruit fly development determine the pat-
tern of the adult body (figure 17.23). The major parts of
the adult body are determined as patches of tissue called
imaginal discs that float within the body of the larva; dur-
ing the pupal stage, these discs grow, develop, and associate
to form the adult body.

The adult Drosophila body is divided into 17 segments,
some bearing jointed appendages such as wings or legs.
These segments are established during very early develop-
ment, before the many nuclei of the blastoderm are fully
separated from one another. Chemical gradients, estab-
lished within the egg by material from the mother, create a
polarity that directs embryonic development. Reacting to
this gradient, a series of segmentation genes progressively
subdivide the embryo, first into four broad stripes, and
then into 7, 14, and finally 17 segments.

Within each segment, the development of key body
parts is under the control of homeotic genes that determine
where the body part will form. As we have seen, there are
two clusters of homeotic genes, one called Antennapedia
that governs the front (anterior) end of the body, and an-
other called bithorax that governs the rear (posterior) end.
The organization of genes within each cluster corresponds
nicely with the order of the segments they affect. A very
similar set of homeotic genes governs body architecture in
mice and humans.

 

Aseries of segmentation genes divides a Drosophila
embryo into parts; Antennapedia genes control anterior
development, and bithorax genes control the
development of the posterior.

 

FIGURE 17.23
Studying development in the fruit fly.

Drosophila egg

bicoid

Krippel knirps

 

engrailed
