Table 3.1 Macromolecules

Macromolecule Subunit Function Example
PROTEINS
Globular Penimoerice PMiecinereineres Hemoglobin
Structural Amino acids Catalysis; transport Hair; silk
NUCLEIC ACIDS Support
DNA Nucleotides Encodes genes Chromosomes
RNA Nucleotides Needed for gene expression Messenger RNA
LIPIDS
Fats (Glyerrallantl ireet airy Energy storage Breenfenetciieean
Pteenhelinies Clee aes Cell membranes Tenn
Rhee ent Seen Te rocpe
Prostaglandins Five-carbon rings with two Chemical messengers Prostaglandin E (PGE)
nonpolar tails
Steoies Freee eee nentenes Membranes; hormones noleseroheereeen
Terpenes Long carbon chains Pigments; structural Carotene; rubber
CARBOHYDRATES
Starch, glycogen Glucose Energy storage Potatoes
ennies cee Cell walls Papsparinasalfedtaay
Chitin Structural support Crab shells
Building Macromolecules FIGURE 3.3 -
Making and breaking
Although the four categories of macromolecules contain dif- macromolecules.
ferent kinds of subunits, they are all assembled in the same (a) Biological HO (OHO># Ho) H
macromolecules are

fundamental way: to form a covalent bond between two sub-
unit molecules, an —OH group is removed from one sub-
unit and a hydrogen atom (H) is removed from the other
(figure 3.32). This condensation reaction is called a dehy-
dration synthesis, because the removal of the —OH group
and H during the synthesis of a new molecule in effect con-
stitutes the removal of a molecule of water (HO). For every
subunit that is added to a macromolecule, one water mole-
cule is removed. Energy is required to break the chemical
bonds when water is extracted from the subunits, so cells
must supply energy to assemble macromolecules. These and
other biochemical reactions require that the reacting sub-
stances be held close together and that the correct chemical
bonds be stressed and broken. This process of positioning
and stressing, termed catalysis, is carried out in cells by a
special class of proteins known as enzymes.

Cells disassemble macromolecules into their constituent
subunits by performing reactions that are essentially the re-
verse of dehydration—a molecule of water is added instead
of removed (figure 3.3). In this process, which is called
hydrolysis (Greek hydro, “water” + lyse, “break”), a hydro-
gen atom is attached to one subunit and a hydroxyl group
to the other, breaking a specific covalent bond in the
macromolecule. Hydrolytic reactions release the energy
that was stored in the bonds that were broken.

polymers formed by
linking subunits
together. The
covalent bond
between the subunits

Energy

Dehydration synthesis

is formed by

dehydration synthesis, )

process that creates a L

water molecule for wo OHO

every bond formed. (6)
Breaking the bond

between subunits bk Energy
the retu

requires the returning |, HHO: 4

of a water molecule

with a subsequent Hydrolysis

release of energy, a

process called (b)
hydrolysis.

 

Polymers are large molecules consisting of long chains
of similar subunits joined by dehydration reactions. In a
dehydration reaction, a hydroxyl (OH) group is
removed from one subunit and a hydrogen atom (H) is
removed from the other.

 

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 37
