40-6 X RAYS AND THE ORDERING OF THE ELEMENTS

X Rays and the Ordering of the Elements

‘When a solid target, such as solid copper or tungsten, is bombarded with electrons
whose kinetic energies are in the kiloelectron-volt range, electromagnetic radia-
tion called x rays is emitted. Our concern here is what these rays can teach us
about the atoms that absorb or emit them. Figure 40-13 shows the wavelength
spectrum of the x rays produced when a beam of 35 keV electrons falls on a
molybdenum target. We see a broad, continuous spectrum of radiation on which
are superimposed two peaks of sharply defined wavelengths. The continuous spec-
trum and the peaks arise in different ways, which we next discuss separately.

The Continuous X-Ray Spectrum

Here we examine the continuous x-ray spectrum of Fig. 40-13, ignoring for the
time being the two prominent peaks that rise from it. Consider an electron of
initial kinetic energy K, that collides (interacts) with one of the target atoms, as in
Fig. 40-14. The electron may lose an amount of energy AK, which will appear as
the energy of an x-ray photon that is radiated away from the site of the collision.
(Very little energy is transferred to the recoiling atom because of the relatively
large mass of the atom; here we neglect that transfer.)

The scattered electron in Fig. 40-14, whose energy is now less than Ko, may
have a second collision with a target atom, generating a second photon, with a
different photon energy. This electron-scattering process can continue until the
electron is approximately stationary. All the photons generated by these colli-
sions form part of the continuous x-ray spectrum.

A prominent feature of that spectrum in Fig. 40-13 is the sharply defined
cutoff wavelength A,,,,, below which the continuous spectrum does not exist. This
minimum wavelength corresponds to a collision in which an incident electron
loses all its initial kinetic energy Ko in a single head-on collision with a target
atom. Essentially all this energy appears as the energy of a single photon, whose
associated wavelength—the minimum possible x-ray wavelength —is found from

 

he
Ky =hf=
0 if Amin >
IC
e Amin = e~ (cutoff wavelength). (40-23)

0

The cutoff wavelength is totally independent of the target material. If we were to
switch from a molybdenum target to a copper target, for example, all features of
the x-ray spectrum of Fig. 40-13 would change except the cutoff wavelength.

Vv] Checkpoint 2

Does the cutoff wavelength Ain of the continuous x-ray spectrum increase, decrease, or
remain the same if you (a) increase the kinetic energy of the electrons that strike the x-ray
target, (b) allow the electrons to strike a thin foil rather thana thick block of the target
material, (c) change the target to an element of higher atomic number?

The Characteristic X-Ray Spectrum

We now turn our attention to the two peaks of Fig. 40-13, labeled K, and Ky.
These (and other peaks that appear at wavelengths beyond the range displayed
in Fig. 40-13) form the characteristic x-ray spectrum of the target material.

The peaks arise in a two-part process. (1) An energetic electron strikes an
atom in the target and, while it is being scattered, the incident electron knocks
out one of the atom’s deep-lying (low n value) electrons. If the deep-lying elec-

1237

  
    

  

Continuous
spectrum Ky

Relative intensity

30 40 50 6 70 680 «90
Wavelength (pm)

Figure 40-13 The distribution by wavelength of
the x rays produced when 35 keV electrons
strike a molybdenum target. The sharp peaks
and the continuous spectrum from which they
rise are produced by different mechanisms.

 

Ko
Incident
electron

if (= AK)
Xray
photon

Figure 40-14 An electron of kinetic energy Ky
passing near an atom in the target may gener-
ate an x-ray photon, the electron losing part

of its energy in the process. The continuous
x-ray spectrum arises in this way.
