1272 CHAPTER 41

The p-n Junction A p-n junction is a single semiconducting crys-
tal with one end doped to form p-type material and the other end
doped to form n-type material, the two types meeting at a junction
plane. At thermal equilibrium, the following occurs at that plane:

The majority carriers (electrons on then side and holes on the p side)
diffuse across the junction plane, producing a diffusion current
Taig

The minority carriers (holes on the n side and electrons on the p
side) are swept across the junction plane, forming a drift cur-
rent J,,i,. These two currents are equal in magnitude, making
the net current zero.

A depletion zone, consisting largely of charged donor and acceptor
ions, forms across the junction plane.

<Questions

1 On which of the following does the interval between adjacent
energy levels in the highest occupied band of a metal depend: (a)
the material of which the sample is made, (b) the size of the sam-
ple, (c) the position of the level in the band, (d) the temperature of
the sample, (e) the Fermi energy of the metal?

2 Figure 41-1a shows 14 atoms that represent the unit cell of copper.
However, because each of these atoms is shared with one or more ad-
joining unit cells, only a fraction of each atom belongs to the unit cell
shown. What is the number of atoms per unit cell for copper? (To an-
swer, count up the fractional atoms belonging to a single unit cell.)

3 Figure 41-1b shows 18 atoms that represent the unit cell of sili-
con. Fourteen of these atoms, however, are shared with one or
more adjoining unit cells. What is the number of atoms per unit cell
for silicon? (See Question 2.)

4 Figure 41-21 shows three la-
beled levels in a band and also the
Fermi level for the material. The
temperature is 0 K. Rank the three
levels according to the probability
of occupation, greatest first if the temperature is (a) 0 K and (b)
1000 K. (c) At the latter temperature, rank the levels according to
the density of states N(E) there, greatest first.

 

Figure 41-21 Question 4.

5 The occupancy probability at a certain energy E, in the valence
band of a metal is 0.60 when the temperature is 300 K. Is E; above
or below the Fermi energy?

6 An isolated atom of germanium has 32 electrons, arranged in
subshells according to this scheme:

Is? 2s? 2p% 35? 3p 3d! 4s? 4p.

<Problems
So

SSM_ Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
‘+ — see Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

A contact potential difference V) develops across the depletion zone.

Applications of the p-n Junction When a potential difference is
applied across a p-n junction, the device conducts electricity more
readily for one polarity of the applied potential difference than for the
other. Thus, a p-n junction can serve as a junction rectifier.

When a p-n junction is forward biased, it can emit light, hence can
serve as a light-emitting diode (LED). The wavelength of the emitted

light is given by
os
fo E,

A strongly forward-biased p-n junction with parallel end faces can op-
erate as a junction laser, emitting light of a sharply defined wavelength.

a

(41-11)

This element has the same crystal structure as silicon and, like sili-
con, is a semiconductor. Which of these electrons form the valence.
band of crystalline germanium?

7 If the temperature of a piece of a metal is increased, does the
probability of occupancy 0.1 eV above the Fermi level increase, de-
crease, or remain the same?

8 In the biased p-n junctions shown in Fig. 41-15, there is an elec-
tric field E in each of the two depletion zones, associated with the
potential difference that exists across that zone. (a) Is the electric
field vector directed from left to right in the figure or from right to
left? (b) Is the magnitude of the field greater for forward bias or for
back bias?

9 Consider a copper wire that is carrying, say, a few amperes of
current. Is the drift speed v, of the conduction electrons that form
that current about equal to, much greater than, or much less than
the Fermi speed v; for copper (the speed associated with the Fermi
energy for copper)?

10 In asilicon lattice, where should you look if you want to find
(a) a conduction electron, (b) a valence electron, and (c) an elec-
tron associated with the 2p subshell of the isolated silicon atom?

11 The energy gaps E, for the semiconductors silicon and
germanium are, respectively, 1.12 and 0.67eV. Which of the
following statements, if any, are true? (a) Both substances have
the same number density of charge carriers at room temperature.
(b) At room temperature, germanium has a greater number den-
sity of charge carriers than silicon. (c) Both substances have a
greater number density of conduction electrons than holes.
(d) For each substance, the number density of electrons equals
that of holes.

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
WWW Worked-out solution is at

ILW Interactive solution is at

RE Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 41-1 The Electrical Properties of Metals
*1 Show that Eq. 41-9 can be written as Ey = An?3, where the
constant A has the value 3.65 x 10-"? m?-eV.

*2 Calculate the density of states M(E) for a metal at energy
E =8.0 eV and show that your result is consistent with the curve of
Fig. 41-6.
