Pattern Formation

All animals seem to use positional information to deter-
mine the basic pattern of body compartments and, thus, the
overall architecture of the adult body. How is positional in-
formation encoded in labels and read by cells? To answer
this question, let us consider how positional labels are used
in pattern formation in Drosophila. The Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine was awarded in 1995 for the un-
raveling of this puzzle.

As we noted previously, a Drosophila egg acquires an ini-
tial asymmetry long before fertilization as a result of mater-

nal mRNA molecules that are deposited in one end of the
egg by nurse cells. Part of this maternal mRNA, from a
gene called bicoid, remains near its point of entry, marking
what will become the embryo’s front end. Fertilization
causes this mRNA to be translated into bicoid protein,
which diffuses throughout the syncytial blastoderm, form-
ing a morphogen gradient. Mothers unable to make bicoid
protein produce embryos without a head or thorax (in ef-
fect, these embryos are two-tailed, or bicaudal—hence the
name “bicoid”). Bicoid protein establishes the anterior
(front) end of the embryo. If bicoid protein is injected into
the anterior end of mutant embryos unable to make it, the

 

Establishing polarity of the

embryo: Fertilization of the
egg triggers the production of
bicoid protein from maternal
RINA in the egg. The bicoid
protein diffuses through the
egg, forming a gradient. This
gradient determines the
polarity of the embryo, with the
head and thorax developing in
the zone of high

concentration (yellow through
red).

FIGURE 17.14

Setting the stage for
segmentation: About 21/2 hours
after fertilization, bicoid protein
tums on a series of brief signals
from so-called gap genes. The
gap proteins act to divide the
embryo into large blocks. In this
photo, fluorescent dyes in
antibodies that bind to the gap
proteins Kriippel (red) and
hunchback (green) make the
blocks visible; the region of
overlap is yellow.

Laying down the
fundamental regions: About
+ hour later, the gap genes
switch on a so-called “pair-
rule” gene called hairy. Hairy
produces a series of
boundaries within each block,
dividing the embryo into
seven fundamental regions.

Forming the segments: The
final stage of segmentation
occurs when a “segment-
polarity” gene called engrailed
divides each of the seven
regions into halves, producing
14 narrow compartments.

Each compartment corresponds
to one segment of the future
body. There are three head
segments (H, top left), three
thoracic segments (T, lower
left), and eight abdominal
segments (A, from bottom left
to upper right).

Body organization in an early Drosophila embryo. In these images by 1995 Nobel laureate, Christiane Niisslein-Volhard, and Sean
Carroll, we watch a Drosophila egg pass through the early stages of development, in which the basic segmentation pattern of the embryo is

established.

344 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics
