AE 500 =

 

(42-8)

AE,

J _ (binding energy per nucleon).
Mass- Energy Exchanges The energy equivalent of one
mass unit (u) is 931.494013 MeV. The binding energy curve
shows that middle-mass nuclides are the most stable and that en-
ergy can be released both by fission of high-mass nuclei and by
fusion of low-mass nuclei.

The Nuclear Force Nuclei are held together by an attractive
force acting among the nucleons, part of the strong force acting
between the quarks that make up the nucleons.

Radioactive Decay Most known nuclides are radioactive:
they spontaneously decay at a rate R (= —dNidrt) that is
proportional to the number N of radioactive atoms present, the
proportionality constant being the disintegration constant A.This
leads to the law of exponential decay:

N=Ne™, R= AN= Rye™
(radioactive decay). (42-15, 42-17, 42-16)

The half-life T;. = (In 2)/A of a radioactive nuclide is the time re-
quired for the decay rate R (or the number N) in a sample to
drop to half its initial value.

Alpha Decay Some nuclides decay by emitting an alpha parti-
cle (a helium nucleus, ‘He). Such decay is inhibited by a potential
energy barrier that cannot be penetrated according to classical
physics but is subject to tunneling according to quantum physics.
The barrier penetrability, and thus the half-life for alpha decay, is
very sensitive to the energy of the emitted alpha particle.

Beta Decay In beta decay either an electron or a positron

<Questions

1 The radionuclide Ir decays by emitting an electron. (a) Into
which square in Fig. 42-6 is it transformed? (b) Do further decays
then occur?

2 Is the mass excess of an alpha particle (use a straightedge on
Fig. 42-13) greater than or less than the particle’s total binding en-
ergy (use the binding energy per nucleon from Fig. 42-7)?

3 At¢=0,a sample of radionuclide A has the same decay rate as
a sample of radionuclide B has at t = 30 min. The disintegration
constants are A, and Ag, with Ay < Ag. Will the two samples ever
have (simultaneously) the same decay rate? (Hint: Sketch a
graph of their activities.)

4 Acertain nuclide is said to be particularly stable. Does its bind-
ing energy per nucleon lie slightly above or slightly below the
binding energy curve of Fig. 42-7?

5 Suppose the alpha particle in a Rutherford scattering exper-
iment is replaced with a proton of the same initial kinetic en-
ergy and also headed directly toward the nucleus of the gold
atom. (a) Will the distance from the center of the nucleus at
which the proton stops be greater than, less than, or the same as
that of the alpha particle? (b) If, instead, we switch the target to
a nucleus with a larger value of Z, is the stopping distance of the
alpha particle greater than, less than, or the same as with the
gold target?

QUESTIONS 1301

is emitted by a nucleus, along with a neutrino. The emitted particles
share the available disintegration energy. The electrons and
positrons emitted in beta decay have a continuous spectrum of en-
ergies from near zero up toa limit Kya, (= Q = —Amc?).

Radioactive Dating Naturally occurring radioactive nuclides
provide a means for estimating the dates of historic and prehistoric
events. For example, the ages of organic materials can often be
found by measuring their “C content; rock samples can be dated
using the radioactive isotope “°K.

Radiation Dosage Three units are used to describe exposure
to ionizing radiation. The becquerel (1 Bq = 1 decay per second)
measures the activity of a source. The amount of energy actually
absorbed is measured in grays, with 1 Gy corresponding to 1 J/kg.
The estimated biological effect of the absorbed energy is measured
in sieverts; a dose equivalent of 1 Sv causes the same biological ef-
fect regardless of the radiation type by which it was acquired.

Nuclear Models The collective model of nuclear structure as-
sumes that nucleons collide constantly with one another and that rel-
atively long-lived compound nuclei are formed when a projectile is
captured. The formation and eventual decay of a compound nucleus
are totally independent events.

The independent particle model of nuclear structure assumes
that each nucleon moves, essentially without collisions, in a quantized
state within the nucleus The model predicts nucleon levels and magic
nucleon numbers (2,8, 20,28, 50,82, and 126) associated with closed
shells of nucleons; nuclides with any of these numbers of neutrons or
protons are particularly stable.

The combined model, in which extra nucleons occupy quan-
tized states outside a central core of closed shells, is highly success-
ful in predicting many nuclear properties.

6 Figure 42-16 gives the activities of three radioactive samples ver-
sus time. Rank the samples according to their (a) half-life and (b) dis-
integration constant, greatest first. (Hint: For (a), use a straightedge
on the graph.)

 

Figure 42-16 Question 6.

7 The nuclide “Pu (Z = 94) is an alpha-emitter. Into which of
the following nuclides does it decay:2“°Np (Z = 93),24°U (Z = 92),
248Cm (Z = 96), or “Am (Z = 95)?

8 Theradionuclide*’Sc has a half-life of 57.0 min. At ¢ = 0, the count-
ing rate of a sample of it is 6000 counts/min above the general back-
ground activity, which is 30 counts/min. Without computation, deter-
mine whether the counting rate of the sample will be about equal to
the background rate in 3h, 7h, 10h, or a time much longer than 10 h.
