1222 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

Figure 40-4 The Einstein—de Haas experi-
mental setup. (a) Initially, the magnetic
field in the iron cylinder is zero and the
magnetic dipole moment vectors ## of its
atoms are randomly oriented. (b) When a
magnetic field B is set up along the cylin-
der’s axis, the magnetic dipole moment vec-
tors line up parallel to B and the cylinder be-
gins to rotate.

Eoox
‘Thin fiber
° © ®
° ° ® ®
° ° ° —
oe ° ° ; ri
° a ° ® ®
o| ‘Ao o| ¢ 3
olga ~o— tron —— 9 ®
° ° oinder 8 ; B ®
2p SB sen 8 |p é
° L ° ® 7 ®
of \ ° ° T ®
o ay ° ° |; ®
° B=0 ° ® Tne ®
(a) 0 ° (b) ® @

Aligning the magnetic moment vectors rotates the cylinder.

The Einstein-de Haas Experiment

In 1915, well before the discovery of quantum physics, Albert Einstein and Dutch
physicist W. J. de Haas carried out a clever experiment designed to show that the
angular momentum and magnetic moment of individual atoms are coupled.

Einstein and de Haas suspended an iron cylinder from a thin fiber, as shown
in Fig. 40-4. A solenoid was placed around the cylinder but not touching it.
Initially, the magnetic dipole moments of the atoms of the cylinder point in
random directions, and so their external magnetic effects cancel (Fig. 40-4a).
However, when a current is switched on in the solenoid (Fig. 40-4b) so that a
magnetic field B is set up parallel to the long axis of the cylinder, the magnetic
dipole moments of the atoms of the cylinder reorient themselves, lining up with
that field. If the angular momentum L of each atom is coupled to its magnetic
moment 7, then this alignment of the atomic magnetic moments must cause an
alignment of the atomic angular momenta opposite the magnetic field.

No external torques initially act on the cylinder; thus, its angular momentum
must remain at its initial zero value. However, when B is turned on and the atomic
angular momenta line up antiparallel to B, they tend to give a net angular momen-
tum L,,¢; to the cylinder as a whole (directed downward in Fig. 40-4b).To maintain
zero angular momentum, the cylinder begins to rotate around its central axis to pro-
duce an angular momentum F,,, in the opposite direction (upward in Fig. 40-4b).

The twisting of the fiber quickly produces a torque that momentarily stops the
cylinder’s rotation and then rotates the cylinder in the opposite direction as the twist-
ing is undone. Thereafter, the fiber will twist and untwist as the cylinder oscillates
about its initial orientation in angular simple harmonic motion.

Observation of the cylinder’s rotation verified that the angular momentum and
the magnetic dipole moment of an atom are coupled in opposite directions.
Moreover, it dramatically demonstrated that the angular momenta associated with
quantum states of atoms can result in visible rotation of an object of everyday size.

Angular Momentum, Magnetic Dipole Moments

Every quantum state of an electron in an atom has an associated orbital angular mo-
mentum and orbital magnetic dipole moment. Every electron, whether trapped in an
atom or free, has a spin angular momentum and a spin magnetic dipole moment that
are as intrinsic as its mass and charge. Let’s next discuss these various quantities.

Orbital Angular Momentum

Classically, a moving particle has an angular momentum L with respect to any
given reference point. In Chapter 11 we wrote this as the cross product
