42-2 SOME NUCLEAR PROPERTIES

Scientists and engineers working with atomic masses often prefer to report
the mass of an atom by means of the atom’s mass excess A, defined as

A=M-—A _  (massexcess), (42-6)

where M is the actual mass of the atom in atomic mass units and A is the mass
number for that atom’s nucleus.

Nuclear Binding Energies

The mass M of a nucleus is Jess than the total mass =m of its individual protons
and neutrons. That means that the mass energy Mc? of a nucleus is Jess than the
total mass energy =(mc?) of its individual protons and neutrons. The difference
between these two energies is called the binding energy of the nucleus:

AE ye = (mc?) — Mc? (binding energy). (42-7)

Caution: Binding energy is not an energy that resides in the nucleus. Rather,
it is a difference in mass energy between a nucleus and its individual nucleons: If
we were able to separate a nucleus into its nucleons, we would have to transfer a
total energy equal to AZ, to those particles during the separating process.
Although we cannot actually tear apart a nucleus in this way, the nuclear binding
energy is still a convenient measure of how well a nucleus is held together, in the
sense that it measures how difficult the nucleus would be to take apart.

A better measure is the binding energy per nucleon AF,,.,, which is the ratio of
the binding energy AZ), of a nucleus to the number A of nucleons in that nucleus:

AE ve
A

 

AE ben = (binding energy per nucleon). (42-8)
We can think of the binding energy per nucleon as the average energy needed to
separate a nucleus into its individual nucleons. A greater binding energy per nu-
cleon means a more tightly bound nucleus.

Figure 42-7 is a plot of the binding energy per nucleon AE,., versus mass
number A for a large number of nuclei. Those high on the plot are very tightly

The large nuclei
over here are more

   

Ole Sc. Ni Sy loosely bound.
110, Lipp
> ai 209;
z - ocepeee,
z Mofo lye epee
8 Mo DY 97a,
AU sy

2 258
5 5 {oo The most tightly
& bound nuclei lie
& at the peak.
8
20
2
3
&
a

 

0 100 200
Mass number A

Figure 42-7 The binding energy per nucleon for some representative nuclides. The nickel nu-
clide “Ni has the highest binding energy per nucleon (about 8.794 60 MeV/nucleon) of any
known stable nuclide. Note that the alpha particle (He) has a higher binding energy per nu-
cleon than its neighbors in the periodic table and thus is also particularly stable.

1283
