40-6 X RAYS AND THE ORDERING OF THE ELEMENTS

periodic table puzzles. Prior to that time (1913), the positions of elements in the
table were assigned in order of atomic mass, although it was necessary to invert
this order for several pairs of elements because of compelling chemical evidence;
Moseley showed that it is the nuclear charge (that is, atomic number Z) that is
the real basis for ordering the elements.

In 1913 the periodic table had several empty squares, and a surprising num-
ber of claims for new elements had been advanced. The x-ray spectrum provided
a conclusive test of such claims. The lanthanide elements, often called the rare
earth elements, had been sorted out only imperfectly because their similar chemi-
cal properties made sorting difficult. Once Moseley’s work was reported, these
elements were properly organized.

It is not hard to see why the characteristic x-ray spectrum shows such im-
pressive regularities from element to element whereas the optical spectrum in
the visible and near-visible region does not: The key to the identity of an element
is the charge on its nucleus. Gold, for example, is what it is because its atoms have
a nuclear charge of +79e (that is, Z = 79). An atom with one more elementary
charge on its nucleus is mercury; with one fewer, it is platinum. The K electrons,
which play such a large role in the production of the x-ray spectrum, lie very close
to the nucleus and are thus sensitive probes of its charge. The optical spectrum,
on the other hand, involves transitions of the outermost electrons, which are
heavily screened from the nucleus by the remaining electrons of the atom and
thus are not sensitive probes of nuclear charge.

Accounting for the Moseley Plot
Moseley’s experimental data, of which the Moseley plot of Fig. 40-16 is but a part,
can be used directly to assign the elements to their proper places in the periodic
table. This can be done even if no theoretical basis for Moseley’s results can be
established. However, there is such a basis.
According to Eq. 39-33, the energy of the hydrogen atom is
me 1 13.60 eV

E, = Bene WT forn = 1,2,3,.... (40-24)

Consider now one of the two innermost electrons in the K shell of a multi-
electron atom. Because of the presence of the other K-shell electron, our electron
“sees” an effective nuclear charge of approximately (Z — 1)e, where e is the
elementary charge and Z is the atomic number of the element. The factor e* in
Eq. 40-24 is the product of e?—the square of hydrogen’s nuclear charge—and
(—e)’—the square of an electron’s charge. For a multielectron atom, we can
approximate the effective energy of the atom by replacing the factor e* in
Eq. 40-24 with (Z — 1)’e? x (—e)’, or e*(Z — 1). That gives us

2,
E-- (13.60eV)(Z = (40-25)
Ww

We saw that the K, x-ray photon (of energy hf) arises when an electron makes a
transition from the L shell (with n = 2 and energy E>) to the K shell (with n = 1
and energy £)).Thus, using Eq. 40-25, we may write the energy change as

AE=E,-E,
_ —(13.60eV)(Z—1? — —(13.60eV)(Z — 1)?
ae 2
= (10.2 eV)(Z — 1).
Then the frequency fof the K, line is
_ AE __(l0.2eV)(Z— 1P
faa (4.14 X 10-5 eV-s)
= (2.46 x 10 Hz)(Z — 1). (40-26)

1239
