The fact that nucleons obey the Pauli exclusion principle helps us to under-
stand the relative stability of nucleon states. If two nucleons within the nucleus
are to collide, the energy of each of them after the collision must correspond to
the energy of an unoccupied state. If no such state is available, the collision sim-
ply cannot occur. Thus, any given nucleon experiencing repeated “frustrated
collision opportunities” will maintain its state of motion long enough to give
meaning to the statement that it exists in a quantum state with a well-defined
energy.

In the atomic realm, the repetitions of physical and chemical properties that
we find in the periodic table are associated with a property of atomic electrons —
namely, they arrange themselves in shells that have a special stability when fully
occupied. We can take the atomic numbers of the noble gases,

2, 10, 18, 36, 54, 86,...,

as magic electron numbers that mark the completion (or closure) of such shells.
Nuclei also show such closed-shell effects, associated with certain magic
nucleon numbers:

2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, 126, .

 

Any nuclide whose proton number Z or neutron number N has one of these
values turns out to have a special stability that may be made apparent in a variety
of ways.

Examples of “magic” nuclides are 80 (Z = 8), “°Ca (Z = 20, N = 20), "Mo
(N = 50), and?8Pb (Z = 82, N = 126). Both Ca and Pb are said to be “doubly
magic” because they contain both filled shells of protons and filled shells of
neutrons.

The magic number 2 shows up in the exceptional stability of the alpha parti-
cle (*He), which, with Z = N = 2, is doubly magic. For example, on the binding
energy curve of Fig. 42-7, the binding energy per nucleon for this nuclide stands
well above those of its periodic-table neighbors hydrogen, lithium, and beryllium.
The neutrons and protons making up the alpha particle are so tightly bound to
one another, in fact, that it is impossible to add another proton or neutron to it;
there is no stable nuclide with A = 5.

The central idea of a closed shell is that a single particle outside a closed
shell can be relatively easily removed, but considerably more energy must be
expended to remove a particle from the shell itself The sodium atom, for exam-
ple, has one (valence) electron outside a closed electron shell. Only about 5 eV is
required to strip the valence electron away from a sodium atom; however, to
remove a second electron (which must be plucked out of a closed shell) requires
22 eV. As a nuclear case, consider ?!Sb (Z = 51), which contains a single proton
outside a closed shell of 50 protons. To remove this lone proton requires 5.8 MeV;
to remove a second proton, however, requires an energy of 11 MeV. There is
much additional experimental evidence that the nucleons in a nucleus form
closed shells and that these shells exhibit stable properties.

We have seen that quantum theory can account beautifully for the magic
electron numbers— that is, for the populations of the subshells into which atomic
electrons are grouped. It turns out that, under certain assumptions, quantum
theory can account equally well for the magic nucleon numbers! The 1963 Nobel
Prize in physics was, in fact, awarded to Maria Mayer and Hans Jensen “for their
discoveries concerning nuclear shell structure.”

A Combined Model

Consider a nucleus in which a small number of neutrons (or protons) exist
outside a core of closed shells that contains magic numbers of neutrons or
protons. The outside nucleons occupy quantized states in a potential well

42-8 NUCLEAR MODELS

1299
