42-6 RADIOACTIVE DATING 1295

The disintegration energy for the “P decay is then Experimentally, this calculated quantity proves to be equal

to K,

‘max» the maximum energy the emitted electrons can

Q=—-Ame have. Although 1.71 MeV is released every time a ”P nu-

 

—(31.972 07 u — 31.973 91 u)(931.494 013 MeV/u) cleus decays, in essentially every case the electron carries

= L71 MeV. (Answer) away less energy than this. The neutrino gets all the rest,
carrying it stealthily out of the laboratory.

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

42-6 RADIOACTIVE DATING

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.31 Apply the equations for radioactive decay to determine 42.32 Explain how radiocarbon dating can be used to date
the age of rocks and archaeological materials. the age of biological samples.

Key Idea

@ Naturally occurring radioactive nuclides provide a means for estimating the dates of historic and prehistoric events. For exam-
ple, the ages of organic materials can often be found by measuring their '*C content, and rock samples can be dated using the

radioactive 4°K.

Radioactive Dating

If you know the half-life of a given radionuclide, you can in principle use the
decay of that radionuclide as a clock to measure time intervals. The decay of very
long-lived nuclides, for example, can be used to measure the age of rocks—that
is, the time that has elapsed since they were formed. Such measurements for
rocks from Earth and the Moon, and for meteorites, yield a consistent maximum
age of about 4.5 x 10° y for these bodies.

The radionuclide °K, for example, decays to “Ar, a stable isotope of the noble
gas argon. The half-life for this decay is 1.25 x 10° y. A measurement of the ratio of
4K to Ar, as found in the rock in question, can be used to calculate the age of that
rock. Other long-lived decays, such as that of ?°U to”"’Pb (involving a number of in-
termediate stages of unstable nuclei), can be used to verify this calculation.

For measuring shorter time intervals, in the range of historical interest, radio-
carbon dating has proved invaluable. The radionuclide 4C (with Ty. = 5730 y) is
produced at a constant rate in the upper atmosphere as atmospheric nitrogen
is bombarded by cosmic rays. This radiocarbon mixes with the carbon that is
normally present in the atmosphere (as CO,) so that there is about one atom of
MC for every 10° atoms of ordinary stable ’C. Through biological activity such
as photosynthesis and breathing, the atoms of atmospheric carbon trade places
randomly, one atom at a time, with the atoms of carbon in every living thing,
including broccoli, mushrooms, penguins, and humans. Eventually an exchange
equilibrium is reached at which the carbon atoms of every living thing contain
a fixed small fraction of the radioactive nuclide 4C.

This equilibrium persists as long as the organism is alive. When the organism
dies, the exchange with the atmosphere stops and the amount of radiocarbon trapped
in the organism, since it is no longer being replenished, dwindles away with a half-life
of 5730 y. By measuring the amount of radiocarbon per gram of organic matter, it is
possible to measure the time that has elapsed since the organism died. Charcoal from
ancient campfires, the Dead Sea scrolls (actually, the cloth used to plug the jars hold-
ing the scrolls), and many prehistoric artifacts have been dated in this way.

 

‘Top photo: George Rockwin/Bruce Coleman, Inc/Photoshot
Holdings Ltd. Inset photo: www. BibleLandPictures.com/Alamy

A fragment of the Dead Sea scrolls and the
caves from which the scrolls were recovered.

 
