1226 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

40-2 tHE STERN-GERLACH EXPERIMENT

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

40.20 Sketch the Stern—Gerlach experiment and explain the
type of atom required, the anticipated result, the actual result,
and the importance of the experiment.

40.21 Apply the relationship between the magnetic field
gradient and the force on an atom in a Stern—Gerlach
experiment.

 

Key Ideas
@ The Stern—Gerlach experiment demonstrated that the mag-
netic moment of silver atoms is quantized, experimental proof
that magnetic moments at the atomic level are quantized.

@ An atom with a magnetic dipole moment experiences a
force in a nonuniform magnetic field. If the field changes at

the rate of dB/dz along a z axis, then the force is along the z
axis and its magnitude is related to the component 2, of the
dipole moment:

dB

Ee weg

Collimator

Electromagnet

Glass
detector plate

Figure 40-8 Apparatus used by Stern and
Gerlach.

 

The Stern-Gerlach Experiment

In 1922, Otto Stern and Walther Gerlach at the University of Hamburg in
Germany showed experimentally that the magnetic moment of silver atoms is
quantized. In the Stern—Gerlach experiment, as it is now known, silver is vaporized
in an oven, and some of the atoms in that vapor escape through a narrow slit in the
oven wall and pass into an evacuated tube. Some of those escaping atoms then pass
through a second narrow slit, to form a narrow beam of atoms (Fig. 40-8). (The
atoms are said to be collimated —made into a beam —and the second slit is called a
collimator.) The beam passes between the poles of an electromagnet and then lands
ona glass detector plate where it forms a silver deposit.

When the electromagnet is off, the silver deposit is a narrow spot. However, when
the electromagnet is turned on, the silver deposit should be spread vertically. The rea-
son is that silver atoms are magnetic dipoles, and so vertical magnetic forces act on
them as they pass through the vertical magnetic field of the electromagnet; these
forces deflect them slightly up or down. Thus, by analyzing the silver deposit on the
plate, we can determine what deflections the atoms underwent in the magnetic field.
‘When Stern and Gerlach analyzed the pattern of silver on their detector plate, they
found a surprise. However, before we discuss that surprise and its quantum implica-
tions, let us discuss the magnetic deflecting force acting on the silver atoms.

The Magnetic Deflecting Force on a Silver Atom
‘We have not previously discussed the type of magnetic force that deflects the
silver atoms in a Stern—Gerlach experiment. It is not the magnetic deflecting
force that acts on a moving charged particle, as given by Eq. 28-2 (F = qv x B).
The reason is simple: A silver atom is electrically neutral (its net charge q is zero),
and thus this type of magnetic force is also zero.

The type of magnetic force we seek is due to an interaction between the
magnetic field B of the electromagnet and the magnetic dipole of the individual sil-
ver atom. We can derive an expression for the force in this interaction by starting with

the energy U of the dipole in the magnetic field. Equation 28-38 tells us that
U=-p-B. (40-15)

where ## is the magnetic dipole moment of a silver atom. In Fig. 40-8, the positive
direction of the z axis and the direction of B are vertically upward. Thus, we can
write Eq. 40-15 in terms of the component su, of the atom’s magnetic dipole
