41-3 THE p-n JUNCTION AND THE TRANSISTOR

valence band. A device with this property can be fabricated by placing a strong
forward bias on a heavily doped p-n junction, as in Fig. 41-16. In such an arrange-
ment the current J through the device serves to inject electrons into the n-type ma-
terial and to inject holes into the p-type material. If the doping is heavy enough and
the current is great enough, the depletion zone can become very narrow, perhaps
only a few micrometers wide. The result is a great number density of electrons in
the n-type material facing a correspondingly great number density of holes in the
p-type material, across the narrow depletion zone. With such great number densi-
ties so near each other, many electron—hole combinations occur, causing light to be
emitted from that zone. Figure 41-17 shows the construction of an actual LED.

Commercial LEDs designed for the visible region are commonly based on gal-
lium suitably doped with arsenic and phosphorus atoms. An arrangement in which
60% of the nongallium sites are occupied by arsenic ions and 40% by phosphorus
ions results ina gap width E, of about 1.8 eV, corresponding to red light. Other dop-
ing and transition-level arrangements make it possible to construct LEDs that emit
light in essentially any desired region of the visible and near-visible spectra.

The Photodiode

Passing a current through a suitably arranged p-n junction can generate light. The re-
verse is also true; that is, shining light on a suitably arranged p-n junction can produce
acurrent in a circuit that includes the junction. This is the basis for the photodiode.
When you click your television remote control, an LED in the device sends
out a coded sequence of pulses of infrared light. The receiving device in your
television set is an elaboration of the simple (two-terminal) photodiode that not
only detects the infrared signals but also amplifies them and transforms them into
electrical signals that change the channel or adjust the volume, among other tasks.

The Junction Laser

In the arrangement of Fig. 41-16, there are many electrons in the conduction
band of the n-type material and many holes in the valence band of the p-type
material. Thus, there is a population inversion for the electrons; that is, there
are more electrons in higher energy levels than in lower energy levels. As we
discussed in Module 40-7, this can lead to lasing.

When a single electron moves from the conduction band to the valence band,
it can release its energy as a photon. This photon can stimulate a second electron
to fall into the valence band, producing a second photon by stimulated emission.
In this way, if the current through the junction is great enough, a chain reaction of
stimulated emission events can occur and laser light can be generated. To bring
this about, opposite faces of the p-n junction crystal must be flat and parallel, so
that light can be reflected back and forth within the crystal. (Recall that in the
helium—neon laser of Fig. 40-20, a pair of mirrors served this purpose.) Thus, a
p-n junction can act as a junction laser, its light output being highly coherent and
much more sharply defined in wavelength than light from an LED.

Junction lasers are built into compact
disc (CD) players, where, by detecting re-
flections from the rotating disc, they are used
to translate microscopic pits in the disc into
sound. They are also much used in optical
communication systems based on optical
fibers. Figure 41-18 suggests their tiny scale.
Junction lasers are usually designed to oper-
ate in the infrared region of the electromag-
netic spectrum because optical fibers have
two “windows” in that region (at A= 1.31
and 1.55 4m) for which the energy absorp-
tion per unit length of the fiber is a minimum.

 

Courtesy AT&T Archives and History Center,
Warren, NJ

Figure 41-18 A junction laser developed
at the AT&T Bell Laboratories.
The cube at the right is a grain of salt.

1269

Hole current

—eevt 0
R +
~ aka
Light Light
[i—
e

Electron current

Figure 41-16 A forward-biased p-n junction,
showing electrons being injected into the
n-type material and holes into the p-type
material. (Holes move in the conventional
direction of the current J, equivalent to
electrons moving in the opposite direc-
tion.) Light is emitted from the narrow
depletion zone each time an electron and a
hole combine across that zone.

Axis.

     
  
 

Light

Transparent
dome

Terminal

 

Figure 41-17 Cross section of an LED (the
device has rotational symmetry about the
central axis). The p-type material, which is
thin enough to transmit light, is in the form
of a circular disk. A connection is made to
the p-type material through a circular metal
ring that touches the disk at its periphery.
The depletion zone between the n-type ma-
terial and the p-type material is not shown.
