Evolution of Homeobox Genes

Since their initial discovery in Drosophila,
homeotic genes have also been found in
mice and humans, which are separated
from insects by over 600 million years of
evolution. Their presence in mammals
and insects indicates that homeotic genes
governing the positioning of body parts
must have arisen very early in the evolu-
tionary history of animals. Similar genes
also appear to operate in flowering plants.
Gene probes made using the homeobox
sequence of Drosophila have been used to
identify very similar sequences in a wide
variety of other organisms, including
frogs, mice, humans, cows, chickens, bee-
tles, and even earthworms. Mice and hu-
mans have four clusters of homeobox-
containing genes, called Hox genes in
mice. Just as in flies, the homeotic genes
of mammals appear to be lined up in the
same order as the segments they control
(figure 17.19). Thus, the ordered nature
of homeotic gene clusters is highly con-
served in evolution (figure 17.20). There
is a total of 38 Hox genes in the four
homeotic clusters of a mouse, and we are
only beginning to understand how they
interact.

Homeotic genes encode transcription
factors that activate blocks of genes
specifying particular body parts.

FIGURE 17.20

The remarkably conserved homeobox
series. By inserting a mouse homeobox-
containing gene into a fruit fly, a mutant
fly (right) can be manufactured with a leg
(arrow) growing from where its antenna
would be in a normal fly (/eft).

348 = Part V = Molecular Genetics

 

abd-A_abd-B
Hom fly 22 26 Did Ser Anip  Ubx

chromosome

  

Mouse
chromosomes

 

FIGURE 17.19
A comparison of homeotic gene clusters in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster
and the mouse Mus musculus. Similar genes, the Drosophila HOM genes and the
mouse Hox genes, control the development of front and back parts of the body. These
genes are located on a single chromosome in the fly, and on four separate chromosomes
in mammals. The genes are color-coded to match the parts of the body in which they
are expressed.

 
