1264 CHAPTER 41

ntype
Conduction band

Electrons
jump up
from donors
at the

Electrons
jump up to
acceptors

at the
dashed
level, leaving
holes.

 

Figure 41-11 (a) Ina doped n-type
semiconductor, the energy levels of donor
electrons lie a small interval E,; below the
bottom of the conduction band. Because
donor electrons can be easily excited to the
conduction band, there are now many more
electrons in that band. The valence band
contains the same small number of holes as
before the dopant was added. (b) In a doped
p-type semiconductor, the acceptor levels lie
asmall energy interval E, above the top of
the valence band. There are now many more
holes in the valence band. The conduction
band contains the same small number of
electrons as before the dopant was added.
The ratio of majority carriers to minority
carriers in both (a) and (b) is very much
greater than is suggested by these diagrams.

dashed level.

CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

electrons contributed by the donor atoms are in the conduction band. By adding
donor atoms, it is possible to increase greatly the number of electrons in the con-
duction band, by a factor very much larger than Fig. 41-1la suggests.

Semiconductors doped with donor atoms are called n-type semiconduc-
tors; the n stands for negative, to imply that the negative charge carriers intro-
duced into the conduction band greatly outnumber the positive charge
carriers, which are the holes in the valence band. In n-type semiconductors, the
electrons are called the majority carriers and the holes are called the minority
carriers.

p-Type Semiconductors

Now consider Fig. 41-10c, in which one of the silicon atoms (valence = 4) has
been replaced by an atom of aluminum (valence = 3). The aluminum atom can
bond covalently with only three silicon atoms, and so there is now a “missing”
electron (a hole) in one aluminum silicon bond. With a small expenditure of en-
ergy, an electron can be torn from a neighboring silicon—silicon bond to fill this
hole, thereby creating a hole in that bond. Similarly, an electron from some other
bond can be moved to fill the newly created hole. In this way, the hole can
migrate through the lattice.

The aluminum atom is called an acceptor atom because it readily accepts
an electron from a neighboring bond —that is, from the valence band of sili-
con. As Fig. 41-115 suggests, this electron occupies a localized energy state that
lies within the energy gap, at an average energy interval E, above the top of
the valence band. Because this energy interval E, is small, valence electrons
are easily bumped up to the acceptor level, leaving holes in the valence band.
Thus, by adding acceptor atoms, it is possible to greatly increase the number of
holes in the valence band, by a factor much larger than Fig. 41-11) suggests. In
silicon at room temperature, virtually all the acceptor levels are occupied by
electrons.

Semiconductors doped with acceptor atoms are called p-type semiconduc-
tors; the p stands for positive to imply that the holes introduced into the valence
band, which behave like positive charge carriers, greatly outnumber the electrons
in the conduction band. In p-type semiconductors, holes are the majority carriers
and electrons are the minority carriers.

Table 41-2 summarizes the properties of a typical n-type and a typical p-type
semiconductor. Note particularly that the donor and acceptor ion cores, although
they are charged, are not charge carriers because they are fixed in place.

Table 41-2 Properties of Two Doped Semiconductors

Type of Semiconductor

Property n D
Matrix material Silicon Silicon

Matrix nuclear charge +14e +14e

Matrix energy gap 1.2eV 12eV
Dopant Phosphorus Aluminum
Type of dopant Donor Acceptor
Majority carriers Electrons Holes
Minority carriers Holes Electrons
Dopant energy gap Ey = 0.045 eV E, = 0.067 eV
Dopant valence 5 3

Dopant nuclear charge +15e +13e

Dopant net ion charge +e —e
