40-5 BUILDING THE PERIODIC TABLE

states in a subshell. If we count all the states throughout a given shell with quantum
number n, we find that the total number in the shell is 2n”. All states in a given sub-
shell have about the same energy, which depends primarily on the value of n, but it
also depends somewhat on the value of ¢.

For the purpose of labeling subshells, the values of £ are represented by letters:

€=0 12345...
spdfgh....

For example, the n = 3, £ = 2 subshell would be labeled the 3d subshell.

When we assign electrons to states in a multielectron atom, we must be
guided by the Pauli exclusion principle of Module 40-4; that is, no two electrons
in an atom can have the same set of the quantum numbers n, €, m,, and m,. If this
important principle did not hold, all the electrons in any atom could jump to the
atom’s lowest energy level, which would eliminate the chemistry of atoms and
molecules, and thus also eliminate biochemistry and us. Let us examine the atoms
of a few elements to see how the Pauli exclusion principle operates in the build-
ing up of the periodic table.

The neon atom has 10 electrons. Only two of them fit into the lowest-energy
subshell, the ly subshell. These two electrons both have n = 1, € = 0,and m, = 0,
but one has m, = +5 and the other has m, = —}. The 1s subshell contains
2[2(0) + 1] =2 states. Because this subshell then contains all the electrons
permitted by the Pauli principle, it is said to be closed.

Two of the remaining eight electrons fill the next lowest energy subshell, the
2s subshell. The last six electrons just fill the 2p subshell, which, with = 1, holds
2[2(1) + 1] = 6states.

Ina closed subshell, all allowed z projections of the orbital angular momen-
tum vector L are present and, as you can verify from Fig. 40-5, these projections
cancel for the subshell as a whole; for every positive projection there is a corre-
sponding negative projection of the same magnitude. Similarly, the z projections
of the spin angular momenta also cancel. Thus, a closed subshell has no angular
momentum and no magnetic moment of any kind. Furthermore, its probability
density is spherically symmetric. Then neon with its three closed subshells (1s, 2s,
and 2p) has no “loosely dangling electrons” to encourage chemical interaction
with other atoms. Neon, like the other noble gases that form the right-hand col-
umn of the periodic table, is almost chemically inert.

Sodium

Next after neon in the periodic table comes sodium, with 11 electrons Ten of
them form a closed neon-like core, which, as we have seen, has zero angular
momentum. The remaining electron is largely outside this inert core, in the 3s
subshell—the next lowest energy subshell. Because this valence electron of
sodium is in a state with € = 0 (that is, an s state using the lettering system
above), the sodium atom’s angular momentum and magnetic dipole moment
must be due entirely to the spin of this single electron.

Sodium readily combines with other atoms that have a “vacancy” into which
sodium’s loosely bound valence electron can fit. Sodium, like the other alkali
metals that form the left-hand column of the periodic table, is chemically active.

Chlorine

The chlorine atom, which has 17 electrons, has a closed 10-electron, neon-like
core, with 7 electrons left over. Two of them fill the 3s subshell, leaving five to
be assigned to the 3p subshell, which is the subshell next lowest in energy. This
subshell, which has € = 1, can hold 2[2(1) + 1] = 6 electrons, and so there is a
vacancy, or a “hole,” in this subshell.

1235
