40-2 THE STERN-GERLACH EXPERIMENT 1227

momentalong the direction of B:

U=~pB. (40-16)
Then, using Eq. 8-22 (F = —dU/dx) for the z axis shown in Fig. 40-8, we obtain
dU dB
= -s = 40-17.
dz Me dz ( )

 

This is what we sought—an equation for the magnetic force that deflects a silver
atom as the atom passes through a magnetic field.

The term dB/dz in Eq. 40-17 is the gradient of the magnetic field along the z
axis. If the magnetic field does not change along the z axis (as in a uniform
magnetic field or no magnetic field), then dB/dz = 0 and a silver atom is not
deflected as it moves between the magnet’s poles. In the Stern—Gerlach experi-
ment, the poles are designed to maximize the gradient dB/dz, so as to vertically
deflect the silver atoms passing between the poles as much as possible, so that
their deflections show up in the deposit on the glass plate.

According to classical physics, the components yz, of silver atoms passing
through the magnetic field in Fig. 40-8 should range in value from —y (the dipole
moment 7 is directed straight down the z axis) to + (His directed straight up
the z axis). Thus, from Eq. 40-17, there should be a range of forces on the atoms,
and therefore a range of deflections of the atoms, from a greatest downward
deflection to a greatest upward deflection. This means that we should expect the
atoms to land along a vertical line on the glass plate, but they don’t.

The Experimental Surprise

What Stern and Gerlach found was that the atoms formed two distinct spots on
the glass plate, one spot above the point where they would have landed with no
deflection and the other spot just as far below that point. The spots were initially
too faint to be seen, but they became visible when Stern happened to breathe on
the glass plate after smoking a cheap cigar. Sulfur in his breath (from the cigar)
combined with the silver to produce a noticeably black silver sulfide.

This two-spot result can be seen in the plots of Fig. 40-9, which shows the out-
come of a more recent version of the Stern—Gerlach experiment. In that version,
a beam of cesium atoms (magnetic dipoles like the silver atoms in the original
Stern—Gerlach experiment) was sent through a magnetic field with a large verti-
cal gradient dB/dz. The field could be turned on and off, and a detector could be
moved up and down through the beam.

When the field was turned off, the beam was, of course, undeflected and the
detector recorded the central-peak pattern shown in Fig. 40-9. When the field was
turned on, the original beam was split vertically by the magnetic field into two
smaller beams, one beam higher than the previously undeflected beam and the
other beam lower. As the detector moved vertically up through these two smaller
beams, it recorded the two-peak pattern shown in Fig. 40-9.

The Meaning of the Results

In the original Stern—Gerlach experiment, two spots of silver were formed on
the glass plate, not a vertical line of silver. This means that the component pu,
along B (and along z) could not have any value between — and +p as classi-
cal physics predicts. Instead, 2, is restricted to only two values, one for each
spot on the glass. Thus, the original Stern—Gerlach experiment showed that 4,
is quantized, implying (correctly) that 7 is also. Moreover, because the angular
momentum L of an atom is associated with #, that angular momentum and its
component L, are also quantized.

With modern quantum theory, we can add to the explanation of the two-spot
result in the Stern—Gerlach experiment. We now know that a silver atom consists

The double peak
proved that uz
is quantized.

  
     
      

Magnet off.

Magnet on

Beam intensity

Beam detector position

Figure 40-9 Results of a modern repetition of
the Stern—Gerlach experiment. With the
electromagnet turned off, there is only a
single beam; with the electromagnet turned
on, the original beam splits into two sub-
beams. The two subbeams correspond to
parallel and antiparallel alignment of the
magnetic moments of cesium atoms with
the external magnetic field.
