39-5 THE HYDROGEN ATOM 1211

identical. Although these plots are symmetric about the z axis, they are not spher-
ically symmetric. That is, the probability densities for these three states are func-
tions of both rand the angular coordinate 0.

Here is a puzzle: What is there about the hydrogen atom that establishes the
axis of symmetry that is so obvious in Fig. 39-23? The answer: absolutely nothing.

The solution to this puzzle comes about when we realize that all three states
shown in Fig. 39-23 have the same energy. Recall that the energy of a state, given
by Eg. 39-33, depends only on the principal quantum number n and is independ-
ent of € and my. In fact, for an isolated hydrogen atom there is no way to differen-
tiate experimentally among the three states of Fig. 39-23.

If we add the volume probability densities for the three states for which
n=2and ¢ =1, the combined probability density turns out to be spherically
symmetrical, with no unique axis. One can, then, think of the electron as spending
one-third of its time in each of the three states of Fig. 39-23, and one can think of
the weighted sum of the three independent wave functions as defining a spheri-
cally symmetric subshell specified by the quantum numbers n = 2, € = 1. The
individual states will display their separate existence only if we place the hydro-
gen atom in an external electric or magnetic field. The three states of the n = 2,
€ = 1 subshell will then have different energies, and the field direction will estab-
lish the necessary symmetry axis.

The n= 2, € =0 state, whose volume probability density is shown in
Fig. 39-21, also has the same energy as each of the three states of Fig. 39-23. We
can view all four states whose quantum numbers are listed in Table 39-3 as form-
ing a spherically symmetric shell specified by the single quantum number n.
The importance of shells and subshells will become evident in Chapter 40, where
we discuss atoms having more than one electron.

To round out our picture of the hydrogen atom, we display in Fig. 39-24 a dot
plot of the radial probability density for a hydrogen atom state with a relatively
high quantum number (n = 45) and the highest orbital quantum number that the
restrictions of Table 39-2 permit (€ = n — 1 = 44). The probability density forms a
ring that is symmetrical about the z axis and lies very close to the xy plane. The
mean radius of the ring is n’a, where a is the Bohr radius. This mean radius is more
than 2000 times the effective radius of the hydrogen atom in its ground state.

Figure 39-24 suggests the electron orbit of classical physics — it resembles
the circular orbit of a planet around a star. Thus, we have another illustration
of Bohr’s correspondence principle—namely, that at large quantum numbers
the predictions of quantum mechanics merge smoothly with those of classical
physics. Imagine what a dot plot like that of Figure 39-24 would look like for
really large values of n and £—say,n = 1000 and £ = 999.

 

Figure 39-24 A dot plot of the radial probabil-
ity density P(r) for the hydrogen atom ina
quantum state with a relatively large princi-
pal quantum number —namely, n = 45—
and angular momentum quantum number

€ =n —1=44.The dots lie close to the xy
plane, the ring of dots suggesting a classical
electron orbit.

Sample Problem 39.06 Radial probability density for the electron in a hydrogen atom

Show that the radial probability density for the ground state Ca/culation: If we differentiate P(r) with respect to r,

of the hydrogen atom has a maximum at r = a.

using derivative 7 of Appendix E and the chain rule for

differentiating products, we get

KEY IDEAS

oo ___—. aR
(1) The radial probability density for a ground-state hydro- dr
gen atom is given by Eq.39-44,

a
P(r) = @ eae

(2) To find the maximum (or minimum) of any function, we

4

@e
8r

ma

=2 4
2 prea) lati aC
a a
8r?
eta — ST g-2ria
a

8
=—r(a — rje*".
5 Ha ~ 0)

must differentiate the function and set the result equal to zero. _If we set the right side equal to zero, we obtain an equa-
