1296 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

Sample Problem 42.08 Radioactive dating of a moon rock

In a Moon rock sample, the ratio of the number of (stable)
“Ar atoms present to the number of (radioactive) “K
atoms is 10.3. Assume that all the argon atoms were pro-
duced by the decay of potassium atoms, with a half-life of
1.25 X 10° y. How old is the rock?

KEY IDEAS

(1) If Np potassium atoms were present at the time the rock
was formed by solidification from a molten form, the number
of potassium atoms now remaining at the time of analysis is

Nx =Ne™, (42-29)
in which f is the age of the rock. (2) For every potassium atom

that decays, an argon atom is produced. Thus, the number of ar-
gon atoms present at the time of the analysis is

Nae = No - Nx (42-30)

42-7 MEASURING RADIATION DOSAGE

Learning Objectives

Calculations: We cannot measure Np; so let’s eliminate it
from Eqs. 42-29 and 42-30. We find, after some algebra, that

= a)
aAt= in(1 a Nx)

in which Na,/Nx can be measured. Solving for ¢ and using
Eq. 42-18 to replace A with (In 2)/Ty yield

_ Typ In(1 + Na/Nx)

- In2

_ (1.25 x 10° y)[In(1 + 10.3)]

- In2

= 4.37 X 10°y. (Answer)
Lesser ages may be found for other lunar or terrestrial rock sam-
ples, but no substantially greater ones. Thus, the oldest rocks
were formed soon after the solar system formed, and the solar
system must be about 4 billion years old.

(42-31)

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...
42.33 Identify absorbed dose, dose equivalent, and the asso-

ciated units.
Key Ideas

@ The Becquerel (1 Bq = 1 decay per second) measures the
activity of a source.

@ The amount of energy actually absorbed is measured in

42.34 Calculate absorbed dose and dose equivalent.

grays, with 1 Gy corresponding to 1 J/kg.

@ The estimated biological effect of the absorbed energy is
the dose equivalent and is measured in sieverts.

Measuring Radiation Dosage

The effect of radiation such as gamma rays, electrons, and alpha particles on
living tissue (particularly our own) is a matter of public interest. Such radiation is
found in nature in cosmic rays (from astronomical sources) and in the emissions
by radioactive elements in Earth’s crust. Radiation associated with some human
activities, such as using x rays and radionuclides in medicine and in industry, also

contributes.

Our task here is not to explore the various sources of radiation but simply
to describe the units in which the properties and effects of such radiations are
expressed. We have already discussed the activity of a radioactive source. There
are two remaining quantities of interest.

1. Absorbed Dose. This is a measure of the radiation dose (as energy per unit
mass) actually absorbed by a specific object, such as a patient’s hand or chest.
Its SI unit is the gray (Gy). An older unit, the rad (from radiation absorbed
