1268 CHAPTER 41 CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

 

4

Verse

Fs

hy
lI
C7)

Fave

 

 

 

 

a

Is

Jaw
6 Jaen

Figure 41-15 (a) The forward-bias connection
of a p-n junction, showing the narrowed
depletion zone and the large forward
current Ip. (b) The back-bias connection,
showing the widened depletion zone and
the small back current Jp.

Figure 41-15 shows why a p-n junction operates as a junction rectifier. In Fig.
41-15a, a battery is connected across the junction with its positive terminal con-
nected at the p side. In this forward-bias connection, the p side becomes more
positive and the n side becomes more negative, thus decreasing the height of
the potential barrier Vp of Fig. 41-12c. More of the majority carriers can now sur-
mount this smaller barrier; hence, the diffusion current J,i¢ increases markedly.

The minority carriers that form the drift current, however, sense no barrier;
so the drift current Jy, is not affected by the external battery. The nice current
balance that existed at zero bias (see Fig. 41-12d) is thus upset, and, as shown in
Fig. 41-15a, a large net forward current J; appears in the circuit.

Another effect of forward bias is to narrow the depletion zone, as a compari-
son of Fig. 41-12b and Fig. 41-15a shows. The depletion zone narrows because the
reduced potential barrier associated with forward bias must be associated with
a smaller space charge. Because the ions producing the space charge are fixed in
their lattice sites, a reduction in their number can come about only through a
reduction in the width of the depletion zone.

Because the depletion zone normally contains very few charge carriers, it
is normally a region of high resistivity. However, when its width is substantially
reduced by a forward bias, its resistance is also reduced substantially, as is consis-
tent with the large forward current.

Figure 41-15b shows the back-bias connection, in which the negative ter-
minal of the battery is connected at the p-type end of the p-n junction. Now
the applied emf increases the contact potential difference, the diffusion current
decreases substantially while the drift current remains unchanged, and a rela-
tively small back current J results. The depletion zone widens, its high resistance
being consistent with the small back current Jp.

The Light-Emitting Diode (LED)

Nowadays, we can hardly avoid the brightly colored “electronic” numbers that
glow at us from cash registers and gasoline pumps, microwave ovens and alarm
clocks, and we cannot seem to do without the invisible infrared beams that con-
trol elevator doors and operate television sets via remote control. In nearly all
cases this light is emitted from a p-n junction operating as a light-emitting diode
(LED). How can a p-n junction generate light?

Consider first a simple semiconductor. When an electron from the bottom of
the conduction band falls into a hole at the top of the valence band, an energy
E, equal to the gap width is released. In silicon, germanium, and many other
semiconductors, this energy is largely transformed into thermal energy of the
vibrating lattice, and as a result, no light is emitted.

In some semiconductors, however, including gallium arsenide, the energy can
be emitted as a photon of energy /f at wavelength

c c he
fF Elk ~ E,’ (41-11)
To emit enough light to be useful as an LED, the material must have a suitably
large number of electron-hole transitions. This condition is not satisfied by a pure
semiconductor because, at room temperature, there are simply not enough
electron-hole pairs. As Fig. 41-11 suggests, doping will not help. In doped n-type
material the number of conduction electrons is greatly increased, but there
are not enough holes for them to combine with; in doped p-type material
there are plenty of holes but not enough electrons to combine with them. Thus,
neither a pure semiconductor nor a doped semiconductor can provide enough
electron-hole transitions to serve as a practical LED.

What we need is a semiconductor material with a very large number of elec-
trons in the conduction band and a correspondingly large number of holes in the

 
