REVIEW & SUMMARY 1271

and thus decreases the current Jps. With the proper value of Vs, this current can
be shut off completely; hence, by controlling Vgs, the MOSFET can be switched

between its ON and OFF modes.

Charge carriers do not flow through the substrate because it (1) is lightly
doped, (2) is not a good conductor, and (3) is separated from the n channel and
the two n-type islands by an insulating depletion zone, not specifically shown in
Fig. 41-20. Such a depletion zone always exists at a boundary between n-type

material and p-type material, as Fig. 41-12b shows.

Computers and other electronic devices employ thousands (if not millions)
of transistors and other electronic components, such as capacitors and resistors.
These are not assembled as separate units but are crafted into a single semicon-
ducting chip, forming an integrated circuit with millions of transistors and many

other electronic components.

Review & Summary

Metals, Semiconductors, and Insulators = Three electrical
properties that can be used to distinguish among crystalline solids
are resistivity p, temperature coefficient of resistivity a, and num-
ber density of charge carriers n. Solids can be broadly divided into
insulators (very high p), metals (low p, positive and low a, large n),
and semiconductors (high p,negative and high a, small ).

Energy Levels and Gaps in a Crystalline Solid An isolated
atom can exist in only a discrete set of energy levels. As atoms come
together to form a solid, the levels of the individual atoms merge to
form the discrete energy bands of the solid. These energy bands are
separated by energy gaps, each of which corresponds to a range of
energies that no electron may possess.

Any energy band is made up of an enormous number of very
closely spaced levels. The Pauli exclusion principle asserts that only
one electron may occupy each of these levels.

Insulators In an insulator, the highest band containing electrons
is completely filled and is separated from the vacant band above it by
an energy gap so large that electrons can essentially never become
thermally agitated enough to jump across the gap.

Metals In a metal, the highest band that contains any electrons
is only partially filled. The energy of the highest filled level at a
temperature of 0 K is called the Fermi energy Ey for the metal.

The electrons in the partially filled band are the conduction
electrons and their number is

number of conduction\ _ {number of atoms
electrons insample /~ \ in sample
(number of valence (412)
electrons per atom,

The number of atoms ina sample is given by

_ sample mass Means

number of atoms
atomic mass

in sample

sample mass Mein
(molar mass MYNx

(maeriars sample
_ \ density /\volume V, ALA
=—“GnolarmassMyN, | AN4)

The number density n of the conduction electrons is

number of conduction electrons in sample

sample volume V (413)

The density of states function N(E) is the number of available
energy levels per unit volume of the sample and per unit energy in-
terval and is given by

32
vee evi mn

(density of states, m~? J~'), (41-5)
where m (=9.109 X 10-"' kg) is the electron mass, h (= 6.626 X
10-¥ J-s) is the Planck constant, and E is the energy in joules at
which N(£) is to be evaluated. To modify the equation so that the
value of £ is in eV and the value of N(E) is in m~3 eV~', multiply
the right side by e? (where e = 1.602 x 10-C).

The occupancy probability P(E), the probability that a given
available state will be occupied by an electron, is

1

PE) = mer ez (occupancy probability). (41-6)
The density of occupied states N,(E) is given by the product

of the two quantities in Eqs. (41-5) and (41-6):

N,(E) = N(E) P(E) (41-7)

(density of occupied states).

The Fermi energy for a metal can be found by integrating N,(E)
for T = 0 from E = 0 to E = Ey. The result is

( 3 y Ry, _ 0.1210
Ey =(————) ws =
16V27) om m

 

(41-9)

Semiconductors The band structure of a semiconductor is
like that of an insulator except that the gap width E, is much
smaller in the semiconductor. For silicon (a semiconductor) at
room temperature, thermal agitation raises a few electrons to
the conduction band, leaving an equal number of holes in the va-
lence band. Both electrons and holes serve as charge carriers.
The number of electrons in the conduction band of silicon can be
increased greatly by doping with small amounts of phosphorus,
thus forming n-type material. The number of holes in the va-
lence band can be greatly increased by doping with aluminum,
thus forming p-type material.
