1240 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

Taking the square root of both sides yields

Vf =CZ-C, (40-27)

in which C is a constant (= 4.96 x 107 Hz!). Equation 40-27 is the equation of
a straight line. It shows that if we plot the square root of the frequency of the K,
x-ray spectral line against the atomic number Z, we should obtain a straight line.
As Fig. 40-16 shows, that is exactly what Moseley found.

Sample Problem 40.03 Characteristic spectrum in x-ray production

A cobalt target is bombarded with electrons, and the wave-
lengths of its characteristic x-ray spectrum are measured.
There is also a second, fainter characteristic spectrum, which
is due to an impurity in the cobalt. The wavelengths of the
K,, lines are 178.9 pm (cobalt) and 143.5 pm (impurity), and
the proton number for cobalt is Zc, = 27. Determine the
impurity using only these data.

KEY IDEA

 

The wavelengths of the K, lines for both the cobalt (Co)
and the impurity (X) fall on a K, Moseley plot, and Eq.
40-27 is the equation for that plot.

Calculations: Substituting c/A for fin Eq. 40-27, we obtain

=CZo-C and .|—=CZ-C.
xX

 

AWILEY

Dividing the second equation by the first neatly eliminates

C, yielding
Aco Zx=1
Ax Zo—1°

Substituting the given data yields
178.9pm — Zx-1
V 143.5pm 27-1"

Solving for the unknown, we find that

Zx = 30.0. (Answer)
Thus, the number of protons in the impurity nucleus is 30,
and a glance at the periodic table identifies the impurity as
zinc. Note that with a larger value of Z than cobalt, zinc has

a smaller value of the K, line. This means that the energy as-
sociated with that jump must be greater in zinc than cobalt.

 

 

 

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

40-7 tasers

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

40.45 Distinguish the light of a laser from the light of a com-
mon lightbulb.

40.46 Sketch energy-level diagrams for the three basic ways
that light can interact with matter (atoms) and identify
which is the basis of lasing.

40.47 Identify metastable states.

40.48 For two energy states, apply the relationship between
the relative number of atoms in the higher state due to ther-
mal agitation, the energy difference, and the temperature.

Key Ideas

e In stimulated emission, an atom in an excited state can be
induced to de-excite to a lower energy state by emitting a
photon if an identical photon passes the atom.

@ The light emitted in stimulated emission is in phase with
and travels in the direction of the light causing the emission.

40.49 Identify population inversion, explain why it is required
in a laser, and relate it to the lifetimes of the states.

40.50 Discuss how a helium—neon laser works, pointing out
which gas lases and explaining why the other gas is required.

40.51 For stimulated emission, apply the relationships be-
tween energy change, frequency, and wavelength.

40.52 For stimulated emission, apply the relationships be-
tween energy, power, time, intensity, area, photon energy,
and rate of photon emission.

@ Alaser can emit light via stimulated emission provided that
its atoms are in a population inversion. That is, for the pair of
levels involved in the stimulated emission, more atoms must
be in the upper level than the lower level so that there is more
stimulated emission than just absorption.

 
