41-1 THE ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS 1255

There are plenty of unoccupied levels (or vacant levels) in the band above
the filled band in Fig. 41-4. However, if an electron is to occupy one of those
levels, it must acquire enough energy to jump across the substantial energy gap
E, that separates the two bands. In diamond, this gap is so wide (the energy
needed to cross it is 5.5 eV, about 140 times the average thermal energy of a free
particle at room temperature) that essentially no electron can jump across it.

Diamond is thus an electrical insulator, and a very good one.

Sample Problem 41.01

Approximately what is the probability that, at room temper-
ature (300K), an electron at the top of the highest filled
band in diamond (an insulator) will jump the energy gap E,
in Fig. 41-4? For diamond, E, is 5.5 eV.

 

KEY IDEA
In Chapter 40 we used Eq. 40-29,
= = e~ Ex EAT, (41-1)

to relate the population N, of atoms at energy level E, to the
population Np at energy level Eo, where the atoms are part of a
system at temperature T (measured in kelvins); k is the
Boltzmann constant (8.62 X 10~° eV/K). In this chapter we
can use Eq. 41-1 to approximate the probability P that an elec-
tron in an insulator will jump the energy gap E, in Fig. 41-4.

Probability of electron excitation in an insulator

Calculations: We first set the energy difference E, — Ey to
E,.Then the probability P of the jump is approximately equal
to the ratio N,,/No of the number of electrons just above the
energy gap to the number of electrons just below the gap.

For diamond, the exponent in Eq. 41-1 is

E, 3.5 eV

 

b= - eS ee .
kT (8.62 x 10 > eV/K)(300 K)
The required probability is then
a va eEgikT) = e218 ~ 3 x 10-8. (Answer)

No
This result tells us that approximately 3 electrons out of 10°
electrons would jump across the energy gap. Because any
diamond stone has fewer than 1073 electrons, we see that the
probability of the jump is vanishingly small. No wonder
diamond is such a good insulator.

AILEY

PLUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

Metals

The feature that defines a metal is that, as Fig. 41-5 shows, the highest occupied
energy level falls somewhere near the middle of an energy band. If we apply a
potential difference across a metal, a current can exist because there are plenty of
vacant levels at nearby higher energies into which electrons (the charge carriers
in a metal) can jump. Thus, a metal can conduct electricity because electrons in its
highest occupied band can easily move into higher energy levels.

In Module 26-4 we discussed the free-electron model of a metal, in which the
conduction electrons are free to move throughout the volume of the sample
like the molecules of a gas in a closed container. We used this model to derive an
expression for the resistivity of a metal. Here we use the model to explain the
behavior of the conduction electrons in the partially filled band of Fig. 41-5.
However, we now assume the energies of these electrons to be quantized and the
Pauli exclusion principle to hold.

Assuming that the electric potential energy U of a conduction electron is uni-
form throughout the lattice, let’s set U = 0 so that the mechanical energy E
is entirely kinetic. Then the level at the bottom of the partially filled band of Fig.
41-5 corresponds to E = 0. The highest occupied level in this band at absolute
zero (T =0K) is called the Fermi level, and the energy corresponding to it is
called the Fermi energy Ey; for copper, Ey = 7.0 eV.

The electron speed corresponding to the Fermi energy is called the Fermi
speed vp. For copper the Fermi speed is 1.6 x 10° m/s. Thus, all motion does not
cease at absolute zero; at that temperature—and solely because of the Pauli ex-

In a conductor,
electrons need
only a small
energy jump.

 

Metal
Figure 41-5 The band-gap pattern for a
metal. The highest filled level, called the
Fermi level, lies near the middle of a band.
Since vacant levels are available within
that band, electrons in the band can easily
change levels, and conduction can
take place.
