All About Atoms

40-1 propenrtics oF ATOMS

Learning Objectives

 

Atter reading this module, you should be able to...

40.01 Discuss the pattem that is seen in a plot of ionization
energies versus atomic number Z.

40.02 Identify that atoms have angular momentum and magnetism.

40.03 Explain the Einstein-de Haas experiment.

40.04 Identify the five quantum numbers of an electron in an
atom and the allowed values of each.

40.05 Determine the number of electron states allowed in a
given shell and subshell.

40.06 Identify that an electron in an atom has an orbital angular
momentum L and an orbital magnetic dipole moment Pons

40.07 Calculate magnitudes for orbital angular momentum
T and orbital magnetic dipole moment Hy) in terms of the
orbital quantum number ¢.

40.08 Apply the relationship between orbital angular momentum
T and orbital magnetic dipole moment Hoy

40.09 Identify that Land HK, cannot be observed (measured) but a
component on a measurement axis (usually called the z axis) can.

40.10 Calculate the z components L, of an orbital angular mo-
mentum F using the orbital magnetic quantum number 1,.

40.11 Calculate the z components j25,,- of an orbital

Key Ideas

magnetic dipole moment j«,,_, using the orbital magnetic
quantum number mz, and the Bohr magneton jug.

40.12 For a given orbital state or spin state, calculate the
semiclassical angle 6.

40.13 Identify that a spin angular momentum S (usually simply
called spin) and a spin magnetic dipole moment /, are intrin-
sic properties of electrons (and also protons and neutrons).

40.14 Calculate magnitudes for spin angular momentum 5)
and spin magnetic dipole moment /Z, in terms of the spin
quantum number s.

40.15 Apply the relationship between the spin angular mo-
mentum S and the spin magnetic dipole moment 7Z,.

40.16 Identify that 3S and 4, cannot be observed (measured)
but a component on a measurement axis can.

40.17 Calculate the z components S- of the spin angular mo-
mentum S using the spin magnetic quantum number m,.

40.18 Calculate the z components 4,,. of the spin magnetic
dipole moment /Z, using the spin magnetic quantum num-
ber m, and the Bohr magneton jug.

40.19 Identify the effective magnetic dipole moment of an atom.

 

@ Atoms have quantized energies and can make quantum
jumps between them. If a jump between a higher energy and a
lower energy involves the emission or absorption of a photon,
the frequency associated with the light is given by

hf= Enign — Brow
@ States with the same value of quantum number n form a shell.
@ States with the same values of quantum numbers 7 and €
form a subshell.

@ The magnitude of the orbital angular momentum of an elec-
tron trapped in an atom has quantized values given by

L= V+ Dh, for €=0,1,2,...,7—1),

where hi is h/2 7, € is the orbital quantum number, and nis the
electron's principal quantum number.
@ The component L, of the orbital angular momentum ona
z axis is quantized and given by
L,= mh, form, = 0, +1, +2,..., +€,

where mz, is the orbital magnetic quantum number.

@ The magnitude 4,,,, of the orbital magnetic moment of the
electron is quantized with the values given by

Hors = Go VE + Dh,

where mis the electron mass.
@ The component fo,p,2 on a Z axis is also quantized according to

e
Horb.z = Fp meh = —mypp,

where ug is the Bohr magneton:

ch hg 974 x 102 HT.

2m
@ Every electron, whether trapped or free, has an intrinsic spin
angular momentum S with a magnitude that is quantized as

S=Vs(s +1)h, fors = i

where s is the spin quantum number. An electron is said to be a
spin-} particle.

 

He A4nm

1219
