It is the same with the electrons, positrons, and neutrinos emitted from nuclei
during beta decay. They are created during the emission process. For beta-minus
decay, a neutron transforms into a proton within the nucleus according to

n>ptet+p (42-26)
For beta-plus decay, a proton transforms into a neutron via
prontet»y (42-27)

These processes show why the mass number A of a nuclide undergoing beta de-
cay does not change; one of its constituent nucleons simply changes its character
according to Eq. 42-26 or 42-27.

In both alpha decay and beta decay, the same amount of energy is released
in every individual decay of a particular radionuclide. In the alpha decay of a
particular radionuclide, every emitted alpha particle has the same sharply
defined kinetic energy. However, in the beta-minus decay of Eq. 42-26 with elec-
tron emission, the disintegration energy Q is shared —in varying proportions—be-
tween the emitted electron and neutrino. Sometimes the electron gets nearly all the
energy, sometimes the neutrino does. In every case, however, the sum of the elec-
tron’s energy and the neutrino’s energy gives the same value Q. A similar sharing
of energy, with a sum equal to Q, occurs in beta-plus decay (Eq. 42-27).

Thus, in beta decay the energy of the emitted electrons or positrons may
range from near zero up to a certain maximum K,,,x. Figure 42-11 shows the
distribution of positron energies for the beta decay of “Cu (see Eq. 42-25). The
maximum positron energy Kj, must equal the disintegration energy Q because
the neutrino has approximately zero energy when the positron has Kyax?

Q = Kaax- (42-28)
The Neutrino

Wolfgang Pauli first suggested the existence of neutrinos in 1930. His neutrino
hypothesis not only permitted an understanding of the energy distribution of
electrons or positrons in beta decay but also solved another early beta-decay
puzzle involving “missing” angular momentum.

The neutrino is a truly elusive particle; the mean free path of an energetic
neutrino in water has been calculated as no less than several thousand light-
years. At the same time, neutrinos left over from the big bang that presumably
marked the creation of the universe are the most abundant particles of physics.
Billions of them pass through our bodies every second, leaving no trace.

In spite of their elusive character, neutrinos have been detected in the lab-
oratory. This was first done in 1953 by F. Reines and C. L. Cowan, using neutrinos
generated in a high-power nuclear reactor. (In 1995, Reines received a Nobel
Prize for this work.) In spite of the difficulties of detection, experimental neu-
trino physics is now a well-developed branch of experimental physics, with avid
practitioners at laboratories throughout the world.

The Sun emits neutrinos copiously from the nuclear furnace at its core,
and at night these messengers from the center of the Sun come up at us from
below, Earth being almost totally transparent to them. In February 1987, light
from an exploding star in the Large Magellanic Cloud (a nearby galaxy) reached
Earth after having traveled for 170 000 years. Enormous numbers of neutrinos
were generated in this explosion, and about 10 of them were picked up by a sensi-
tive neutrino detector in Japan; Fig. 42-12 shows a record of their passage.

Radioactivity and the Nuclidic Chart

We can increase the amount of information obtainable from the nuclidic chart
of Fig. 42-5 by including a third axis showing the mass excess A expressed in the

42-5 BETA DECAY 1293

Kunax

Relative number
of positrons

°

02 04 0.6
Kinetic energy (MeV)

Figure 42-11 The distribution of the kinetic
energies of positrons emitted in the beta
decay of “Cu. The maximum kinetic energy
of the distribution (K ax) is 0.653 MeV. In
all “Cu decay events, this energy is shared
between the positron and the neutrino, in
varying proportions. The most probable
energy for an emitted positron is about

0.15 MeV.

8 8 8

Energy (MeV)

Ss

 

Time (s)

Figure 42-12 A burst of neutrinos from the
supernova SN 1987A, which occurred at
(relative) time 0, stands out from the usual
background of neutrinos. (For neutrinos, 10
is a “burst.”) The particles were detected by
an elaborate detector housed deep ina
mine in Japan. The supernova was visible
only in the Southern Hemisphere; so the
neutrinos had to penetrate Earth (a trifling
barrier for them) to reach the detector.
