H A P T CE

Conduction of Electricity in Solids

41-1 THE ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

41.01 Identify the three basic properties of crystalline solids
and sketch unit cells for them.

41.02 Distinguish insulators, metals, and semiconductors.

41.03 With sketches, explain the transition of an energy-level dia-
gram for a single atom to an energy-band diagram for many
atoms.

41.04 Draw a band-gap diagram for an insulator, indicating
the filled and empty bands and explaining what prevents
the electrons from participating in a current.

41.05 Draw a band-gap diagram for a metal, and explain
what feature, in contrast to an insulator, allows electrons to
participate in a current.

41.06 Identify the Fermi level, Fermi energy, and Fermi speed.

41.07 Distinguish monovalent atoms, bivalent atoms, and
trivalent atoms.

41.08 For a conducting material, apply the relationships
between the number density n of conduction electrons
and the material's density, volume V, and molar mass M.

41.09 Identify that in a metal’s partially filled band, thermal
agitation can jump some of the conduction electrons to

Key Ideas

higher energy levels.

41.10 For a given energy level in a band, calculate the density
of states N(E) and identify that it is actually a double
density (per volume and per energy).

41.11 Find the number of states per unit volume in a range
AE at height E in a band by integrating N(E) over that
range or, if AE is small relative to E, by evaluating the
product N(E) AE.

41.12 For a given energy level, calculate the probability P(E)
that the level is occupied by electrons.

41.13 Identify that probability P(E) is 0.5 at the Fermi level.

41.14 At a given energy level, calculate the density N,(E) of
occupied states.

41.15 For a given range in energy levels, calculate the num-
ber of states and the number of occupied states.

41.16 Sketch graphs of the density of states N(E),
occupancy probability P(E), and the density of
occupied states N,(£), all versus height in a band.

41.17 Apply the relationship between the Fermi energy Er
and the number density of conduction electrons n.

 

@ Crystalline solids can be broadly divided into insulators,
metals, and semiconductors.
@ The quantized energy levels for a crystalline solid form
bands that are separated by gaps.
@ In a metal, the highest band that contains any electrons is
only partially filled, and the highest filled level at a temperature
of 0 K is called the Fermi level E;.
@ The electrons in the partially filled band are the conduction
electrons, and their number density (number per unit volume) is

___material’s density

MN, ’

where M is the material's molar mass and N, is Avogadro's
number.
@ The number density of states of the allowed energy levels
per unit volume and per unit energy interval is

3/2
N(E) = S20 pe

where mis the electron mass and Eis the energy in joules at
which N(E) is to be evaluated.

@ The occupancy probability P(£) is the probability that a
given available state will be occupied by an electron:

1

P(E) = e(E-EPUKT 4 1°

@ The density of occupied states N,(£) is given by the product
of the density of states function and the occupancy probabil-

ity function:
N&E) = N(E) P(E).
@ The Fermi energy £;- for a metal can be found by integrating
N,(E) for temperature T = 0 K (absolute zero) from E = 0 to
E = E;. The result is
3 213 42 0.12 1/7
Ep= (3) — 3 = ——_p
16V27/  m m

2/3

 

1252
