Lasers and Laser Light

In the early 1960s, quantum physics made one of its many contributions to tech-
nology: the laser. Laser light, like the light from an ordinary lightbulb, is emitted
when atoms make a transition from one quantum state to a lower one. However,
in a lightbulb the emissions are random, both in time and direction, and in a laser
they are coordinated so that the emissions are at the same time and in the same
direction. As a result, laser light has the following characteristics:

1. Laser light is highly monochromatic. Light from an ordinary incandescent
lightbulb is spread over a continuous range of wavelengths and is certainly not
monochromatic. The radiation from a fluorescent neon sign is monochro-
matic, true, to about 1 part in 10°, but the sharpness of definition of laser light
can be many times greater, as much as | part in 10".

2. Laser light is highly coherent. Individual long waves (wave trains) for laser
light can be several hundred kilometers long. When two separated beams
that have traveled such distances over separate paths are recombined, they
“remember” their common origin and are able to form a pattern of interfer-
ence fringes. The corresponding coherence length for wave trains emitted by a
lightbulb is typically less than a meter.

»

Laser light is highly directional. A laser beam spreads very little; it departs from
strict parallelism only because of diffraction at the exit aperture of the laser. For
example, a laser pulse used to measure the distance to the Moon generates a spot
on the Moon’s surface with a diameter of only a few kilometers. Light from an or-
dinary bulb can be made into an approximately parallel beam by a lens, but the
beam divergence is much greater than for laser light. Each point on a lightbulb’s
filament forms its own separate beam, and the angular divergence of the overall
composite beam is set by the size of the filament.

4. Laser light can be sharply focused. If two light beams transport the same amount
of energy, the beam that can be focused to the smaller spot will have the greater
intensity (power per unit area) at that spot. For laser light, the focused spot can
be so small that an intensity of 10'7 W/cm? is readily obtained. An oxyacetylene
flame, by contrast, has an intensity of only about 10? W/cm’.

Lasers Have Many Uses

The smallest lasers, used for voice and data transmission over optical fibers,
have as their active medium a semiconducting crystal about the size of a pin-
head. Small as they are, such lasers can generate about 200 mW of power. The
largest lasers, used for nuclear fusion research and for astronomical and mili-
tary applications, fill a large building. The largest such laser can generate brief
pulses of laser light with a power level, during the pulse, of about 10'* W. This is
a few hundred times greater than the total electrical power generating capacity
of the United States. To avoid a brief national power blackout during a pulse,
the energy required for each pulse is stored up at a steady rate during the rela-
tively long interpulse interval.

Among the many uses of lasers are reading bar codes, manufacturing and
reading compact discs and DVDs, performing surgery of many kinds (both as a
surgical aid as in Fig. 40-17 and as a cutting and cauterizing tool), surveying, cut-
ting cloth in the garment industry (several hundred layers at a time), welding
auto bodies, and generating holograms.

 

Figure 40-17 A patient’s head is scanned and mapped by (red) laser light in preparation for
brain surgery. During the surgery, the laser-derived image of the head will be superim-
posed on the model of the brain shown on the monitor, to guide the surgical team into the
region shown in green (lower right) on the model displayed on the screen.

40-7 LASERS

Sam Ogden/Photo Researchers, Inc.

1241

 
