41-1 THE ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS 1257

Conductivity Above Absolute Zero

Our practical interest in the conduction of electricity in metals is at tempera-
tures above absolute zero. What happens to the electron distribution of
Fig. 41-5 at such higher temperatures? As we shall see, surprisingly little. Of
the electrons in the partially filled band of Fig. 41-5, only those that are close
to the Fermi energy find unoccupied levels above them, and only those elec-
trons are free to be boosted to these higher levels by thermal agitation. Even
at T = 1000 K (the copper would glow brightly in a dark room), the electron
distribution among the available levels does not differ much from the distribu-
tionat T=0K.

Let us see why. The quantity kT, where k is the Boltzmann constant, is a con-
venient measure of the energy that may be given to a conduction electron by the
random thermal motions of the lattice. At T = 1000 K, we have kT = 0.086 eV.
No electron can hope to have its energy changed by more than a few times this
relatively small amount by thermal agitation alone; so at best only those few con-
duction electrons whose energies are close to the Fermi energy are likely to jump
to higher energy levels due to thermal agitation. Poetically stated, thermal agita-
tion normally causes only ripples on the surface of the Fermi sea of electrons; the
vast depths of that sea lie undisturbed.

How Many Quantum States Are There?

The ability of a metal to conduct electricity depends on how many quantum
states are available to its electrons and what the energies of those states are.
Thus, a question arises: What are the energies of the individual states in the par-
tially filled band of Fig. 41-5? This question is too difficult to answer because we
cannot possibly list the energies of so many states individually. We ask instead:
How many states in a unit volume of a sample have energies in the energy range
E to E+ dE? We write this number as N(E) dE, where N(E) is called the
density of states at energy E. The conventional unit for N(E) dE is states per
cubic meter (states/m*, or simply m~?), and the conventional unit for M(E) is
states per cubic meter per electron-volt (m~* eV~).

We can find an expression for the density of states by counting the number
of standing electron matter waves that can fit into a box the size of the metal
sample we are considering. This is analogous to counting the number of standing
waves of sound that can exist in a closed organ pipe. Here the problem is three-
dimensional (not one-dimensional) and the waves are matter waves (not sound
waves). Such counting is covered in more advanced treatments of solid state
physics; the result is

3/2
ME) = ae E'? (density of states,m™J-'), (41-5)

where m (= 9.109 x 10™*! kg) is the electron mass, h (= 6.626 X 10-™ J-s) is the
Planck constant, E is the energy in joules at which N(E) is to be evaluated, and
N(E) is in states per cubic meter per joule (m? J~'). To modify this equation so
that the value of E is in electron-volts and the value of N(E) is in states per cubic
meter per electron-volt (m~* eV), multiply the right side of the equation by e*7,
where e is the fundamental charge, 1.602 x 10!” C. Figure 41-6 is a plot of sucha
modified version of Eq. 41-5. Note that nothing in Eq. 41-5 or Fig. 41-6 involves

the shape, temperature, or composition of the sample.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

Is the spacing between adjacent energy levels at E = 4 eV in copper larger than, the
same as, orsmaller than the spacing at E = 6 eV?

The density of energy levels
increases upward in a band.

  

4 6 8 10
Energy (eV)
Figure 41-6 The density of states N(E)—that
is, the number of electron energy levels
per unit energy interval per unit volume —
plotted as a function of electron energy.
The density of states function simply
counts the available states; it says nothing
about whether these states are occupied by
electrons.
