40-3 macnetic RESONANCE

Learning Objectives

40-3 MAGNETIC RESONANCE 1229

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

40.22 Fora proton in a magnetic field, sketch the field vec-
tor and the proton's magnetic moment vector for the
lower energy state and the upper energy state and then
include the labels of spin up and spin down.

40.23 For a proton in a magnetic field, calculate the energy

Key Ideas

difference between the two spin states and find the pho-
ton frequency and wavelength required for a transition
between the states.

40.24 Explain the procedure of producing a nuclear magnetic
resonance spectrum.

 

@ A proton has an intrinsic spin angular momentum S and an

@ The energy required of a photon to spin-flip the proton be-

intrinsic magnetic dipole moment 7 that are in the same
direction (because the proton is positively charged).

@ The magnetic dipole moment Z of a proton in amagnetic field B
has two quantized components along the field axis: spin up (12, is
in the direction B and spin down yz, isin the opposite direction).

@ Contrary to the situation with an electron, spin up is the
lower energy orientation; the difference between the two ori-
entations is 2B.

Magnetic Resonance

As we discussed briefly in Module 32-5, a proton has a spin magnetic dipole
moment # that is associated with the proton’s intrinsic spin angular momentum
S. The two vectors are said to be coupled together and, because the proton is pos-
itively charged, they are in the same direction. Suppose a proton is located in a
magnetic field B that is directed along the positive direction of a z axis. Then
has two possible quantized components along that axis: the component can
be +y, if the vector is in the direction of B (Fig. 40-10a) or —y, if it is opposite
the direction of B (Fig, 40-10b).

From Eq. 28-38 (U(@) = — +B), recall that an energy is associated with the
orientation of any magnetic dipole moment /# located in an external magnetic
field B. Thus, energy is associated with the two orientations of Figs. 40-10a and b.
The orientation in Fig. 40-10a is the lower-energy state (—,B) and is called the
spin-up state because the proton’s spin component S- (not shown) is also aligned
with B. The orientation in Fig. 40-10b (the spin-down state) is the higher-energy
state (4,B). Thus, the energy difference between these two states is

AE = :B ~ (~,B) = 2B. (40-21)

If we place a sample of water in a magnetic field B, the protons in the hydro-
gen portions of each water molecule tend to be in the lower-energy state. (We
shall not consider the oxygen portions.) Any one of these protons can jump to the
higher-energy state by absorbing a photon with an energy hf equal to AE. That is,
the proton can jump by absorbing a photon of energy

hf = 2p-B. (40-22)

Such absorption is called magnetic resonance or, as originally, nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), and the consequent reversal of S, is called spin-flipping.

In practice, the photons required for magnetic resonance have an associated
frequency in the radio-frequency (RF) range and are provided by a small coil
wrapped around the sample undergoing resonance. An electromagnetic oscilla-
tor called an RF source drives a sinusoidal current in the coil at frequency f. The
electromagnetic (EM) field set up within the coil and sample also oscillates at

tween the two orientations is

hf = 2y-B.

@ The field is the vector sum of an external field set up by
equipment and an internal field set up by the atoms and nu-
clei surrounding the proton.

@ Detection of spin-flips can lead to nuclear magnetic reso-
nance spectra by which specific substances can be identified.

Low High
energy energy
Hw AB B
Me
(@ (d)
Spin down |
E 2B
spinup [

(c)
Figure 40-10 The z component of j# for a pro-
ton in the (a) lower-energy (spin-up) and
(b) higher-energy (spin-down) state. (¢) An
energy-level diagram for the states, showing,
the upward quantum jump the proton
makes when its spin flips from up to down.
