FIGURE 17.17
Drosophila homeotic genes. Called the
homeotic gene complex, or HOM complex, the

Drosophila embryo
Head

Abdomen

 

genes are grouped into two clusters, the
Antennapedia complex (anterior) and the
bithorax complex (posterior).

lab

 

pb Did Scr _Antp Ubx abd-A_abd-B

Drosophila HOM genes

Mutations in these genes all affect body parts of the tho-
racic and abdominal segments, and Lewis concluded that
the genes of the bithorax complex control the development
of body parts in the rear half of the thorax and all of the ab-
domen. Most interestingly, the order of the genes in the
bithorax complex mirrors the order of the body parts they
control, as if the genes are activated serially! Genes at the
beginning of the cluster switch on development of the tho-
rax, those in the middle control the anterior part of the ab-
domen, and those at the end affect the tip of the abdomen.
A second cluster of homeotic genes, the Antennapedia
complex, was discovered in 1980 by Thomas Kaufmann.
The Antennapedia complex governs the anterior end of the
fly, and the order of genes in it also corresponds to the
order of segments they control (figure 17.17).

The Homeobox

Drosophila homeotic genes typically contain the home-
obox, a sequence of 180 nucleotides that codes for a 60-
amino acid DNA-binding peptide domain called the home-
odomain (figure 17.18). As we saw in chapter 16, proteins
that contain the homeodomain function as transcription
factors, ensuring that developmentally related genes are
transcribed at the appropriate time. Segmentation genes
such as bicoid and engrailed also contain the homeobox se-
quence. Clearly, the homeobox distinguishes those portions
of the genome devoted to pattern formation.

Variable region

Hinge region

Homeodomain Helices

ko

COOH

FIGURE 17.18

Homeodomain protein. This protein plays an important
regulatory role when it binds to DNA and regulates expression of
specific genes. The variable region of the protein determines the
specific activity of the protein. Also included in this protein is a
small hinge region and the homeodomain, a 60-amino-acid
sequence common to all proteins of this type. The homeodomain
region of the protein is coded for by the homeobox region of
genes and is composed of four o helices. One of the helices
recognizes and binds to a specific DNA sequence in target genes.

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 347
