1308 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

explained that he had carefully mimicked Vermeer's style, using a
300-year-old canvas and Vermeer’s choice of pigments; he had then
signed Vermeer’s name to the work and baked the painting to give
it an authentically old look.

‘Was van Meegeren lying to avoid a conviction of treason, hop-
ing to be convicted of only the lesser crime of fraud? To art experts,
Emmaus certainly looked like a Vermeer but, at the time of van
Meegeren’s trial in 1947, there was no scientific way to answer the
question. However, in 1968 Bernard Keisch of Carnegie-Mellon
University was able to answer the question with newly developed
techniques of radioactive analysis.

Specifically, he analyzed a small sample of white lead-bearing
pigment removed from Emmaus. This pigment is refined from lead
ore, in which the lead is produced by a long radioactive decay se-
ries that starts with unstable *“U and ends with stable Pb.To fol-
low the spirit of Keisch’s analysis, focus on the following abbrevi-
ated portion of that decay series, in which intermediate, relatively
short-lived radionuclides have been omitted:

2 226 210 206
"Thay R8 Tay Po ey
The longer and more important half-lives in this portion of the de-
cay series are indicated.

(a) Show that in a sample of lead ore, the rate at which the
number of ?!°Pb nuclei changes is given by

ANr9

Tenn = Anan ~ Ano a1

where Nyy and Nyy, are the numbers of 2°Pb nuclei and “Ra nu-
clei in the sample and Ayjo and Ay, are the corresponding disinte-
gration constants.

Because the decay series has been active for billions of years
and because the half-life of “Pb is much less than that of ”°Ra, the
nuclides Ra and Pb are in equilibrium: that is, the numbers of
these nuclides (and thus their concentrations) in the sample do not
change. (b) What is the ratio Ry6/R210 of the activities of these nu-
clides in the sample of lead ore? (c) What is the ratio Nyy«/Noio of
their numbers?

When lead pigment is refined from the ore, most of the ”°Ra
is eliminated. Assume that only 1.00% remains. Just after the pig-
ment is produced, what are the ratios (d) Ry¢/Ryi9 and (e)
No2/No10?

Keisch realized that with time the ratio Ry26/R29 of the pig-
ment would gradually change from the value in freshly refined
pigment back to the value in the ore, as equilibrium between the
20Pb and the remaining ”°Ra is established in the pigment. If
Emmaus were painted by Vermeer and the sample of pigment
taken from it were 300 years old when examined in 1968, the ratio
would be close to the answer of (b). If Emmaus were painted by
van Meegeren in the 1930s and the sample were only about 30
years old, the ratio would be close to the answer of (d). Keisch
found a ratio of 0.09. (f) Is Emmaus a Vermeer?

97 From data presented in the first few paragraphs of Module 42-3,
find (a) the disintegration constant A and (b) the half-life of U.
