*°43 In the ground state of the hydrogen atom, the electron has a
total energy of — 13.6 eV. What are (a) its kinetic energy and (b) its
potential energy if the electron is one Bohr radius from the central
nucleus?

°44 A hydrogen atom in a state having a binding energy (the
energy required to remove an electron) of 0.85eV makes a
transition to a state with an excitation energy (the difference
between the energy of the state and that of the ground state) of
10.2 eV. (a) What is the energy of the photon emitted as a result
of the transition? What are the (b) higher quantum number and
(c) lower quantum number of the transition producing this
emission?

**45 SSM The wave functions for the three states with the dot
plots shown in Fig. 39-23, which have n = 2,€ = land m, = 0, +1,
and —1,are

Unyol(r, 0) = (AV 2m) (a-*2)(rlae-"™ cos 8,
doy a(t, 0) = (UI8V7)(a-9?)(ria)ye-"4(sin Be*'#,
oy _a(r, 0) = (UI8V7)(a-8?)(ria)ye-"4(sin Be,

in which the subscripts on (7, @) give the values of the quantum
numbers n, €, m, and the angles @ and ¢ are defined in Fig. 39-22.
Note that the first wave function is real but the others, which
involve the imaginary number i, are complex. Find the radial prob-
ability density P(r) for (a) Yor and (b) Yi: (same as for Yo-1).
(c) Show that each P(r) is consistent with the corresponding dot
plot in Fig. 39-23. (d) Add the radial probability densities for yo1o,
yy 41, and y;_; and then show that the sum is spherically symmet-
ric, depending only on r.

°°46 Calculate the probability that the electron in the hydrogen
atom, in its ground state, will be found between spherical shells
whose radii are a and 2a, where ais the Bohr radius.

°°47 For what value of the principal quantum number n would
the effective radius, as shown in a probability density dot plot for
the hydrogen atom, be 1.0mm? Assume that € has its maximum
value of n — 1. (Hint: See Fig. 39-24.)

°48 Light of wavelength 121.6nm is emitted by a hydrogen
atom. What are the (a) higher quantum number and (b) lower
quantum number of the transition producing this emission? (c)
What is the name of the series that includes the transition?

°°49 How much work must be done to pull apart the electron and
the proton that make up the hydrogen atom if the atom is initially
in (a) its ground state and (b) the state with n = 2?

°°50 Light of wavelength 102.6nm is emitted by a hydrogen
atom. What are the (a) higher quantum number and (b) lower
quantum number of the transition producing this emission? (c)
What is the name of the series that includes the transition?

°°51 What is the probability that in the ground state of the hydro-
gen atom, the electron will be found at a radius greater than the
Bohr radius?

°°52 A hydrogen atom is excited from its ground state to the state
with n = 4. (a) How much energy must be absorbed by the atom?
Consider the photon energies that can be emitted by the atom as it
de-excites to the ground state in the several possible ways. (b) How
many different energies are possible; what are the (c) highest,
(d) second highest, (e) third highest, (f) lowest, (g) second lowest,
and (h) third lowest energies?

°°53 SSM WWW Schrédinger’s equation for states of the hy-

PROBLEMS 1217

drogen atom for which the orbital quantum number ¢ is zero is

 

1d at) 802m
> (P—)+ - =0.
Pdr (- ar) +e LE UOW=0
Verify that Eq. 39-39, which describes the ground state of the hy-
drogen atom, is a solution of this equation.

54 The wave function for the hydrogen-atom quantum state
represented by the dot plot shown in Fig. 39-21, which has n = 2

and € =m, = 0,is
1 r
soz — 2) grea,
4V27 ( )

in which a is the Bohr radius and the subscript on y(r) gives the
values of the quantum numbers n, €, my. (a) Plot y3(r) and show
that your plot is consistent with the dot plot of Fig. 39-21. (b) Show
analytically that 90(r) has a maximum at r = 4a. (c) Find the ra-
dial probability density Py 9(r) for this state. (d) Show that

 

Yoo?) =

[ Pag() dr = 1
,

and thus that the expression above for the wave function y200(r)
has been properly normalized.

55 The radial probability density for the ground state of the
hydrogen atom is a maximum when r = a, where a is the Bohr ra-
dius. Show that the average value of r,defined as

Tove = [ro rdr,

has the value 1.5a. In this expression for ryy,, each value of P(?) is
weighted with the value of r at which it occurs. Note that the average
value of ris greater than the value of r for which P(r) is amaximum.

Additional Problems

56 Let AE,, be the energy difference between two adjacent en-
ergy levels for an electron trapped in a one-dimensional infinite
potential well. Let E be the energy of either of the two levels. (a)
Show that the ratio AE,,/E approaches the value 2/n at large val-
ues of the quantum number n. As 1 — %, does (b) AE, (¢) E, or
(d) AE,q/E approach zero? (e) What do these results mean in
terms of the correspondence principle?

57 Anelectron is trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential
well. Show that the energy difference AE between its quantum ley-
els nandn + 2is (W2/2mL2)(n + 1).

58 As Fig. 39-8 suggests, the probability density for an electron in
the region 0 <x < L for the finite potential well of Fig. 39-7 is
sinusoidal, being given by ¥°(x) = B sin? kx, in which B is a con-
stant. (a) Show that the wave function (x) that may be found from
this equation is a solution of Schrédinger’s equation in its one-
dimensional form. (b) Find an expression for k that makes this true.

59 ssM As Fig, 39-8 suggests, the probability density for the
region x > L in the finite potential well of Fig. 39-7 drops off
exponentially according to y?(x) = Ce~?*, where C is a constant.
(a) Show that the wave function (x) that may be found from
this equation is a solution of Schrédinger’s equation in its one-
dimensional form. (b) Find an expression for k for this to be true.

60 An electron is confined to a narrow evacuated tube of length
3.0 m; the tube functions as a one-dimensional infinite potential well.
(a) What is the energy difference between the electron’s ground state
and its first excited state? (b) At what quantum number n would the
energy difference between adjacent energy levels be 1.0eV—which
