1278 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

Sample Problem 42.01

An alpha particle with kinetic energy K; = 5.30 MeV
happens, by chance, to be headed directly toward the nucleus
of a neutral gold atom (Fig. 42-4a). What is its distance of
closest approach d (least center-to-center separation) to the
nucleus? Assume that the atom remains stationary.

KEY IDEAS

 

(1) Throughout the motion, the total mechanical energy E of
the particle-atom system is conserved. (2) In addition to the
kinetic energy, that total energy includes electric potential
energy Uas given by Eq. 24-46 (U =4q1q0/4 mer).

Calculations: The alpha particle has a charge of +2e because
it contains two protons. The target nucleus has a charge of
dm = +79e because it contains 79 protons. However, that nu-
clear charge is surrounded by an electron “cloud” with a
charge of q. = —79e, and thus the alpha particle initially
“sees” a neutral atom with a net charge of qatom = 0. The
electric force on the particle is zero and the initial electric
potential energy of the particle-atom system is U;=0.

Once the alpha particle enters the atom, we say that it
passes through the electron cloud surrounding the nucleus.

Electron cloud

) Initially the particle

 

  
  

sees a neutral atom. qe=-79¢
Alpha
qu=*2e
>"
m=O Nucleus
«@ : day = #790
The force has
momentarily
stopped the The energy
particle. transfer is
complete.

Rutherford scattering of an alpha particle by a gold nucleus

That cloud then acts as a closed conducting spherical shell
and, by Gauss’ law, has no effect on the (now internal)
charged alpha particle. Then the alpha particle “sees” only
the nuclear charge qay. Because q, and qa, are both posi-
tively charged, a repulsive electric force acts on the alpha
particle, slowing it, and the particle-atom system has a po-
tential energy

1 qe4au

Amey or

 

that depends on the center-to-center separation r of the
incoming particle and the target nucleus (Fig. 42-4b).

As the repulsive force slows the alpha particle, energy
is transferred from kinetic energy to electric potential
energy. The transfer is complete when the alpha particle
momentarily stops at the distance of closest approach d to
the target nucleus (Fig. 42-4c). Just then the kinetic energy
is K, = 0 and the particle-atom system has the electric
potential energy

1 Gan
U,=——
! Ane d

 

The particle
now seesa
positive nucleus.
Arepulsive

force slows it.

  
   
    

Energy is being

transferred from
kinetic energy to
potential energy.

K<5.30 MeV
u>0
(

The force propels
the particle back
out of the atom.

   
  

The energy is
being transferred
back to kinetic
energy.

K<5.30 MeV
u>0

Figure 42-4. An alpha particle (a) approaches and (b) then enters a gold atom, headed toward the nucleus. The alpha particle
(c) comes to a stop at the point of closest approach and (d) is propelled back out of the atom.
