1298

CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

Two models of the nucleus have proved useful. Although based on assump-
tions that seem flatly to exclude each other, each accounts very well for a selected
group of nuclear properties. After describing them separately, we shall see how
these two models may be combined to form a single coherent picture of the
atomic nucleus.

The Collective Model

In the collective model, formulated by Niels Bohr, the nucleons, moving around
within the nucleus at random, are imagined to interact strongly with each other,
like the molecules in a drop of liquid. A given nucleon collides frequently with
other nucleons in the nuclear interior, its mean free path as it moves about being
substantially less than the nuclear radius.

The collective model permits us to correlate many facts about nuclear masses
and binding energies; it is useful (as you will see later) in explaining nuclear
fission. It is also useful for understanding a large class of nuclear reactions.

Consider, for example, a generalized nuclear reaction of the form

X+acCoYtb. (42-34)

We imagine that projectile a enters target nucleus X, forming a compound nucleus C
and conveying to it a certain amount of excitation energy. The projectile, perhaps a
neutron, is at once caught up by the random motions that characterize the nuclear
interior. It quickly loses its identity—so to speak —and the excitation energy it car-
ried into the nucleus is quickly shared with all the other nucleons in C.

The quasi-stable state represented by C in Eq. 42-34 may have a mean life of
10-'°s before it decays to Y and b. By nuclear standards, this is a very long time,
being about one million times longer than the time required for a nucleon with
a few million electron-volts of energy to travel across a nucleus.

The central feature of this compound-nucleus concept is that the formation
of the compound nucleus and its eventual decay are totally independent events.
At the time of its decay, the compound nucleus has “forgotten” how it was
formed. Hence, its mode of decay is not influenced by its mode of formation. As
an example, Fig. 42-14 shows three possible ways in which the compound nucleus
?°Ne might be formed and three in which it might decay. Any of the three forma-
tion modes can lead to any of the three decay modes.

The Independent Particle Model

In the collective model, we assume that the nucleons move around at random and
bump into one another frequently. The independent particle model, however, is
based on just the opposite assumption—namely, that each nucleon remains in a
well-defined quantum state within the nucleus and makes hardly any collisions at
all! The nucleus, unlike the atom, has no fixed center of charge; we assume in this
model that each nucleon moves in a potential well that is determined by the
smeared-out (time-averaged) motions of all the other nucleons.

A nucleon ina nucleus, like an electron in an atom, has a set of quantum num-
bers that defines its state of motion. Also, nucleons obey the Pauli exclusion princi-
ple, just as electrons do; that is, no two nucleons in a nucleus may occupy the same
quantum state at the same time. In this regard, the neutrons and the protons are
treated separately, each particle type with its own set of quantum states.

O + Cl my SF +?H
MF+p YNetn
Ne + ¥ "0 +%He
‘ Th Th
Figure 42-14 The formation modes andthe decay jymation deew,

modes of the compound nucleus ”Ne. modes modes
