41-1 THE ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS

What Is Physics?

A major question in physics, which underlies solid-state electronic devices, is
this: What are the mechanisms by which a material conducts, or does not con-
duct, electricity? The answers are complex and poorly understood, largely be-
cause they involve the application of quantum physics to a tremendous number
of particles and atoms grouped together and interacting. Let’s start by charac-
terizing conducting and nonconducting materials.

  

The Electrical Properties of Solids

We shall examine only crystalline solids — that is, solids whose atoms are arranged

in a repetitive three-dimensional structure called a lattice. We shall not consider

such solids as wood, plastic, glass, and rubber, whose atoms are not arranged in

such repetitive patterns. Figure 41-1 shows the basic repetitive units (the unit cells)

of the lattice structures of copper, our prototype of a metal, and silicon and dia-

mond (carbon), our prototypes of a semiconductor and an insulator, respectively.
We can classify solids electrically according to three basic properties:

1. Their resistivity » at room temperature, with the SI unit ohm-meter (Q-m);
resistivity is defined in Module 26-3.

2. Their temperature coefficient of resistivity a, defined as a = (1/p)(dp/dT) in
Eq. 26-17 and having the SI unit inverse kelvin (K~!). We can evaluate a for
any solid by measuring p over a range of temperatures.

3. Their number density of charge carriers 1. This quantity, the number of charge
carriers per unit volume, can be found from measurements of the Hall effect,
as discussed in Module 28-2, and has the SI unit inverse cubic meter (m~*).

From measurements of resistivity, we find that there are some materials,
insulators, that do not conduct electricity at all. These are materials with very
high resistivity. Diamond, an excellent example, has a resistivity greater than
that of copper by the enormous factor of about 10.

We can then use measurements of p, a, and n to divide most noninsulators, at
least at low temperatures, into two categories: metals and semiconductors.

 

 

Semiconductors have a considerably greater resistivity pthan metals.

Semiconductors have a temperature coefficient of resistivity a that is both high
and negative. That is, the resistivity of a semiconductor decreases with tem-
perature, whereas that of a metal increases.

Semiconductors have a considerably lower number density of charge carriers n
than metals.

Table 41-1 shows values of these quantities for copper, our prototype metal, and
silicon, our prototype semiconductor.

Now let’s consider our central question: What features make diamond an in-
sulator, copper a metal, and silicon a semiconductor?

Table 41-1 Some Electrical Properties of Two Materials?

 

Material
Property Unit Copper Silicon.
Type of conductor Metal Semiconductor
Resistivity, p 2m 2x 10-§ 3 x 103
Temperature coefficient of resistivity, a Ko +4 x 10-3 70 x 10-3
Number density of charge carriers, n m3 9 x 10% 1x 10%

“All values are for room temperature.

1253

 

()

Figure 41-1 (a) The unit cell for copper is a
cube. There is one copper atom (darker) at
each corner of the cube and one copper

atom (lighter) at the center of each face of
the cube. The arrangement is called face-
centered cubic. (b) The unit cell for either
silicon or the carbon atoms in diamond is
also a cube, the atoms being arranged in
what is called a diamond lattice. There is one
atom (darkest) at each corner of the cube
and one atom (lightest) at the center of
each cube face; in addition, four atoms.
(medium color) lie within the cube. Every
atom is bonded to its four nearest neighbors
by a two-electron covalent bond (only the
four atoms within the cube show all four
nearest neighbors).
