41-3 THE p-n JUNCTION AND THE TRANSISTOR

limits further diffusion of electrons and holes across the junction plane. Negative
charges tend to avoid regions of low potential. Thus, an electron approaching
the junction plane from the right in Fig. 41-125 is moving toward a region of low
potential and would tend to turn back into the n side. Similarly, a positive charge
(a hole) approaching the junction plane from the left is moving toward a region
of high potential and would tend to turn back into the p side.

Motions of the Minority Carriers

As Fig. 41-11a shows, although the majority carriers in n-type material are elec-
trons, there are a few holes. Likewise in p-type material (Fig. 41-11b), although
the majority carriers are holes, there are also a few electrons. These few holes and
electrons are the minority carriers in the corresponding materials.

Although the potential difference Vo in Fig. 41-12c acts as a barrier for the
majority carriers, it is a downhill trip for the minority carriers, be they electrons
on the p side or holes on the n side. Positive charges (holes) tend to seek regions
of low potential; negative charges (electrons) tend to seek regions of high poten-
tial. Thus, both types of minority carriers are swept across the junction plane by
the contact potential difference and together constitute a drift current J, across
the junction plane from right to left, as Fig. 41-12d indicates.

Thus, an isolated p-n junction is in an equilibrium state in which a contact
potential difference Vo exists between its ends. At equilibrium, the average diffu-
sion current J, that moves through the junction plane from the p side to the n
side is just balanced by an average drift current Jj, that moves in the opposite
direction. These two currents cancel because the net current through the junction
plane must be zero; otherwise charge would be transferred without limit from
one end of the junction to the other.

Iv] Checkpoint 2

Which of the following five currents across the junction plane of Fig. 41-12a must be

zero?

(a) the net current due to holes, both majority and minority carriers included

(b) the net current due to electrons, both majority and minority carriers included

(c) the net current due to both holes and electrons, both majority and minority
carriers included

(a) the net current due to majority carriers, both holes and electrons included

(e) the net current due to minority carriers, both holes and electrons included

The Junction Rectifier

Look now at Fig. 41-13. It shows that, if we place a potential difference across a
p-n junction in one direction (here labeled + and “Forward bias”), there will
be a current through the junction. However, if we reverse the direction of the
potential difference, there will be approximately zero current through the
junction.

One application of this property is the junction rectifier, whose symbol is
shown in Fig. 41-14); the arrowhead corresponds to the p-type end of the device
and points in the allowed direction of conventional current. A sine wave input
potential to the device (Fig. 41-14a) is transformed to a half-wave output poten-
tial (Fig. 41-14c) by the junction rectifier; that is, the rectifier acts as essentially a
closed switch (zero resistance) for one polarity of the input potential and as
essentially an open switch (infinite resistance) for the other. The average input
voltage is zero, but the average output voltage is not. Thus, a junction rectifier can
be used as part of an apparatus to convert an alternating potential difference into
a constant potential difference, as for a power supply.

1267

  

oe

Current (mA)
4

ne

2 =1 0 +1
Potential difference (V)

——_+
Back bias Forward bias

Figure 41-13 A current—voltage plot for a
p-njunction, showing that the junction is
highly conducting when forward-biased
and essentially nonconducting when.
back-biased.

Input voltage

(@)

Junction rectitier

 

(d)

Ouuput voltage

 

(

Figure 41-14 A p-n junction connected asa
junction rectifier. The action of the circuit
in (b) is to pass the positive half of the
input wave form in (a) but to suppress the
negative half. The average potential of the
input wave form is zero; that of the output
wave form in (c) has a positive value Vy...
