1266 CHAPTER 41

Figure 41-12 (a) A p-n junction. (b) Motions
of the majority charge carriers across the
junction plane uncover a space charge
associated with uncompensated donor ions
(to the right of the plane) and acceptor ions
(to the left). (c) Associated with the space.
charge is a contact potential difference Vy
across dy, (d) The diffusion of majority
carriers (both electrons and holes) across
the junction plane produces a diffusion
current J,i;. (In a real p-n junction, the
boundaries of the depletion zone would
not be sharp, as shown here, and the

contact potential curve (c) would be
smooth, with no sharp corners.)

CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

The p-n Junction

A p-n junction (Fig. 41-12a), essential to most semiconductor devices, is a single
semiconductor crystal that has been selectively doped so that one region is n-type
material and the adjacent region is p-type material. Let’s assume that the junc-
tion has been formed mechanically by jamming together a bar of n-type semicon-
ductor and a bar of p-type semiconductor. Thus, the transition from one region to
the other is perfectly sharp, occurring at a single junction plane.

Let us discuss the motions of electrons and holes just after the n-type bar and
the p-type bar, both electrically neutral, have been jammed together to form the
junction. We first examine the majority carriers, which are electrons in the n-type
material and holes in the p-type material.

Motions of the Majority Carriers

If you burst a helium-filled balloon, helium atoms will diffuse (spread) outward
into the surrounding air. This happens because there are very few helium atoms
in normal air. In more formal language, there is a helium density gradient at the
balloon—air interface (the number density of helium atoms varies across the
interface); the helium atoms move so as to reduce the gradient.

In the same way, electrons on the n side of Fig. 41-12a that are close to the
junction plane tend to diffuse across it (from right to left in the figure) and into
the p side, where there are very few free electrons. Similarly, holes on the p side
that are close to the junction plane tend to diffuse across that plane (from left to
right) and into the n side, where there are very few holes. The motions of both
the electrons and the holes contribute to a diffusion current [,;, conventionally
directed from left to right as indicated in Fig. 41-12d.

Recall that the n-side is studded throughout with positively charged donor
ions, fixed firmly in their lattice sites. Normally, the excess positive charge of each
of these ions is compensated electrically by one of the conduction-band elec-
trons. When an n-side electron diffuses across the junction plane, however, the
diffusion “uncovers” one of these donor ions, thus introducing a fixed positive
charge near the junction plane on the n side. When the diffusing electron arrives
on the p side, it quickly combines with an acceptor ion (which lacks one electron),
thus introducing a fixed negative charge near the junction plane on the p side.

In this way electrons diffusing through the junction plane from right to left
in Fig. 41-12a result in a buildup of space charge on each side of the junction
plane, with positive charge on the n side and negative charge on the p side, as
shown in Fig. 41-12b. Holes diffusing through the junction plane from left to
right have exactly the same effect. (Take the time now to convince yourself of
that.) The motions of both majority carriers—electrons and holes—contribute
to the buildup of these two space charge regions, one positive and one negative.
These two regions form a depletion zone, so named because it is relatively free of
mobile charge carriers; its width is shown as dp in Fig. 41-12b.

The buildup of space charge generates an associated contact potential differ-
ence V across the depletion zone, as Fig. 41-12c shows. This potential difference

)

(@) vy
Hl

(d) (o (d

Toxin

4
