1238 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

 

 

204 K(n=1)
bo
2 4
=<
104
|
s
a
54
7 L(n=2)
4 M(n=3)
y-N(n=4
ce

Figure 40-15 A simplified energy-level
diagram for a molybdenum atom, showing
the transitions (of holes rather than elec-
trons) that give rise to some of the charac-
teristic x rays of that element. Each
horizontal line represents the energy of
the atom with a hole (a missing electron) in
the shell indicated.

Figure 40-16 A Moseley plot of the K, line of
the characteristic x-ray spectra of 21
elements. The frequency is calculated from
the measured wavelength.

tron is in the shell defined by n = 1 (called, for historical reasons, the K shell),
there remains a vacancy, or hole, in this shell. (2) An electron in one of the shells
with a higher energy jumps to the K shell, filling the hole in this shell. During this
jump, the atom emits a characteristic x-ray photon. If the electron that fills the
K-shell vacancy jumps from the shell with n = 2 (called the L shell), the emitted
radiation is the K, line of Fig. 40-13; if it jumps from the shell with n = 3 (called
the M shell), it produces the K, line, and so on. The hole left in either the L or M
shell will be filled by an electron from still farther out in the atom.

In studying x rays, it is more convenient to keep track of where a hole is
created deep in the atom’s “electron cloud” than to record the changes in the
quantum state of the electrons that jump to fill that hole. Figure 40-15 does
exactly that; it is an energy-level diagram for molybdenum, the element to
which Fig. 40-13 refers. The baseline (E = 0) represents the neutral atom in its
ground state. The level marked K (at E = 20 keV) represents the energy of the
molybdenum atom with a hole in its K shell, the level marked L (at E = 2.7 keV)
represents the atom with a hole in its L shell, and so on.

The transitions marked K,, and K,in Fig. 40-15 are the ones that produce the two
x-ray peaks in Fig. 40-13. The K,, spectral line, for example, originates when an elec-
tron from the L shell fills a hole in the K shell. To state this transition in terms of what
the arrows in Fig. 40-15 show, a hole originally in the K shell moves to the L shell.

Ordering the Elements

In 1913, British physicist H. G. J. Moseley generated characteristic x rays for as
many elements as he could find—he found 38—by using them as targets for
electron bombardment in an evacuated tube of his own design. By means of a
trolley manipulated by strings, Moseley was able to move the individual targets
into the path of an electron beam. He measured the wavelengths of the emitted
x rays by the crystal diffraction method described in Module 36-7.

Moseley then sought (and found) regularities in these spectra as he moved from
element to element in the periodic table. In particular, he noted that if, for a given
spectral line such as K,, he plotted for each element the square root of the frequency
f against the position of the element in the periodic table, a straight line resulted.
Figure 40-16 shows a portion of his extensive data. Moseley’s conclusion was this:

We have here a proof that there is in the atom a fundamental quantity, which
increases by regular steps as we pass from one element to the next. This quantity
can only be the charge on the central nucleus.

Asa result of Moseley’s work, the characteristic x-ray spectrum became the uni-
versally accepted signature of an element, permitting the solution of a number of

2.0)

be

VF (10° Hz!)

 

0 10 20 30 40 50

Element number in periodic table
