41-3 THE p-n JUNCTION AND THE TRANSISTOR

Sample Problem 41.06 Doping silicon with phosphorus

The number density ny of conduction electrons in pure
silicon at room temperature is about 10! m~?. Assume that,
by doping the silicon lattice with phosphorus, we want to
increase this number by a factor of a million (10°). What
fraction of silicon atoms must we replace with phosphorus
atoms? (Recall that at room temperature, thermal agitation
is so effective that essentially every phosphorus atom
donates its “extra” electron to the conduction band.)
Number of phosphorus atoms: Because each phosphorus
atom contributes one conduction electron and because we want
the total number density of conduction electrons to be 10°,
the number density of phosphorus atoms np must be given by
1019 = no + np.
Then Np = 10%) — Ng ~ 10°N
= (106)(10'° m-) = 107 m=.
This tells us that we must add 10” atoms of phosphorus per
cubic meter of silicon.
Fraction of silicon atoms: We can find the number density
ng; of silicon atoms in pure silicon (before the doping) from
Eq. 41-4, which we can write as
number of atoms
in sample
__ (silicon density)(sample volume V)
7 (silicon molar mass Mg;)/Na

1265

Dividing both sides by the sample volume V to get the num-
ber density of silicon atoms ng; on the left, we then have
__ (silicon density)N

Ms,
Appendix F tells us that the density of silicon is 2.33 g/cm?
(= 2330 kg/m) and the molar mass of silicon is 28.1 g/mol
(= 0.0281 kg/mol). Thus, we have

_ (2330 kg/m4)(6.02 x 1073 atoms/mol)
a 0.0281 kg/mol
= 5 x 10* atoms/m* = 5 x 10% m3.
The fraction we seek is approximately
np 107m3 i
ng 7 SX 10Sm> 7 Sx 10s — (Answer)
If we replace only one silicon atom in five million with a
phosphorus atom, the number of electrons in the conduc-
tion band will be increased by a factor of a million.

How can such a tiny admixture of phosphorus have what
seems to be such a big effect? The answer is that, although
the effect is very significant, it is not “big.” The number den-
sity of conduction electrons was 10'° m~? before doping and
10” m- after doping. For copper, however, the conduction-
electron number density (given in Table 41-1) is about
107° m~3. Thus, even after doping, the number density of con-
duction electrons in silicon remains much less than that of a
typical metal, such as copper, by a factor of about 107.

nsi

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

41-3 tHe p-n JUNCTION AND THE TRANSISTOR

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...
41.29 Describe a p-n junction and outline how it works.
41.30 Identify diffusion current, space charge, depletion
Zone, contact potential difference, and drift current.
41.31 Describe the functioning of a junction rectifier.

Key Ideas

@ Ap-n junction is a single semiconducting crystal with one end
doped to form p-type material and the other end doped to form
n-type material. The two types meet at a junction plane.

@ At thermal equilibrium, the following occur at the junction
plane: (1) Majority carriers diffuse across the plane, produc-
ing a diffusion current I,i¢ (2) Minority carriers are swept
across the plane, forming a drift current Jy,i- (3) A depletion
zone forms at the plane. (4) A contact potential V) develops
across the depletion zone.

41.32 Distinguish forward bias and back bias.
41.33 Explain the general properties of a light-emitting diode,
a photodiode, a junction laser, and a MOSFET.

@ Ap-n junction conducts electricity better for one direction
of an applied potential difference (forward biased) than for the
opposite direction (back biased), and thus the device can
serve as a junction rectifier.

@ Ap-n junction made with certain materials can emit light when
forward biased and thus can serve as a light-emitting diode (LED).
@ A light-emitting p-n junction can also be made to emit
stimulated emission and thus can serve as a laser.

 
