41-2 SEMICONDUCTORS AND DOPING 1261

Calculating the Fermi Energy

Suppose we add up (via integration) the number of occupied states per unit vol-
ume in Fig. 41-8a (for T= 0 K) at all energies between E = 0 and E = Ey. The
result must equal n, the number of conduction electrons per unit volume for the
metal, because at that temperature none of the energy states above the Fermi
level are occupied. In equation form, we have

Ee
n= I N(E) dE. (41-8)
0

0
(Graphically, the integral here represents the area under the distribution curve of
Fig. 41-8a.) Because P(E) = 1 for all energies below the Fermi energy when T =
0 K, Eq. 41-7 tells us we can replace N,(£) in Eq. 41-8 with N(E) and then use
Eg. 41-8 to find the Fermi energy Ef. If we substitute Eq. 41-5 into Eq. 41-8, we

find that

n=

he he

in which mis the electron mass. Solving for E; now leads to

= ( 3 y FP ay — O12 ay
16V20/ m m

_ 8V2am*? [Pera 8V2am*? 2ER?
0

(41-9)

Thus, when we known, the number of conduction electrons per unit volume for a

metal, we can find the Fermi energy for that metal.

41-2 semiconbucToRs AND DOPING

Learning Objectives

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

41.18 Sketch a band-gap diagram for a semiconductor,
identifying the conduction and valence bands, conduction
electrons, holes, and the energy gap.

41.19 Compare the energy gap of a semiconductor with that
of an insulator.

41.20 Apply the relationship between a semiconductor's
energy gap and the wavelength of light associated with a
transition across the gap.

41.21 Sketch the lattice structure for pure silicon and doped
silicon.

41.22 Identify holes, how they are produced, and how they
move in an applied electric field.

Key Ideas

41.23 For metals and semiconductors, compare the
resistivity p and the temperature coefficient of resistivity a,
and explain how the resistivity changes with temperature.

41.24 Explain the procedure for producing n-type
semiconductors and p-type semiconductors.

41.25 Apply the relationship between the number of
conduction electrons in a pure material and the number in
the doped material.

41.26 Identify donors and acceptors and indicate where their
energy levels lie in an energy-level diagram.

41.27 Identify majority carriers and minority carriers.

41.28 Explain the advantage of doping a semiconductor.

 

@ The band structure of a semiconductor is like that of an
insulator except it has a much smaller gap width E,, which
can be jumped by thermally excited electrons.

@ In silicon at room temperature, thermal agitation raises a
few electrons to the conduction band, leaving an equal num-
ber of holes in the valence band. When the silicon is put un-
der a potential difference, both electrons and holes serve as
charge carriers.

@ The number of electrons in the conduction band of silicon
can be increased greatly by doping with small amounts of
phosphorus, thus forming n-type material. The phosphorus
atoms are said to be donor atoms.

@ The number of holes in the valence band of silicon can be
greatly increased by doping with small amounts of aluminum,
thus forming p-type material. The aluminum atoms are said to
be acceptor atoms.

 
