40-4 EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE AND MULTIPLE ELECTRONS IN A TRAP

Multiple Electrons in Rectangular Traps

To prepare for our discussion of multiple electrons in atoms, let us discuss two
electrons confined to the rectangular traps of Chapter 39. However, here we shall
also include the spin angular momenta. To do this, we assume that the traps are
located in a uniform magnetic field. Then according to Eq. 40-10 (S, = m,f), an
electron can be either spin up with m, = } or spin down with m, = — 3. (We as-
sume that the field is very weak so that the associated energy is negligible.)

As we confine the two electrons to one of the traps, we must keep the Pauli

exclusion principle in mind; that is, the electrons cannot have the same set of
values for their quantum numbers.

1. One-dimensional trap. In the one-dimensional trap of Fig. 39-2, fitting an elec-

tron wave to the trap’s width L requires the single quantum number n. There-
fore, any electron confined to the trap must have a certain value of n, and its
quantum number m, can be either +3 or —}. The two electrons could have
different values of n, or they could have the same value of n if one of them is
spin up and the other is spin down.

Rectangular corral. In the rectangular corral of Fig. 39-13, fitting an electron
wave to the corral’s widths L, and L, requires the two quantum numbers n,
and ny. Thus, any electron confined to the trap must have certain values for
those two quantum numbers, and its quantum number m, can be either +4 or
-} so now there are three quantum numbers. According to the Pauli exclusion
principle, two electrons confined to the trap must have different values for at
least one of those three quantum numbers.

Rectangular box. In the rectangular box of Fig. 39-14, fitting an electron wave
to the box’s widths L,, Ly, and L, requires the three quantum numbers n,, 1),
and n,. Thus, any electron confined to the trap must have certain values for
these three quantum numbers, and its quantum number m, can be either +4 or
-} so now there are four quantum numbers. According to the Pauli exclusion
principle, two electrons confined to the trap must have different values for at
least one of those four quantum numbers.

Suppose we add more than two electrons, one by one, toa rectangular trap

in the preceding list. The first electrons naturally go into the lowest possible
energy level—they are said to occupy that level. However, eventually the
Pauli exclusion principle disallows any more electrons from occupying that
lowest energy level, and the next electron must occupy the next higher level.
When an energy level cannot be occupied by more electrons because of the
Pauli exclusion principle, we say that level is full or fully occupied. In contrast,
a level that is not occupied by any electrons is empty or unoccupied. For inter-
mediate situations, the level is partially occupied. The electron configuration of
a system of trapped electrons is a listing or drawing either of the energy levels
the electrons occupy or of the set of the quantum numbers of the electrons.

Finding the Total Energy

To find the energy of a system of two or more electrons confined to a trap, we as-
sume that the electrons do not electrically interact with one another; that is, we
shall neglect the electric potential energies of pairs of electrons. Then we can cal-
culate the total energy for the system by calculating the energy of each electron
(as in Chapter 39) and then summing those energies.

A good way to organize the energy values of a given system of electrons is

with an energy-level diagram for the system, just as we did for a single electron in
the traps of Chapter 39. The lowest level, with energy E,,, corresponds to the
ground state of the system. The next higher level, with energy E;., corresponds to
the first excited state of the system. The next level, with energy E,., corresponds
to the second excited state of the system, and so on.

1231
