1246 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

Pauli Exclusion Principle Electrons in atoms and other
traps obey the Pauli exclusion principle, which requires that no two
electrons in a trap can have the same set of quantum numbers.

 

Building the Periodic Table In the periodic table, the ele-
ments are listed in order of increasing atomic number Z, where Z
is the number of protons in the nucleus. For a neutral atom, Z is
also the number of electrons. States with the same value of quan-
tum number n forma shell. States with the same values of quantum
numbers n and ¢ form a subshell. A closed shell and a closed sub-
shell contain the maximum number of electrons as allowed by the
Pauli exclusion principle. The net angular momentum and net mag-
netic moment of such closed structures is zero.

X Rays and the Numbering of the Elements When a
beam of high-energy electrons impacts a target, the electrons can
lose their energy by emitting x rays when they scatter from atoms
in the target. The emission is over a range of wavelengths, said to
be a continuous spectrum. The shortest wavelength in the spec-
trum is the cutoff wavelength A,,;,, which is emitted when an inci-
dent electron loses its full kinetic energy Ky in a single scattering
event, with a single x-ray emission:

<Questions

1 Howmany (a) subshells and (b) electron states are in the n = 2
shell? How many (c) subshells and (d) electron states are in the
n= Sshell?

2 Anelectron in an atom of gold isin a state withn = 4. Which of
these values of € are possible for it: —3,0,2,3, 4,5?

3 Label these statements as true or false: (a) One (and only one)
of these subshells cannot exist: 2p, 4f, 3d, Ip. (b) The number of val-
ues of m, that are allowed depends only on ¢ and not on n. (c)
There are four subshells with n = 4. (d) The smallest value of n for
a given value of ¢ is € + 1. (e) Alll states with € = 0 also have
m, = 0.(£) There are n subshells for each value of n.

4 Anatom of uranium has closed 6p and 7s subshells. Which sub-
shell has the greater number of electrons?

5 An atom of silver has closed 3d and 4d subshells. Which sub-

shell has the greater number of electrons, or do they have the same
number?

6 From which atom of each of the following pairs is it easier to
remove an electron: (a) krypton or bromine, (b) rubidium or
cerium, (c) helium or hydrogen?

7 Anelectron in a mercury atom is in the 3d subshell. Which of
the following m, values are possible for it: —3,

—1,0,1,2?

2

8 Figure 40-22 shows three points at which a
spin-up electron can be placed in a nonuniform
magnetic field (there is a gradient along the z 1\ \F
axis). (a) Rank the three points according to the 2
energy U of the electron’s intrinsic magnetic di-
pole moment 7i,, most positive first. (b) What is 3
the direction of the force on the electron due to .

7 Figure 40-22
the magnetic field if the spin-up electron is at
point 2? Question 8.

he

Ky

The characteristic x-ray spectrum is produced when incident elec-
trons eject low-lying electrons in the target atoms and electrons
from upper levels jump down to the resulting holes, emitting
light. A Moseley plot is a graph of the square root of the charac-
teristic-emission frequencies Vf versus atomic number Z of the
target atoms. The straight-line plot reveals that the position of an
element in the periodic table is set by Z and not by the atomic
weight.

Amin =

Lasers In stimulated emission, an atom in an excited state can
be induced to de-excite to a lower energy state by emitting a pho-
ton if an identical photon passes the atom. The light emitted in
stimulated emission is in phase with and travels in the direction of
the light causing the emission.

A laser can emit light via stimulated emission provided that its
atoms are in population inversion. That is, for the pair of levels in-
volved in the stimulated emission, more atoms must be in the up-
per level than the lower level so that there is more stimulated emis-
sion than just absorption.

9 The K, x-ray line for any element arises because of a
transition between the K shell (nm = 1) and the L shell (n = 2).
Figure 40-13 shows this line (for a molybdenum target)
occurring at a single wavelength. With higher resolution, how-
ever, the line splits into several wavelength components because
the L shell does not have a unique energy. (a) How many com-
ponents does the K, line have? (b) Similarly, how many compo-
nents does the Kline have?

10 Consider the elements krypton and rubidium. (a) Which is
more suitable for use in a Stern—Gerlach experiment of the kind
described in connection with Fig. 40-8? (b) Which, if either, would
not work at all?

11 On which quantum numbers does the energy of an electron
depend in (a) a hydrogen atom and (b) a vanadium atom?

12 Which (if any) of the following are essential for laser action to
occur between two energy levels of an atom? (a) There are more
atoms in the upper level than in the lower. (b) The upper level is
metastable. (c) The lower level is metastable. (d) The lower level is
the ground state of the atom. (e) The lasing medium is a gas.

13 Figure 40-21 shows partial energy-level diagrams for the
helium and neon atoms that are involved in the operation of a
helium—neon laser. It is said that a helium atom in state F; can
collide with a neon atom in its ground state and raise the neon
atom to state E,. The energy of helium state E; (20.61 eV) is close
to, but not exactly equal to, the energy of neon state E, (20.66 eV).
How can the energy transfer take place if these energies are not
exactly equal?

14 The x-ray spectrum of Fig. 40-13 is for 35.0 keV electrons
striking a molybdenum (Z = 42) target. If you substitute a silver
(Z = 47) target for the molybdenum target, will (a) Ajjin, (b) the
wavelength for the K, line, and (c) the wavelength for the K, line
increase, decrease, or remain unchanged?
