dose) is still in common use. The terms are defined and related as follows:
1 Gy = 1 J/kg = 100 rad. (42-32)

A typical dose-related statement is: “A whole-body, short-term gamma-ray
dose of 3 Gy (= 300 rad) will cause death in 50% of the population exposed to
it.” Thankfully, our present average absorbed dose per year, from sources of
both natural and human origin, is only about 2 mGy (= 0.2 rad).

Dose Equivalent. Although different types of radiation (gamma rays and
neutrons, say) may deliver the same amount of energy to the body, they do not
have the same biological effect. The dose equivalent allows us to express
the biological effect by multiplying the absorbed dose (in grays or rads) by a
numerical RBE factor (from relative biological effectiveness). For x rays and
electrons, for example, RBE = 1; for slow neutrons, RBE = 5; for alpha parti-
cles, RBE = 10; and so on. Personnel-monitoring devices such as film badges
register the dose equivalent.

The SI unit of dose equivalent is the sievert (Sv). An earlier unit, the rem,
is still in common use. Their relationship is

1 Sv = 100 rem. (42-33)

An example of the correct use of these terms is: “The recommendation of
the National Council on Radiation Protection is that no individual who is
(nonoccupationally) exposed to radiation should receive a dose equivalent
greater than 5 mSv (= 0.5 rem) in any one year.” This includes radiation of all
kinds; of course the appropriate RBE factor must be used for each kind.

42-8 nuctear MODELS

Learning Objectives

42-8 NUCLEAR MODELS

1297

 

After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.35 Distinguish the collective model and the independent

Key Ideas

@ The collective model of nuclear structure assumes that

model, and explain the combined model.

42.36 Identify compound nucleus.
42.37 |dentify magic numbers.

 

nucleons collide constantly with one another and that rela-
tively long-lived compound nuclei are formed when a projec-
tile is captured. The formation and eventual decay of a com-
pound nucleus are totally independent events.

assumes that each nucleon moves, essentially without colli-

sion, in a quantized state within the nucleus. The model pre-

dicts nucleon levels and magic nucleon numbers associated
with closed shells of nucleons.

@ The combined model assumes that extra nucleons occupy

@ The independent particle model of nuclear structure

quantized states outside a central core of closed shells.

 

Nuclear Models

Nuclei are more complicated than atoms. For atoms, the basic force law
(Coulomb’s law) is simple in form and there is a natural force center, the nucleus.
For nuclei, the force law is complicated and cannot, in fact, be written down
explicitly in full detail. Furthermore, the nucleus—a jumble of protons and
neutrons—has no natural force center to simplify the calculations.

In the absence of a comprehensive nuclear theory, we turn to the construc-

tion of nuclear models. A nuclear model is simply a way of looking at the nucleus
that gives a physical insight into as wide a range of its properties as possible. The
usefulness of a model is tested by its ability to provide predictions that can be
verified experimentally in the laboratory.
