1292 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

42-5 Beta DECAY

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.26 Identify the two types of beta particles and the two
types of beta decay.

42.27 \dentify neutrino.

42.28 Explain why the beta particles in beta decays are emit-
ted with a range of energies.

Key Ideas

42.29 For a given beta decay, calculate the mass change and
the Q of the reaction.

42.30 Determine the change in the atomic number Z of a nu-
cleus undergoing a beta decay and identify that the mass
number A does not change.

 

@ In beta decay, either an electron or a positron is emitted by
a nucleus, along with a neutrino.

@ The emitted particles share the available disintegration

energy. Sometimes the neutrino gets most of the energy and
sometimes the electron or positron gets most of it.

 

Beta Decay

A nucleus that decays spontaneously by emitting an electron or a positron (a
positively charged particle with the mass of an electron) is said to undergo beta
decay. Like alpha decay, this is a spontaneous process, with a definite disintegra-
tion energy and half-life. Again like alpha decay, beta decay is a statistical
process, governed by Eqs. 42-15 and 42-16. In beta-minus (B~) decay, an electron
is emitted by a nucleus, as in the decay

PS te ty (Ty = 143d). (42-24)
In beta-plus (8*) decay, a positron is emitted by a nucleus, as in the decay
“Cus Nit et +y (Ty =12.7h). (42-25)

The symbol v represents a neutrino, a neutral particle which has a very small mass,
that is emitted from the nucleus along with the electron or positron during the decay
process. Neutrinos interact only very weakly with matter and—for that reason—
are so extremely difficult to detect that their presence long went unnoticed.*

Both charge and nucleon number are conserved in the above two processes.
In the decay of Eq. 42-24, for example, we can write for charge conservation

(+15e) = (+16e) + (—e) + (0),

because “P has 15 protons, *S has 16 protons, and the neutrino v has zero charge.
Similarly, for nucleon conservation, we can write

(32) = (32) + (0) + (0),

because *P and °S each have 32 nucleons and neither the electron nor the
neutrino is a nucleon.

It may seem surprising that nuclei can emit electrons, positrons, and neutri-
nos, since we have said that nuclei are made up of neutrons and protons only.
However, we saw earlier that atoms emit photons, and we certainly do not say
that atoms “contain” photons. We say that the photons are created during the

emission process.

*Beta decay also includes electron capture, in which a nucleus decays by absorbing one of its atomic
electrons, emitting a neutrino in the process. We do not consider that process here. Also, the neutral
particle emitted in the decay process of Eq. 42-24 is actually an antineutrino, a distinction we shall
not make in this introductory treatment.
