40-1 PROPERTIES OF ATOMS 1225

Spin Magnetic Dipole Moment

As with the orbital angular momentum, a magnetic dipole momentis associated with
the spin angular momentum:

e

B= —>, 8. (40-11)
where the minus sign means that the two vectors are in opposite directions, which
is due to the fact that an electron is negatively charged. This #, is an intrinsic

property of every electron. The vector 7, does not have a definite direction but it
can have a definite magnitude, given by

bs =a Vis + 1 A (40-12)

The vector can also have a definite component ona Zz axis, given by

 

sz = —2Mspp, (40-13)

Figure 40-6 The allowed values of S and yw;

but that means that it cannot have a definite value of y,, or “yy. Figure 40-6 for an electron.

shows the possible values of ,-. In the next module we shall discuss the early ex-
perimental evidence for the quantized nature in Eq. 40-13.

Shells and Subshells

As we discussed in Module 39-5, all states with the same n form a shell, and all
states with the same value of n and € form a subshell. As displayed in Table 40-1, for
a given ¢,there are 2¢ + 1 possible values of quantum number m, and, for each my,
there are two possible values for the quantum number m, (spin up and spin down).
Thus, there are 2(2€ + 1) states in a subshell. If we count all the states throughout a
given shell with quantum number 1, we find that the total number in the shell is 2n?.

Orbital and Spin Angular Momenta Combined

For an atom containing more than one electron, we define a total angular
momentum T, which is the vector sum of the angular momenta of the individual
electrons—both their orbital and their spin angular momenta. Each element in
the periodic table is defined by the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom
of the element. This number of protons is defined as being the atomic number (or
charge number) Z of the element. Because an electrically neutral atom contains
equal numbers of protons and electrons, Z is also the number of electrons in the
neutral atom, and we use this fact to indicate a T value for a neutral atom:

J=(L,+ 0, +0, +---+2y)+ (S++ H4+--- +3). (40-14)

Similarly, the total magnetic dipole moment of a multielectron atom is the
vector sum of the magnetic dipole moments (both orbital and spin) of its individ-
ual electrons. However, because of the factor 2 in Eq. 40-13, the resultant
magnetic dipole moment for the atom does not have the direction of vector TS;
instead, it makes a certain angle with that vector. The effective magnetic dipole
moment /., for the atom is the component of the vector sum of the individual
magnetic dipole moments in the direction of TT (Fig. 40-7). In typical atoms the
orbital angular momenta and the spin angular momenta of most of the electrons Figure 40-7 A classical model showing the
sum vectorially to zero. Then J and fi. of those atoms are due to a relatively total angular momentum vector F and the
small number of electrons, often only a single valence electron. effective magnetic moment vector fii.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

Anelectron is in a quantum state for which the magnitude of the electron’s orbital
angular momentum L is 2\V3/. How many projections of the electron’s orbital mag-
netic dipole moment on az axis are allowed?

 
