1286 CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

42-3 RADIOACTIVE DECAY

 

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.11 Explain what is meant by radioactive decay and identify
that it is a random process.

42.12 Identify disintegration constant (or decay constant) A.

42.13 Identify that, at any given instant, the rate dN/dt at
which radioactive nuclei decay is proportional to the
number N of them still present then.

42.14 Apply the relationship that gives the number N of
radioactive nuclei as a function of time.

42.15 Apply the relationship that gives the decay rate R of
radioactive nuclei as a function of time.

Key Ideas

42.16 For any given time, apply the relationship between the de-
cay rate R and the remaining number N of radioactive nuclei.

42.17 Identify activity.

42.18 Distinguish Becquerel (Bq), curie (Ci), and counts per
unit time.

42.19 Distinguish half-life 7). and mean life 7.

42.20 Apply the relationship between half-life T,,, mean life 7,
and disintegration constant A.

42.21 |dentify that in any nuclear process, including radioactive
decay, the charge and the number of nucleons are conserved.

 

@ Most nuclides spontaneously decay at arate R = dN/dt that
is proportional to the number N of radioactive atoms present.
The proportionality constant is the disintegration constant A.

@ The number of radioactive nuclei is given as a function of time by
N=MNe™,

where Nj is the number at time ¢ = 0.

@ The rate at which the nuclei decay is given as a function of time

by
R=Re™,
where Ry is the rate at time t = 0.

@ The half-life T),. and the mean life 7 are measures of how
quickly radioactive nuclei decay and are related by

In2
Tin == =rln2.

 

Radioactive Decay

As Fig. 42-5 shows, most nuclides are radioactive. They each spontaneously
(randomly) emit a particle and transform into a different nuclide. Thus these de-
cays reveal that the laws for subatomic processes are statistical. For example, in a
1 mg sample of uranium metal, with 2.5 x 10'* atoms of the very long-lived ra-
dionuclide *** U, only about 12 of the nuclei will decay in a given second by emit-
ting an alpha particle and transforming into a nucleus of *+Th. However,

oO There is absolutely no way to predict whether any given nucleus in a radioactive
sample will be among the small number of nuclei that decay during any given
second. All have the same chance.

Although we cannot predict which nuclei in a sample will decay, we can say that if
a sample contains N radioactive nuclei, then the rate (= —dN/dt) at which nuclei will
decay is proportional to N: dN

——— = AN, 42-11
a = AN, (42-11)

in which A, the disintegration constant (or decay constant) has a characteristic
value for every radionuclide. Its SI unit is the inverse second (s!).
To find Nasa function of time f, we first rearrange Eq. 42-11 as

dN
—_ = -hdt, 42-12
= (42-12)
and then integrate both sides, obtaining
N aN t
Weal
No "0
or In N — In Ng = —A(t — to). (42-13)
