Figure 40-18c describes stimulated emission for a single atom. Suppose
now that a sample contains a large number of atoms in thermal equilibrium at
temperature T. Before any radiation is directed at the sample, a number No of
these atoms are in their ground state with energy Ey and a number N, are ina
state of higher energy E,. Ludwig Boltzmann showed that N, is given in terms
of No by

Ny = Ngee F047, (40-29)

in which k is Boltzmann’s constant. This equation seems reasonable. The quantity
kT is the mean kinetic energy of an atom at temperature T. The higher the
temperature, the more atoms—on average—will have been “bumped up” by
thermal agitation (that is, by atom-atom collisions) to the higher energy state E,.
Also, because E, > Eo, Eq. 40-29 requires that N, < No; that is, there will always
be fewer atoms in the excited state than in the ground state. This is what we
expect if the level populations Np and N, are determined only by the action of
thermal agitation. Figure 40-192 illustrates this situation.

If we now flood the atoms of Fig. 40-19a with photons of energy E, — Ep, pho-
tons will disappear via absorption by ground-state atoms and photons will be gen-
erated largely via stimulated emission of excited-state atoms. Einstein showed that
the probabilities per atom for these two processes are identical. Thus, because there
are more atoms in the ground state, the net effect will be the absorption of photons.

To produce laser light, we must have more photons emitted than absorbed;
that is, we must have a situation in which stimulated emission dominates. Thus, we
need more atoms in the excited state than in the ground state, as in Fig. 40-19b.
However, because such a population inversion is not consistent with thermal
equilibrium, we must think up clever ways to set up and maintain one.

The Helium-Neon Gas Laser

Figure 40-20 shows a common type of laser developed in 1961 by Ali Javan and
his coworkers. The glass discharge tube is filled with a 20 : 80 mixture of helium
and neon gases, neon being the medium in which laser action occurs.

Figure 40-21 shows simplified energy-level diagrams for the two types of atoms.
An electric current passed through the helium—neon gas mixture serves—through
collisions between helium atoms and electrons of the current—to raise many helium

Metastable

state
The current (electrons)
excite the helium atoms
by collisions (but not the
more massive neon
atoms).

Excitation
via collisions}

Energy (eV)

Figure 40-21 Five essential en-
ergy levels for helium and
neon atoms ina helium—neon
gas laser. Laser action occurs
between levels E) and E, of
neon when more atoms are at
the EF) level than at the F;
level.

Helium
states

He-Ne
collisions.

 

40-7 LASERS 1243

——_e eg

 

—seeeeeee 7
(@ (d)

Figure 40-19 (a) The equilibrium distribution
of atoms between the ground state Ey and
excited state E, accounted for by thermal ag-
itation. (b) An inverted population, obtained
by special methods. Such a population inver-
sion is essential for laser action.

—__

Laser
beam

M,
(leaky)

W__ Discharge tube w

        
 
 
     

+ Vac

Figure 40-20 The elements of a helium—
neon gas laser. An applied potential V4,
sends electrons through a discharge tube
containing a mixture of helium gas and
neon gas. Electrons collide with helium
atoms, which then collide with neon atoms,
which emit light along the length of the
tube. The light passes through transparent
windows W and reflects back and forth
through the tube from mirrors M, and M,
to cause more neon atom emissions. Some
of the light leaks through mirror M, to
form the laser beam.

Laser light
(632.8 nm)

 

Then the helium atoms
excite the neon atoms

to level Ep by collisions.
Those neon atoms stay
long enough to be forced
into stimulated emission.

Common

Neon -® ground state

states
