Review & Summary

Confinement Confinement of waves (string waves, matter
waves—any type of wave) leads to quantization—that is, discrete
states with certain energies. States with intermediate energies are
not allowed.

Electron in an Infinite Potential Well Because it is a matter
wave, an electron confined to an infinite potential well can exist in
only certain discrete states. If the well is one-dimensional with length
L, the energies associated with these quantum states are

we
=(—"_\w, torn =
E, (sel forn =1,2,3,...,

where m is the electron mass and n is a quantum number. The low-
est energy, said to be the zero-point energy, is not zero but is given
by n = 1. The electron can change (jump) from one state to an-
other only if its energy change is

(39-4)

AE = Exigy — Eows (39-5)

where Evian is the higher energy and Ejay is the lower energy. If the

change is done by photon absorption or emission, the energy of the

photon must be equal to the change in the electron’s energy:

h

hf= "<= ME= Ex ~ Bion (39-6)

where frequency f and wavelength A are associated with the photon.

The wave functions for an electron in an infinite, one-dimen-
sional potential well with length L along an x axis are given by

WAX) = |= sin (225), for n = 1,2,3,...,

where n is the quantum number and the factor V2/L comes
from normalizing the wave function. The wave function y,(x)
does not have physical meaning, but the probability density
uA(x) does have physical meaning: The product Z(x) dx is the
probability that the electron will be detected in the interval between
x and x + dx. If the probability density of an electron is integrated
over the entire x axis, the total probability must be 1, which means
that the electron will be detected somewhere along the x axis:

[#0 dv =1,

Electron in a Finite Well The wave function for an electron
in a finite, one-dimensional potential well extends into the walls.
Compared to the states in an infinite well of the same size, the
states in a finite well have a limited number, longer de Broglie
wavelengths, and lower energies.

(39-10)

(39-14)

Two-Dimensional Electron Trap The quantized energies

<Questions

1 Three electrons are trapped in three different one-dimensional
infinite potential wells of widths (a) 50 pm, (b) 200 pm, and (c) 100
pm. Rank the electrons according to their ground-state energies,
greatest first.

QUESTIONS 1213

for an electron trapped in a two-dimensional infinite potential well
that forms a rectangular corral are

 

ron ny
Enxxn -+( > tat), 39-20
Sm SEE (39-20)
where n, is a quantum number for which the electron’s matter
wave fits in well width L, and n, is a quantum number for which it
fits in well width L,. The wave functions for an electron in a
two-dimensional well are given by

Yneny = 2 sin G2 xP sin ( wy),
© : , ,

The Hydrogen Atom The Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
successfully derived the energy levels for the atom, to explain the
emission/absorption spectrum of the atom, but it is incorrect in al-
most every other aspect. It is a planetary model in which the elec-
tron orbits the central proton with an angular momentum L that is
limited to values given by

 

 

(39-19)

L=nk, forn =1,2,3,..., (39-23)

where n is a quantum number. The equation is, however, incorrect.

Application of the Schrédinger equation gives the correct values
of L and the quantized energies:

met 1

_ _ 13.60 eV
Sey ni

=—-— >, _ forn = 1,2,3,....

E, I

 

 

(39-34)

 

The atom (or, the electron in the atom) can change energy only by
jumping between these allowed energies. If the jump is by photon
absorption (the atom’s energy increases) or photon emission (the
atom’s energy decreases), this restriction in energy changes leads to

1 1 1
senGh-ob)
d Niow — Migh

for the wavelength of the light, where R is the Rydberg constant,

me
Sathic

(39-37)

R= = 1.097 373 X 10’m7!.

 

(39-38)

‘The radial probability density P(r) for a state of the hydrogen atom is
defined so that P(r) is the probability that the electron will be de-
tected somewhere in the space between two spherical shells of radii r
and r + dr that are centered on the nucleus. The probability that the
electron will be detected between any two given radii r; andr is

(probability of detection) = I P(r) dr. (39-45)

2 Is the ground-state energy of a proton trapped in a one-
dimensional infinite potential well greater than, less than, or equal
to that of an electron trapped in the same potential well?
