40-1 PROPERTIES OF ATOMS 1223

Table 40-1 Electron States for an Atom

 

  

Quantum Number Symbol —_ Allowed Values Related to
Principal n Distance from the nucleus
Orbital € Orbital angular momentum
Orbital magnetic m Orbital angular momentum
(z component)
Spin s 3 Spin angular momentum
Spin magnetic m, +} Spin angular momentum
(z component)
L = F X P, where 7 isa position vector extending to the particle from the refer- The vector and
ence point and p is the particle’s linear momentum (mv). Although an electron 2 its component
in an atom is not a classical moving particle, it too has angular momentum given are quantized.

by L=7x P. with the reference point being the nucleus. However, unlike the
classical particle, the electron’s orbital angular momentum Lis quantized. For the
electron in a hydrogen atom, we can find the quantized (allowed) values by solving
Schrédinger’s equation. For that situation and any other, we can also find the quan-
tized values by using the appropriate mathematics for a cross product in a quantum
situation. (The mathematics is linear algebra, which you may have on your schedule
of classes.) Either way we find that the allowed magnitudes of L are given by

L=VCE+ Dh, for =0,1,2,...,(n— 1), (40-2)

 

where hi is h/27, € is the orbital quantum number (introduced in Table 39-2, which is
reproduced in Table 40-1), and n is the electron’s principal quantum number. L=\6h

The electron can have a definite value of L as given by one of the allowed
states in Eq. 40-2, but it cannot have a definite direction for the vector L.
However, we can measure (detect) definite values of a component L, along a
chosen measurement axis (usually taken to be a z axis) as given by

Figure 40-5 The allowed values of L,
electron in a quantum state with € = 2. For
every orbital angular momentum vector L
in the figure, there is a vector pointing in
the opposite direction, representing the
magnitude and direction of the orbital
magnetic dipole moment flor.

  

L,= mh, form, = 0, £1, +2,..., +6, (40-3)

where m, is the orbital magnetic quantum number (Table 40-1). However, if the elec-
tron has a definite value of L-, it does not have definite values for L, and L,. We can-
not get around this uncertainty by, say, first measuring L, (getting a definite value)
and then measuring L, (getting a definite value) because the second measurement
can change L, and thus we no longer have a definite value for it. Also, we can never
find L aligned with an axis because then it would have a definite direction and defi-
nite components along the other axes (namely,zero components).

A common way to depict the allowed values for L, is shown in Fig. 40-5 for
the situation in which £ = 2. However, do not take the figure literally because it
implies (incorrectly) that L has the definite direction of the drawn vector. Still, it
allows us to relate the five possible z components to the full vector (which has a
magnitude of #6) and to define the semi-classical angle 0 given by

 

L,
=—, 40-4
cos 6 L ¢ )

Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment

Classically, an orbiting charged particle sets up the magnetic field of a magnetic
dipole, as we discussed in Module 32-5. From Eq. 32-28, the dipole moment is re-
lated to the angular momentum of the classical particle by

en

How = —Z 7 bs (40-5)
