1282

CHAPTER 42 NUCLEAR PHYSICS

Nuclear Radii

A convenient unit for measuring distances on the scale of nuclei is the femtometer
(= 10-4 m). This unit is often called the fermi; the two names share the same
abbreviation. Thus,

1 femtometer = 1 fermi = 1 fm = 10“ m. (42-2)

We can learn about the size and structure of nuclei by bombarding them with a
beam of high-energy electrons and observing how the nuclei deflect the incident
electrons. The electrons must be energetic enough (at least 200 MeV) to have de
Broglie wavelengths that are smaller than the nuclear structures they are to probe.

The nucleus, like the atom, is not a solid object with a well-defined surface.
Furthermore, although most nuclides are spherical, some are notably ellipsoidal.
Nevertheless, electron-scattering experiments (as well as experiments of other
kinds) allow us to assign to each nuclide an effective radius given by

r= 1A", (42-3)

in which A is the mass number and rp ~ 1.2 fm. We see that the volume of a
nucleus, which is proportional to r?, is directly proportional to the mass number
A and is independent of the separate values of Z and N.That is, we can treat most
nuclei as being a sphere with a volume that depends on the number of nucleons,
regardless of their type.

Equation 42-3 does not apply to halo nuclides, which are neutron-rich
nuclides that were first produced in laboratories in the 1980s. These nuclides
are larger than predicted by Eq. 42-3, because some of the neutrons form a
halo around a spherical core of the protons and the rest of the neutrons. Lithium
isotopes give an example. When a neutron is added to *Li to form °Li, neither of
which are halo nuclides, the effective radius increases by about 4%. However,
when two neutrons are added to °Li to form the neutron-rich isotope 'Li (the
largest of the lithium isotopes), they do not join that existing nucleus but instead
form a halo around it, increasing the effective radius by about 30%. Apparently
this halo configuration involves less energy than a core containing all 11 nucle-
ons. (In this chapter we shall generally assume that Eq. 42-3 applies.)

Atomic Masses

Atomic masses are now measured to great precision, but usually nuclear masses
are not directly measurable because stripping off all the electrons from an atom
is difficult. As we briefly discussed in Module 37-6, atomic masses are often
reported in atomic mass units, a system in which the atomic mass of neutral °C is
defined to be exactly 12 u.

Precise atomic masses are available in tables on the web and are usually
provided in homework problems. However, sometimes we need only an approxi-
mation of the mass of either a nucleus alone or a neutral atom. The mass number
A ofa nuclide gives such an approximate mass in atomic mass units. For example,
the approximate mass of both the nucleus and the neutral atom for !"7Au is 197 u,
which is close to the actual atomic mass of 196.966 552 u.

As we saw in Module 37-6,

1u = 1.660 538 86 x 10°” kg. (42-4)

We also saw that if the total mass of the participants in a nuclear reaction changes
by an amount Am, there is an energy release or absorption given by Eq. 37-50
(Q =—Am c’). As we shall now see, nuclear energies are often reported in
multiples of 1 MeV. Thus, a convenient conversion between mass units and en-
ergy units is provided by Eq. 37-46:

c? = 931.494 013 MeV/u. (42-5)
