 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nematode Human
ced-3 _ced-4 ced-9 bax bole?
! . a 7 1 :
4. Sy) _Death ] =) ak
y FOS) program r pe i
ced-3 ced-4 ay
protein _ protein Me
bax bole2
a) =
oI 4 ="3 | oe hy
ies | yyy No death > jo deat 5 |
UP +N proaram | (SH i > A program
ced-3 ced-4 7 bax protein a
protein __ protein
(@ (b)
FIGURE 17.21

Programmed cell death. Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is necessary for normal development of all animals. (a) In the
developing nematode, for example, two genes, ced-3 and ced-4, code for proteins that cause the programmed cell death of 131 specific
cells. In the other cells of the developing nematode, the product of a third gene, ced-9, represses the death program encoded by ced-3
and ced-4. (b) In developing humans, the product of a gene called bax causes a cell death program in some cells and is blocked by the

bcl-2 gene in other cells.

Programmed Cell Death

Not every cell that is produced during development is des-
tined to survive. For example, the cells between your fin-
gers and toes die; if they did not, you would have paddles
rather than digits. Vertebrate embryos produce a very large
number of neurons, ensuring that there are enough neu-
rons to make all of the necessary synaptic connections, but
over half of these neurons never make connections and die
in an orderly way as the nervous system develops. Unlike
accidental cell deaths due to injury, these cell deaths are
planned for and indeed required for proper development.
Cells that die due to injury typically swell and burst, releas-
ing their contents into the extracellular fluid. This form of
cell death is called necrosis. In contrast, cells programmed
to die shrivel and shrink in a process called apoptosis
(from the Greek word meaning shedding of leaves in au-
tumn), and their remains are taken up by surrounding cells.

Gene Control of Apoptosis

This sort of developmentally regulated cell suicide occurs
when a “death program” is activated. All animal cells ap-
pear to possess such programs. In the nematode worm, for
example, the same 131 cells always die during development
in a predictable and reproducible pattern of apoptosis.
Three genes govern this process. Two (ced-3 and ced-4)

constitute the death program itself; if either is mutant,
those 131 cells do not die, and go on instead to form ner-
vous and other tissue. The third gene (ced-9) represses the
death program encoded by the other two (figure 17.21).
The same sorts of apoptosis programs occur in human
cells: the bax gene encodes the cell death program, and an-
other, an oncogene called dc/-2, represses it (figure 17.210).
The mechanism of apoptosis appears to have been highly
conserved during the course of animal evolution. The
protein made by bcl-2 is 25% identical in amino acid se-
quence to that made by ced-9. If a copy of the human bd-2
gene is transferred into a nematode with a defective ced-9
gene, bcl-2 suppresses the cell death program of ced-3 and
ced-4!

How does bax kill a cell? The bax protein seems to in-
duce apoptosis by binding to the permeability pore of the
cell’s mitochondria, increasing its permeability and in
doing so triggering cell death. How does bc/-2 prevent cell
death? One suggestion is that it prevents damage from free
radicals, highly reactive fragments of atoms that can dam-
age cells severely. Proteins or other molecules that destroy
free radicals are called antioxidants. Antioxidants are al-
most as effective as be/-2 in blocking apoptosis.

 

Animal development involves programmed cell death
(apoptosis), in which particular genes, when activated,
kill their cells.

 

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 349
