1214

3 An electron is trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential
well in a state with quantum number n = 17. How many points of
(a) zero probability and (b) maximum probability does its matter
wave have?

4 Figure 39-25 shows three infinite potential wells, each on an x
axis. Without written calculation, determine the wave function w
for a ground-state electron trapped in each well.

x
2L

x
L/2

(d)

Figure 39-25 Question 4.

x
-L/2 +L/2
(o)

0
(a)

5 A proton and an electron are trapped in identical one-
dimensional infinite potential wells; each particle is in its ground
state. At the center of the wells, is the probability density for the
proton greater than, less than, or equal to that of the electron?

6 If you double the width of a one-dimensional infinite potential
well, (a) is the energy of the ground state of the trapped electron
multiplied by 4,2,4,1, or some other number? (b) Are the energies
of the higher energy states multiplied by this factor or by some
other factor, depending on their quantum number?

 

7 If you wanted to use the idealized trap of Fig. 39-1 to trap
a positron, would you need to change (a) the geometry of the trap, (b)
the electric potential of the central cylinder, or (c) the electric poten-
tials of the two semi-infinite end cylinders? (A positron has the same
mass as an electron but is positively charged.)

8 An electron is trapped in a finite potential well that is deep
enough to allow the electron to exist in a state with n = 4. How
many points of (a) zero probability and (b) maximum probability
does its matter wave have within the well?

9 Anelectron that is trapped in a one-dimensional infinite poten-
tial well of width L is excited from the ground state to the first ex-
cited state. Does the excitation increase, decrease, or have no effect
on the probability of detecting the electron in a small length of the x
axis (a) at the center of the well and (b) near one of the well walls?

10 An electron, trapped in a finite potential energy well such as
that of Fig. 39-7, is in its state of lowest energy. Are (a) its de
Broglie wavelength, (b) the magnitude of its momentum, and (c)
its energy greater than, the same as, or less than they would be if
the potential well were infinite, as in Fig. 39-2?

11 Froma visual inspection of Fig. 39-8, rank the quantum num-

<Problems

o

SSM__Worked-out solution available in Student Solutions Manual
+ —eee Number of dots indicates level of problem difficulty

LW

CHAPTER 39 MORE ABOUT MATTER WAVES

bers of the three quantum states according to the de Broglie wave-
length of the electron, greatest first.

12 You want to modify the finite potential well of Fig. 39-7 to al-
low its trapped electron to exist in more than four quantum states.
Could you do so by making the well (a) wider or narrower, (b)
deeper or shallower?

13 A hydrogen atom is in the third excited state. To what state (give
the quantum number 7) should it jump to (a) emit light with the
longest possible wavelength, (b) emit light with the shortest possible
wavelength, and (c) absorb light with the longest possible wavelength?

14 Figure 39-26 indicates the lowest energy levels (in electron-
volts) for five situations in which an electron is trapped in a one-
dimensional infinite potential well. In wells B, C, D, and E, the
electron is in the ground state. We shall excite the electron in well
A to the fourth excited state (at 25 eV). The electron can then de-
excite to the ground state by emitting one or more photons, corre-
sponding to one long jump or several short jumps. Which photon
emission energies of this de-excitation match a photon absorption
energy (from the ground state) of the other four electrons? Give
the n values.

. 27
Py
z 19 20
=| —16 16
2 12
g
a 9 8

 

B D
Figure 39-26 Question 14.

c D

15 Table 39-4 lists the quantum numbers for five proposed
hydrogen atom states. Which of them are not possible?

Table 39-4

n € Me
(a) 3 2 0
(b) 2 3 1
(c) 4 30-4
(d) 5 5 0
(e) 5 3. -2

Tutoring problem available (at instructor's discretion) in WileyPLUS and WebAssign
WWW Worked-out solution is at

Interactive solution is at

CRE Additional information available in The Flying Circus of Physics and at flyingcircusofphysics.com

Module 39-1 Energies of a Trapped Electron

*1 Anelectron in a one-dimensional infinite potential well of length
Lhas ground-state energy £,.The length is changed to L’ so that the
new ground-state energy is E; = 0.500E;. What is the ratio L'/L?

*2 What is the ground-state energy of (a) an electron and (b) a

proton if each is trapped in a one-dimensional infinite potential
well that is 200 pm wide?

*3 The ground-state energy of an electron trapped in a one-
dimensional infinite potential well is 2.6 eV. What will this quantity
be if the width of the potential well is doubled?
