1262 CHAPTER 41 CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY IN SOLIDS

Conduction
band 4
Valence -

band E,

Semiconductor

(a)

Conduction
7 ee? band

Valence
band

(b)
Figure 41-9 (a) The band-gap pattern for
a semiconductor. It resembles that of an
insulator (see Fig. 41-4) except that here
the energy gap E, is much smaller; thus
electrons, because of their thermal agita-
tion, have some reasonable probability of
being able to jump the gap. (b) Thermal
agitation has caused a few electrons to
jump the gap from the valence band to the
conduction band, leaving an equal number
of holes in the valence band.

 

Semiconductors

If you compare Fig. 41-9a with Fig. 41-4, you can see that the band structure of
a semiconductor is like that of an insulator. The main difference is that the semi-
conductor has a much smaller energy gap E, between the top of the highest filled
band (called the valence band) and the bottom of the vacant band just above it
(called the conduction band). Thus, there is no doubt that silicon (E, = 1.1 eV) is
a semiconductor and diamond (E, = 5.5 eV) is an insulator. In silicon—but not
in diamond—there is a real possibility that thermal agitation at room tempera-
ture will cause electrons to jump the gap from valence to conduction band.

In Table 41-1 we compared three basic electrical properties of copper, our proto-
type metallic conductor, and silicon, our prototype semiconductor. Let us look again
at that table, one row at a time, to see how a semiconductor differs from a metal.

  

Number Density of Charge Carriers n

The bottom row of Table 41-1 shows that copper has far more charge carriers
per unit volume than silicon, by a factor of about 10!°. For copper, each atom con-
tributes one electron, its single valence electron, to the conduction process.
Charge carriers in silicon arise only because, at thermal equilibrium, thermal agi-
tation causes a certain (very small) number of valence-band electrons to jump
the energy gap into the conduction band, leaving an equal number of unoccupied
energy states, called holes, in the valence band. Figure 41-9b shows the situation.

Both the electrons in the conduction band and the holes in the valence band
serve as charge carriers. The holes do so by permitting a certain freedom of
movement to the electrons remaining in the valence band, electrons that, in the
absence of holes, would be gridlocked. If an electric field Eis set up in a semicon-
ductor, the electrons in the valence band, being negatively charged, tend to drift
in the direction opposite E. This causes the positions of the holes to drift in the
direction of E. In effect, the holes behave like moving particles of charge +e.

It may help to think of a row of cars parked bumper to bumper, with the
lead car at one car’s length from a barrier and the empty one-car-length distance
being an available parking space. If the leading car moves forward to the barrier,
it opens up a parking space behind it. The second car can then move up to fill that
space, allowing the third car to move up, and so on. The motions of the many cars
toward the barrier are most simply analyzed by focusing attention on the drift of
the single “hole” (parking space) away from the barrier.

In semiconductors, conduction by holes is just as important as conduction by
electrons. In thinking about hole conduction, we can assume that all unoccupied
states in the valence band are occupied by particles of charge +e and that all
electrons in the valence band have been removed, so that these positive charge
carriers can move freely throughout the band.

Resistivity »

Recall from Chapter 26 that the resistivity p of a material is m/e’nz, where m is
the electron mass, e is the fundamental charge, n is the number of charge carriers
per unit volume, and ris the mean time between collisions of the charge carriers.
Table 41-1 shows that, at room temperature, the resistivity of silicon is higher
than that of copper by a factor of about 10!'. This vast difference can be
accounted for by the vast difference in n. Other factors enter, but their effect on
the resistivity is swamped by the enormous difference in n.

Temperature Coefficient of Resistivity a

Recall that a (see Eq. 26-17) is the fractional change in resistivity per unit change
in temperature: 1 dp

oF (41-10)
