1220 CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

@ The component S, on a z axis is also quantized according to quantized as

Ms =

S.= mi, form, = +s = +5, = £554 1h, fors = 4.
n

where m, is the spin magnetic quantum number.

@ Every electron, whether trapped or free, has an intrinsic =
. oy ae i . Ms = —2Mshp,

spin magnetic dipole moment /4, with a magnitude that is

m
@ The component 1, - on a Z axis is also quantized according to
form, = +3.

 

 

Courtesy War

 

Nagourney

Figure 40-1 The blue dot is a photograph of
the light emitted from a single barium ion
held for a long time in a trap at the
University of Washington. Special tech-
niques caused the ion to emit light over and
over again as it underwent transitions
between the same pair of energy levels. The
dot represents the cumulative emission of
many photons.

Figure 40-2 A plot of the ionization energies
of the elements as a function of atomic
number, showing the periodic repetition of
properties through the six complete hori-
zontal periods of the periodic table. The
number of elements in each of these periods
is indicated.

What Is Physics?

In this chapter we continue with a primary goal of physics—discovering and
understanding the properties of atoms. About 100 years ago, researchers strug-
gled to find experiments that would prove the existence of atoms. Now we take
their existence for granted and even have photographs (scanning tunneling
microscope images) of atoms. We can drag them around on surfaces, such as to
make the quantum corral shown in the photograph of Fig. 39-12. We can even
hold an individual atom indefinitely in a trap (Fig. 40-1) so as to study its proper-
ties when it is completely isolated from other atoms.

Some Properties of Atoms

You may think the details of atomic physics are remote from your daily life.
However, consider how the following properties of atoms—so basic that we
rarely think about them —affect the way we live in our world.

Atoms are stable. Essentially all the atoms that form our tangible world have existed
without change for billions of years. What would the world be like if atoms con-
tinually changed into other forms, perhaps every few weeks or every few years?

Atoms combine with each other. They stick together to form stable molecules
and stack up to form rigid solids. An atom is mostly empty space, but you can
stand on a floor— made up of atoms—without falling through it.

These basic properties of atoms can be explained by quantum physics, as can the
three less apparent properties that follow.

Atoms Are Put Together Systematically

Figure 40-2 shows an example of a repetitive property of the elements as a
function of their position in the periodic table (Appendix G). The figure is a plot

20

 

Ionization energy (eV)

 

 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Atomic number Z
