H A P T CE Fe

Energy from the Nucleus

43-1 nucvear Fission

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

43.01 Distinguish atomic and nuclear burning, noting that in
both processes energy is produced because of a reduction
of mass.

43.02 Define the fission process.

43.03 Describe the process of a thermal neutron causing a
288 nucleus to undergo fission, and explain the role of the
intermediate compound nucleus.

43.04 For the absorption of a thermal neutron, calculate the
change in the system's mass and the energy put into the
resulting oscillation of the intermediate compound nucleus.

Key Ideas

@ Nuclear processes are about a million times more effective,
per unit mass, than chemical processes in transforming mass
into other forms of energy.

@ If a thermal neutron is captured by a 2°°U nucleus, the re-
sulting 29°U can undergo fission, producing two intermediate-
mass nuclei and one or more neutrons.

@ The energy released in such a fission event is Q ~ 200 MeV.

43.05 For agiven fission process, calculate the Q value in
terms of the binding energy per nucleon.

43.06 Explain the Bohr-Wheeler model for nuclear fission,
including the energy barrier.

43.07 Explain why thermal neutrons cannot cause 7°°U to
undergo fission.

43.08 Identify the approximate amount of energy (MeV) in the
fission of any high-mass nucleus to two middle-mass nuclei.

43.09 Relate the rate at which nuclei fission and the rate at
which energy is released.

@ Fission can be understood in terms of the collective
model, in which a nucleus is likened to a charged liquid
drop carrying a certain excitation energy.

e A potential barrier must be tunneled through if fission is to
occur. Fissionability depends on the relationship between the
barrier height E,, and the excitation energy £,, transferred to
the nucleus in the neutron capture.

 

What Is Physics?

Let’s now turn to a central concern of physics and certain types of engineering:
Can we get useful energy from nuclear sources, as people have done for
thousands of years from atomic sources by burning materials like wood
and coal? As you already know, the answer is yes, but there are major differ-
ences between the two energy sources. When we get energy from wood and coal
by burning them, we are tinkering with atoms of carbon and oxygen, rearranging
their outer electrons into more stable combinations. When we get energy from
uranium in a nuclear reactor, we are again burning a fuel, but now we are tin-
kering with the uranium nucleus, rearranging its nucleons into more stable com-

binations.

Electrons are held in atoms by the electromagnetic Coulomb force,
and it takes only a few electron-volts to pull one of them out. On the
other hand, nucleons are held in nuclei by the strong force, and it takes a
few million electron-volts to pull one of them out. This factor of a few
million is reflected in the fact that we can extract a few million times
more energy from a kilogram of uranium than we can from a kilogram of

coal.

1309
