Nuclear Physics

42-1 piscovERING THE NUCLEUS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

42.01 Explain the general arrangement for Rutherford
scattering and what was learned from it.

Key Ideas

42.02 In a Rutherford scattering arrangement, apply the rela-
tionship between the projectile’s initial kinetic energy and
the distance of its closest approach to the target nucleus.

 

@ The positive charge of an atom is concentrated in the central
nucleus rather than being spread through the volume of the
atom. This structure was proposed in 1910 by Emest

neutrons) are directed through a thin metal foil to be scattered
by the (positive) nuclei within the atoms.

@ The total energy (kinetic energy plus electric potential

Rutherford of England after he conducted experiments with
what we now call Rutherford scattering. Alpha particles
(positively charged particles consisting of two protons and two

energy) of the system of alpha particle and target nucleus
is conserved as the alpha particle approaches the nucleus.

 

What Is Physics?

We now turn to what lies at the center of an atom—the nucleus. For the last
90 years, a principal goal of physics has been to work out the quantum physics
of nuclei, and, for almost as long, a principal goal of some types of engineering
has been to apply that quantum physics with applications ranging from radia-
tion therapy in the war on cancer to detectors of radon gas in basements.

Before we get to such applications and the quantum physics of nuclei, let’s
first discuss how physicists discovered that an atom has a nucleus. As obvious as
that fact is today, it initially came as an incredible surprise.

Discovering the Nucleus

In the first years of the 20th century, not much was known about the structure of
atoms beyond the fact that they contain electrons. The electron had been discov-
ered (by J. J. Thomson) in 1897, and its mass was unknown in those early days.
Thus, it was not possible even to say how many negatively charged electrons a
given atom contained. Scientists reasoned that because atoms were electrically
neutral, they must also contain some positive charge, but nobody knew what form
this compensating positive charge took. One popular model was that the positive
and negative charges were spread uniformly in a sphere.

In 1911 Ernest Rutherford proposed that the positive charge of the atom
is densely concentrated at the center of the atom, forming its nucleus, and that,
furthermore, the nucleus is responsible for most of the mass of the atom.
Rutherford’s proposal was no mere conjecture but was based firmly on the results
of an experiment suggested by him and carried out by his collaborators, Hans
Geiger (of Geiger counter fame) and Ernest Marsden, a 20-year-old student who
had not yet earned his bachelor’s degree.

1276
