1230

CH group

 
     
 

  

CH group
OH group

Energy absorbed

B

Figure 40-11 A nuclear magnetic resonance
spectrum for ethanol, CH;CH,OH.The
spectral lines represent the absorption of
energy associated with spin-flips of pro-

tons. The three groups of lines correspond,

as indicated, to protons in the OH group,
the CH) group, and the CH; group of the
ethanol molecule. Note that the two pro-

tons in the CH; group occupy four different

local environments. The entire horizontal
axis covers less than 10~ T.

CHAPTER 40 ALL ABOUT ATOMS

frequency f. If f meets the requirement of Eq. 40-22, the oscillating EM field can
transfer a quantum of energy to a proton in the sample via a photon absorption,
spin-flipping the proton.

The magnetic field magnitude B that appears in Eq. 40-22 is actually the
magnitude of the net magnetic field B at the site where a given proton undergoes
spin-flipping. That net field is the vector sum of the external field Bay set up by the
magnetic resonance equipment (primarily a large magnet) and the internal field Bar
set up by the magnetic dipole moments of the atoms and nuclei near the given pro-
ton. For practical reasons we do not discuss here, magnetic resonance is usually de-
tected by sweeping the magnitude B.,, through a range of values while the fre-
quency f of the RF source is kept at a predetermined value and the energy of the RF
source is monitored. A graph of the energy loss of the RF source versus B,x; Shows a
resonance peak when B.. sweeps through the value at which spin-flipping occurs.
Such a graph is called a nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum, or NMR spectrum.

Figure 40-11 shows the NMR spectrum of ethanol, which is a molecule consisting
of three groups of atoms: CH, CH», and OH. Protons in each group can undergo
magnetic resonance, but each group has its own unique magnetic-resonance value of
Bx, because the groups lie in different internal fields Bax due to their arrangement
within the CH;CH,OH molecule. Thus, the resonance peaks in the spectrum of Fig.
40-11 form a unique NMR signature by which ethanol can be indentified.

40-4 exctusion PRINCIPLE AND MULTIPLE ELECTRONS IN A TRAP

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

40.25 Identify the Pauli exclusion principle.

40.26 Explain the procedure for placing multiple electrons in
traps of one, two, and three dimensions, including the
need to obey the exclusion principle and to allow for

Key Idea

degenerate states, and explain the terms empty, partially
occupied, and fully occupied.

40.27 For a system of multiple electrons in traps of one, two,
and three dimensions, produce energy-level diagrams.

 

@ Electrons in atoms and other traps obey the Pauli exclusion principle, which requires that no two electrons in a trap can have

the same set of quantum numbers.

The Pauli Exclusion Principle

In Chapter 39 we considered a variety of electron traps, from fictional one-
dimensional traps to the real three-dimensional trap of a hydrogen atom. In all
those examples, we trapped only one electron. However, when we discuss traps con-
taining two or more electrons (as we shall below), we must consider a principle that
governs any particle whose spin quantum number s is not zero or an integer. This
principle applies not only to electrons but also to protons and neutrons, all of which
have s = 5. The principle is known as the Pauli exclusion principle after Wolfgang
Pauli, who formulated it in 1925. For electrons, it states that

Oo No two electrons confined to the same trap can have the same set of values for
their quantum numbers.

As we shall discuss in Module 40-5, this principle means that no two electrons in
an atom can have the same four values for the quantum numbers n, €,/7,, and m,. All
electrons have the same quantum number s = Thus, any two electrons in an atom.
must differ in at least one of these other quantum numbers. Were this not true,
atoms would collapse, and thus you and the world could not exist.
