44-3 QUARKS AND MESSENGER PARTICLES

We cannot detect these photons because they are emitted by one electron and
absorbed by the other a very short time later. Because of their undetectable exis-
tence, we call them virtual photons. Because they communicate between the two
interacting charged particles, we sometimes call these photons messenger particles.

Ifa stationary electron emits a photon and remains itself unchanged, energy
is not conserved. The principle of conservation of energy is saved, however, by an
uncertainty principle written in the form

AE-At~ h. (44-18)

Here we interpret this relation to mean that you can “overdraw” an amount of
energy AE, violating conservation of energy, provided you “return” it within an
interval At given by #/AE so that the violation cannot be detected. The virtual
photons do just that. When, say, electron A emits a virtual photon, the overdraw
in energy is quickly set right when that electron receives a virtual photon from
electron B, and the violation is hidden by the inherent uncertainty.

The Weak Force

A theory of the weak force, which acts on all particles, was developed by analogy
with the theory of the electromagnetic force. The messenger particles that trans-
mit the weak force between particles, however, are not (massless) photons but
massive particles, identified by the symbols W and Z. The theory was so successful
that it revealed the electromagnetic force and the weak force as being different
aspects of a single electroweak force. This accomplishment is a logical extension
of the work of Maxwell, who revealed the electric and magnetic forces as being
different aspects of a single electromagnetic force.

The electroweak theory was specific in predicting the properties of the messen-
ger particles. In addition to the massless photon, the messenger of the electromag-
netic interactions, the theory gives us three messengers for the weak interactions:

Particle Charge Mass

WwW te 80.4 GeV/c?
Z 0 91.2 GeV/c?

Recall that the proton mass is only 0.938 GeV/c”; these are massive particles! The
1979 Nobel Prize in physics was awarded to Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg,
and Abdus Salam for their electroweak theory. The theory was confirmed in 1983
by Carlo Rubbia and his group at CERN, and the 1984 Nobel Prize in physics
went to Rubbia and Simon van der Meer for this brilliant experimental work.

Some notion of the complexity of particle physics in this day and age can
be found by looking at an earlier particle physics experiment that led to the
Nobel Prize in physics—the discovery of the neutron. This vitally important dis-
covery was a “tabletop” experiment, employing particles emitted by naturally oc-
curring radioactive materials as projectiles; it was reported in 1932 under the title
“Possible Existence of a Neutron,” the single author being James Chadwick.

The discovery of the W and Z messenger particles in 1983, by contrast, was car-
ried out at a large particle accelerator, about 7 km in circumference and operating in
the range of several hundred billion electron-volts. The principal particle detector
alone weighed 20 MN. The experiment employed more than 130 physicists from 12
institutions in 8 countries, along with a large support staff.

The Strong Force

A theory of the strong force —that is, the force that acts between quarks to bind
hadrons together —has also been developed. The messenger particles in this case

1353
