18.1

Mutations Are Rare
But Important

The cells of eukaryotes contain an enor-
mous amount of DNA. If the DNA in all of
the cells of an adult human were lined up
end-to-end, it would stretch nearly 100 bil-
lion kilometers—60 times the distance from
Earth to Jupiter! The DNA in any multicel-
lular organism is the final result of a long
series of replications, starting with the
DNA of a single cell, the fertilized egg. Or-
ganisms have evolved many different mech-
anisms to avoid errors during DNA replica-
tion and to preserve the DNA from
damage. Some of these mechanisms “proof-
read” the replicated DNA strands for accu-
racy and correct any mistakes. The proof-
reading is not perfect, however. If it were,
no variation in the nucleotide sequences of
genes would be generated.

Mistakes Happen

In fact, cells do make mistakes during repli-
cation, and damage to the genetic message
also occurs, causing mutation (figure 18.2).
However, change is rare. Typically, a par-
ticular gene is altered in only one of a mil-
lion gametes. If changes were common, the
genetic instructions encoded in DNA
would soon degrade into meaningless gib-
berish. Limited as it might seem, the stead:
trickle of change that does occur is the very stuff of evo-
lution. Every difference in the genetic messages that
specify different organisms arose as the result of genetic
change.

 

The Importance of Genetic Change

All evolution begins with alterations in the genetic mes-
sage: mutation creates new alleles, gene transfer and trans-
position alter gene location, reciprocal recombination shuf-
fles and sorts these changes, and chromosomal
rearrangement alters the organization of entire chromo-
somes. Some changes in germ-line tissue produce alter-
ations that enable an organism to leave more offspring, and
those changes tend to be preserved as the genetic endow-
ment of future generations. Other changes reduce the abil-
ity of an organism to leave offspring. Those changes tend
to be lost, as the organisms that carry them contribute
fewer members to future generations.

362 = =PartV Molecular Genetics

FIGURE 18.2

Mutations are changes in the genetic message.

 

Mutation. Normal fruit flies have one pair of wings extending from the thorax. This
fly is a mutant because of changes in bithorax, a gene regulating a critical stage of
development; it possesses two thoracic segments and thus two sets of wings.

Evolution can be viewed as the selection of particular
combinations of alleles from a pool of alternatives. The
rate of evolution is ultimately limited by the rate at which
these alternatives are generated. Genetic change through
mutation and recombination provides the raw material for
evolution.

Genetic changes in somatic cells do not pass on to off-
spring, and so have less evolutionary consequence than
germ-line change. However, changes in the genes of so-
matic cells can have an important immediate impact, par-
ticularly if the gene affects development or is involved with
regulation of cell proliferation.

 

Rare changes in genes, called mutations, can have
significant effects on the individual when they occur in
somatic tissue, but are only inherited if they occur in
germ-line tissue. Inherited changes provide the raw
material for evolution.

 
