1354

CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

are called gluons and, like the photon, they are predicted to be massless. The the-
ory assumes that each “flavor” of quark comes in three varieties that, for conven-
ience, have been labeled red, yellow, and blue. Thus, there are three up quarks,
one of each color, and so on. The antiquarks also come in three colors, which we
call antired, antiyellow, and antiblue. You must not think that quarks are actually
colored, like tiny jelly beans. The names are labels of convenience, but (for once)
they do have a certain formal justification, as you will see.

The force acting between quarks is called a color force and the underlying
theory, by analogy with quantum electrodynamics (QED), is called quantum
chromodynamics (QCD). Apparently, quarks can be assembled only in combina-
tions that are color-neutral.

There are two ways to bring about color neutrality. In the theory of actual col-
ors, red + yellow + blue yields white, which is color-neutral, and we use the same
scheme in dealing with quarks. Thus we can assemble three quarks to form a
baryon, provided one is a yellow quark, one is a red quark, and one is a blue quark.
Antired + antiyellow + antiblue is also white, so that we can assemble three anti-
quarks (of the proper anticolors) to form an antibaryon. Finally, red + antired, or
yellow + antiyellow, or blue + antiblue also yields white. Thus, we can assemble a
quark—antiquark combination to form a meson. The color-neutral rule does not
permit any other combination of quarks, and none are observed.

The color force not only acts to bind together quarks as baryons and mesons,
but it also acts between such particles, in which case it has traditionally been called
the strong force. Hence, not only does the color force bind together quarks to form
protons and neutrons, but it also binds together the protons and neutrons to form
nuclei.

The Higgs Field and Particle

The Standard Model of the fundamental particles consists of the theory for the
electroweak interactions and the theory for the strong interactions. A key success
in the model has been to demonstrate the existence of the four messenger parti-
cles in the electroweak interactions: the photon, and the Z and W particles.
However, a key puzzle has involved the masses of those particles. Why is the pho-
ton massless while the Z and W particles are extremely massive?

In the 1960s, Peter Higgs and, independently, Robert Brout and Francois
Englert suggested that the mass discrepancy is due to a field (now called the Higgs
field) that permeates all of space and thus is a property of the vacuum. Without this
field, the four messenger particles would be massless and indistinguishable—they
would be symmetric. The Brout-Englert—Higgs theory demonstrates how the field
breaks that symmetry, producing the electroweak messengers with one being mass-
less. It also explains why all other particles, except for the gluon, have mass. The
quantum of that field is the Higgs boson. Because of its pivotal role for all particles
and because the theory behind its existence is compelling (even beautiful), intense
searches for the Higgs boson were conducted on the Tevatron at Brookhaven and
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. In 2012, tantalizing experimental evidence
was announced for the Higgs boson, at a mass of 125 Ge V/c.

Einstein’s Dream

The unification of the fundamental forces of nature into a single force —which oc-
cupied Einstein’s attention for much of his later life —is very much a current fo-
cus of research. We have seen that the weak force has been successfully combined
with electromagnetism so that they may be jointly viewed as aspects of a single
electroweak force. Theories that attempt to add the strong force to this combina-
tion—called grand unification theories (GUTs)—are being pursued actively.
Theories that seek to complete the job by adding gravity sometimes called the-
ories of everything (TOE)—are at a speculative stage at this time. String theory
(in which particles are tiny oscillating loops) is one approach.
