1322 CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

43-4 THERMONUCLEAR FUSION: THE BASIC PROCESS

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to

 

43.18 Define thermonuclear fusion, explaining why the nuclei 43.20 Explain the two reasons why fusion of two nuclei can

 

must be at a high temperature to fuse. occur even when the kinetic energy associated with their
43.19 For nuclei, apply the relationship between their kinetic most probable speed is insufficient to overcome their
energy and their temperature. energy barrier.
Key Ideas
@ The release of energy by fusion of two light nuclei is inhib- @ Fusion can occur in bulk matter only if the temperature is
ited by their mutual Coulomb barrier (due to the electric repul- —_ high enough (that is, if the particle energy is high enough) for
sion between the two collections of protons). appreciable barrier tunneling to occur.

 

Thermonuclear Fusion: The Basic Process

The binding energy curve of Fig. 42-7 shows that energy can be released if two
light nuclei combine to form a single larger nucleus, a process called nuclear
fusion. That process is hindered by the Coulomb repulsion that acts to prevent
the two positively charged particles from getting close enough to be within range
of their attractive nuclear forces and thus “fusing.” The range of the nuclear force
is short, hardly beyond the nuclear “surface,” but the range of the repulsive
Coulomb force is long and that force thus forms an energy barrier. The height of
this Coulomb barrier depends on the charges and the radii of the two interacting
nuclei. For two protons (Z = 1), the barrier height is 400 keV. For more highly
charged particles, of course, the barrier is correspondingly higher.

To generate useful amounts of energy, nuclear fusion must occur in bulk matter.
The best hope for bringing this aboutis to raise the temperature of the material until
the particles have enough energy —due to their thermal motions alone —to pene-
trate the Coulomb barrier. We call this process thermonuclear fusion.

In thermonuclear studies, temperatures are reported in terms of the kinetic
energy K of interacting particles via the relation

K=kT, (43-9)

in which K is the kinetic energy corresponding to the most probable speed of the
interacting particles, k is the Boltzmann constant, and the temperature T is in
kelvins. Thus, rather than saying, “The temperature at the center of the Sun is
1.5 x 10’ K,” it is more common to say,“The temperature at the center of the Sun
is 1.3 keV.”

Room temperature corresponds to K ~ 0.03 eV; a particle with only this
amount of energy could not hope to overcome a barrier as high as, say, 400 keV.
Even at the center of the Sun, where kT = 1.3 keV, the outlook for thermonu-
clear fusion does not seem promising at first glance. Yet we know that thermo-
nuclear fusion not only occurs in the core of the Sun but is the dominant feature
of that body and of all other stars.

The puzzle is solved when we realize two facts: (1) The energy calculated
with Eq. 43-9 is that of the particles with the most probable speed, as defined
in Module 19-6; there is a long tail of particles with much higher speeds and,
correspondingly, much higher energies. (2) The barrier heights that we have
calculated represent the peaks of the barriers. Barrier tunneling can occur at
energies considerably below those peaks, as we saw with alpha decay in
Module 42-4.
