ing of the two types of particles by writing the density d* of the
compressed pellet as the sum of the individual densities:

n n
d*=—mg+ >m,

ee

where my and m, are the masses of a deuterium atom and a
tritium atom, respectively. We can replace those masses with

the given molar masses by substituting

(43-18)

d a

mg=— and m =—.

a Ny Tn

where Na is Avogadro’s number. After making those
replacements and substituting 1000d for the compressed
density d*, we solve Eq. 43-18 for the particle number den-
sity n to obtain

_ 20004.
"= Mat Me

Review & Summary

Energy from the Nucleus Nuclear processes are about a
million times more effective, per unit mass, than chemical pro-
cesses in transforming mass into other forms of energy.

Nuclear Fission Equation 43-1 shows a fission of *°U induced
by thermal neutrons bombarding 25U. Equations 43-2 and 43-3
show the beta-decay chains of the primary fragments. The energy
released in such a fission event is @ ~ 200 MeV.

Fission can be understood in terms of the collective model, in
which a nucleus is likened to a charged liquid drop carrying a cer-
tain excitation energy. A potential barrier must be tunneled
through if fission is to occur. The ability of a nucleus to undergo fis-
sion depends on the relationship between the barrier height E, and
the excitation energy Ey.

The neutrons released during fission make possible a fission
chain reaction. Figure 43-5 shows the neutron balance for one
cycle of a typical reactor. Figure 43-6 suggests the layout of a
complete nuclear power plant.

Nuclear Fusion The release of energy by the fusion of two
light nuclei is inhibited by their mutual Coulomb barrier (due to

a

Questions

SS

1 Inthe fission process

SU4n >

 

gn + 60 + 3n,

what number goes in (a) the elevated box (the superscript) and (b)
the descended box (the value of Z)?

2 Ifa fusion process requires an absorption of energy, does the
average binding energy per nucleon increase or decrease?

QUESTIONS 1329

which gives us
_ _(2000)(200 kg/m4)(6.02 x 10°? mol!)
"= 2.0 102 kg/mol + 3.0 X 10° kg/mol
asa gears (Answer)

(b) According to Lawson’s criterion, how long must the
pellet maintain this particle density if breakeven operation
is to take place at a suitably high temperature?

KEY IDEA

 

If breakeven operation is to occur, the compressed density
must be maintained for a time period 7 given by Eq. 43-16
(n> 10” s/m’).
Calculation: We can now write

10” s/m*

ee ena eee

48 10% m= ee)

S Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

the electric repulsion between the two collections of protons).
Fusion can occur in bulk matter only if the temperature is high
enough (that is, if the particle energy is high enough) for apprecia-
ble barrier tunneling to occur.

The Sun’s energy arises mainly from the thermonuclear
burning of hydrogen to form helium by the proton-proton cycle
outlined in Fig. 43-11. Elements up to A ~ 56 (the peak of the
binding energy curve) can be built up by other fusion processes
once the hydrogen fuel supply of a star has been exhausted. Fusion
of more massive elements requires an input of energy and thus
cannot be the source of a star’s energy output.

Controlled Fusion Controlled thermonuclear fusion for
energy generation has not yet been achieved. The d-d and d-t
reactions are the most promising mechanisms. A successful fusion
reactor must satisfy Lawson’s criterion,

nt > 10% sim, (43-16)

and must have a suitably high plasma temperature T.

In a tokamak the plasma is confined by a magnetic field. In
laser fusion inertial confinement is used.

3 Suppose a ?“U nucleus “swallows” a neutron and then decays
not by fission but by beta-minus decay, in which it emits an elec-
tron and a neutrino. Which nuclide remains after this decay: *°Pu,
238Np,2"Np, or Pa?

4 Do the initial fragments formed by fission have more protons
than neutrons, more neutrons than protons, or about the same
number of each?
