1360 CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

Figure 44-7 This color-coded
image is effectively a pho-
tograph of the universe
when it was only 379 000 y
old, which was about 13.7 x
10° y ago. This is what you
would have seen then as
you looked away in all di-
rections (the view has been
condensed to this oval).
Patches of light from col-
lections of atoms stretch
across the “sky,” but galax-
ies, stars, and planets have
not yet formed.

but this light cannot travel far before it interacts with a nucleus. Thus the
universe is opaque.

t ~ 379 000 y. The temperature has now fallen to 2970 K, and electrons can stick to
bare nuclei when the two collide, forming atoms. Because light does not interact
appreciably with (uncharged) particles, such as neutral atoms, the light is now
free to travel great distances. This radiation forms the cosmic background radia-
tion that we discussed earlier. Atoms of hydrogen and helium, under the influ-
ence of gravity, begin to clump together, eventually starting the formation of
galaxies and stars, but until then, the universe is relatively dark (Fig. 44-6).

Early measurements suggested that the cosmic background radiation is uniform
in all directions, implying that 379 000 y after the big bang all matter in the uni-
verse was uniformly distributed. This finding was most puzzling because matter
in the present universe is not uniformly distributed, but instead is collected in
galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and superclusters of galactic clusters. There are also
vast voids in which there is relatively little matter, and there are regions so
crowded with matter that they are called walls. If the big bang theory of the
beginning of the universe is even approximately correct, the seeds for this non-
uniform distribution of matter must have been in place before the universe was
379 000 y old and now should show up as a nonuniform distribution of the
microwave background radiation.

In 1992, measurements made by NASA’s Cosmic Background Explorer
(COBE) satellite revealed that the background radiation is, in fact, not perfectly
uniform. In 2003, measurements by NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy
Probe (WMAP) greatly increased our resolution of this nonuniformity. The re-
sulting image (Fig. 44-7) is effectively a color-coded photograph of the universe
when it was only 379 000 y old. As you can see from the variations in the colors,
large-scale collecting of matter had already begun. Thus, the big bang theory and
the theory of inflation at t ~ 10~™* sare on the right track.

The Accelerated Expansion of the Universe

Recall from Module 13-8 the statement that mass causes curvature of space.
Now that we have seen that mass is a form of energy, as given by Einstein’s equa-

 

Courtesy WMAP Science Team/NASA
