44-3 QUARKS AND MESSENGER PARTICLES

Note, however, that the mass of a proton, neutron, =~, or any other baryon is
not the sum of the masses of the constituent quarks. For example, the total mass of
the three quarks in a proton is only 20 MeV/c’, woefully less than the proton’s mass
of 938.3 MeV/c. Nearly all of the proton’s mass is due to the internal energies of (1)
the quark motion and (2) the fields that bind the quarks together. (Recall that mass
is related to energy via Einstein’s equation, which we can write as m= E/c?.) Thus,
because most of your mass is due to the protons and neutrons in your body, your
mass (and therefore your weight on a bathroom scale) is primarily a measure of the
energies of the quark motion and the quark-binding fields within you.

Quarks and Mesons

Mesons are quark—antiquark pairs; some of their compositions are given in
Fig. 444d. The quark —antiquark model is consistent with the fact that mesons are
not baryons; that is, mesons have a baryon number B = 0. The baryon number
for a quark is +4 and for an antiquark is —4; thus, the combination of baryon
numbers in a meson is zero. :

Consider the meson 7*, which consists of an up quark u and an antidown
quark d. We see from Table 44-5 that the charge quantum number of the up quark
is +3 and that of the antidown quark is +} (the sign is opposite that of the down
quark). This adds nicely to a charge quantum number of +1 for the z* meson; that is,

qud) =}+4= 41.
All the charge and strangeness quantum numbers of Fig. 44-4b agree with

those of Table 44-4 and Fig. 44-3b. Convince yourself that all possible up, down,
and strange quark—antiquark combinations are used. Everything fits.

Vv Checkpoint 3

Is acombination of a down quark (d) and an antiup quark (j) called (a) a 7” meson,
(b) a proton, (c) a 7 meson, (d) a 7* meson, or (e) a neutron?

A New Look at Beta Decay

Let us see how beta decay appears from the quark point of view. In Eq. 42-24, we
presented a typical example of this process:

“PS te ty

After the neutron was discovered and Fermi had worked out his theory of beta
decay, physicists came to view the fundamental beta-decay process as the chang-
ing of a neutron into a proton inside the nucleus, according to the scheme

n7>pte +x,

in which the neutrino is identified more completely. Today we look deeper and
see that a neutron (udd) can change into a proton (uud) by changing a down
quark into an up quark. We now view the fundamental beta-decay process as

drmute +%,

Thus, as we come to know more and more about the fundamental nature of mat-
ter, we can examine familiar processes at deeper and deeper levels. We see too
that the quark model not only helps us to understand the structure of particles
but also clarifies their interactions.

Still More Quarks

There are other particles and other eightfold way patterns that we have not
discussed. To account for them, it turns out that we need to postulate three more
quarks, the charm quark c, the top quark t,and the bottom quark b.Thus, a total of
six quarks exist, as listed in Table 44-5.

1351
