   
  

fin rR Re

Nervous system

The Nematode

One of the most powerful models of animal development is
the tiny nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Only about 1 mm
long, it consists of 959 somatic cells and has about the same
amount of DNA as Drosophila. The entire genome has been
mapped as a series of overlapping fragments, and a serious
effort is underway to determine the complete DNA se-
quence of the genome.

Because C. elegans is transparent, individual cells can be
followed as they divide. By observing them, researchers
have learned how each of the cells that make up the adult
worm is derived from the fertilized egg. As shown on this
lineage map (figure 17.24), the egg divides into two, and
then its daughter cells continue to divide. Each horizontal
line on the map represents one round of cell division. The
length of each vertical line represents the time between cell
divisions, and the end of each vertical line represents one
fully differentiated cell. In figure 17.24, the major organs of
the worm are color-coded to match the colors of the corre-
sponding groups of cells on the lineage map.

Some of these differentiated cells, such as some of the
cells that generate the worm’s external cuticle, are “born”
after only 8 rounds of cell division; other cuticle cells require
as many as 14 rounds. The cells that make up the worm’s
pharynx, or feeding organ, are bom after 9 to 11 rounds of
division, while cells in the gonads require up to 17 divisions.

Exactly 302 nerve cells are destined for the worm’s ner-
vous system. Exactly 131 cells are programmed to die,
mostly within minutes of their birth. The fate of each cell is
the same in every C. elegans individual, except for the cells
that will become eggs and sperm.

 

The nematode develops 959 somatic cells from a single
fertilized egg in a carefully orchestrated series of cell
divisions which have been carefully mapped by
researchers.

 

FIGURE 17.24
Studying development in the nematode.

354 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

Cuticle-making cells

Cuticle

 
