CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

Figure 43-13 The small spheres on the quarter
are deuterium-tritium fuel pellets, designed
to be used in a laser fusion chamber.

 

Courtesy Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico

the charged particles that make up the hot plasma keep the plasma from touch-
ing the walls of the chamber.

The plasma is heated by inducing a current in it and by bombarding it with an
externally accelerated beam of particles. The first goal of this approach is to
achieve breakeven, which occurs when the Lawson criterion is met or exceeded.
The ultimate goal is ignition, which corresponds to a self-sustaining thermonu-
clear reaction and a net generation of energy.

Inertial Confinement

A second approach, called inertial confinement, involves “zapping” a solid fuel
pellet from all sides with intense laser beams, evaporating some material from the
surface of the pellet. This boiled-off material causes an inward-moving shock
wave that compresses the core of the pellet, increasing both its particle density
and its temperature. The process is called inertial confinement because (a) the
fuel is confined to the pellet and (b) the particles do not escape from the heated
pellet during the very short zapping interval because of their inertia (their mass).

Laser fusion, using the inertial confinement approach, is being investigated in
many laboratories in the United States and elsewhere. At the Lawrence Livermore
Laboratory, for example, deuterium —tritium fuel pellets, each smaller than a grain
of sand (Fig. 43-13), are to be zapped by 10 synchronized high-power laser pulses
symmetrically arranged around the pellet. The laser pulses are designed to deliver,
in total, some 200 kJ of energy to each fuel pellet in less than a nanosecond. This is a
delivered power of about 2 x 10'+ W during the pulse, which is roughly 100 times
the total installed (sustained) electrical power generating capacity of the world!

Sample Problem 43.05 Laser fusion: number of particles and Lawson’s criterion

Suppose a fuel pellet in a laser fusion device contains equal
numbers of deuterium and tritium atoms (and no other mate-
tial). The density d = 200 kg/m’ of the pellet is increased by a
factor of 10° by the action of the laser pulses.

(a) How many particles per unit volume (both deuterons
and tritons) does the pellet contain in its compressed state?
The molar mass My of deuterium atoms is 2.0 x 10-3
kg/mol, and the molar mass M, of tritium atoms is 3.0 x
10-7 kg/mol.

KEY IDEA

 

For a system consisting of only one type of particle, we can

write the (mass) density (the mass per unit volume) of the
system in terms of the particle masses and number density
(the number of particles per unit volume):

density,\ _ {number density, \ / particle mass,
(“eine) = (megs) (Page). can

Let n be the total number of particles per unit volume in the
compressed pellet. Then, because we know that the device
contains equal numbers of deuterium and tritium atoms, the
number of deuterium atoms per unit volume is n/2, and the
number of tritium atoms per unit volume is also n/2.

Calculations: We can extend Eq. 43-17 to the system consist-
