44-2 LEPTONS, HADRONS, AND STRANGENESS

tions, then, mean that the individual family lepton numbers are not conserved for
neutrinos. In this book we shall not consider such violations and shall always con-
serve the individual family lepton numbers.

Let’s illustrate such conservation by reconsidering the antimuon decay
process shown in Eq. 44-8, which we now write more fully as

poset tH th, (44-13)
Consider this first in terms of the muon family of leptons. The 2* is an antiparticle
(see Table 44-2) and thus has the muon lepton number L,, = —1.The two particles
e* and », do not belong to the muon family and thus have L,, = 0. This leaves
the right which, being an antiparticle, also has the muon lepton number L,, = —1.
Thus, both sides of Eq. 44-13 have the same net muon lepton number—namely,
L,, = —1;if they did not, the ~* would not decay by this process.

No members of the electron family appear on the left in Eq. 44-13; so there
the net electron lepton number must be L, = 0.On the right side of Eq. 44-13, the
positron, being an antiparticle (again see Table 44-2), has the electron lepton
number L, = —1.The electron neutrino »,, being a particle, has the electron num-
ber L, = +1. Thus, the net electron lepton number for these two particles on the
right in Eq. 44-13 is also zero; the electron lepton number is also conserved in the
process.

Because no members of the tau family appear on either side of Eq. 44-13,
we must have L, = 0 on each side. Thus, each of the lepton quantum numbers
L,, L,, and L, remains unchanged during the decay process of Eq. 44-13, their
constant values being —1, 0, and 0, respectively.

Iv] Checkpoint 1

(a) The 7* meson decays by the process 7* > x* + ».To what lepton family does
the neutrino vbelong? (b) Is this neutrino a particle or an antiparticle? (c) What is its
lepton number?

 

 

The Hadrons

We are now ready to consider hadrons (baryons and mesons), those particles
whose interactions are governed by the strong force. We start by adding another
conservation law to our list: conservation of baryon number.

To develop this conservation law, let us consider the proton decay process

pre tn. (44-14)

This process never happens. We should be glad that it does not because otherwise
all protons in the universe would gradually change into positrons, with disastrous
consequences for us. Yet this decay process does not violate the conservation
laws involving energy, linear momentum, or lepton number.

We account for the apparent stability of the proton—and for the absence of
many other processes that might otherwise occur—by introducing a new quan-
tum number, the baryon number B, and a new conservation law, the conservation
of baryon number:

  

Oo To every baryon we assign B = +1.To every antibaryon we assign B =
particles of other types we assign B = 0. A particle process cannot occur
changes the net baryon number.

In the process of Eq. 44-14, the proton has a baryon number of B = +1 and
the positron and neutrino both have a baryon number of B = 0. Thus, the process
does not conserve baryon number and cannot occur.

1345
