44-4 cosmotoey

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

44,22 |dentify that the universe (all of spacetime) began with
the big bang and has been expanding ever since.

44,23 ldentify that all distant galaxies (and thus their stars,
black holes, etc.), in all directions, are receding from us
because of the expansion.

44.24 Apply Hubble's law to relate the recession speed v of
a distant galaxy, its distance r from us, and the Hubble
constant H.

44.25 Apply the Doppler equation for the red shift of light to
relate the wavelength shift AA, the recession speed v, and
the proper wavelength Ay of the emission.

44.26 Approximate the age of the universe using the Hubble
constant.

Key Ideas
@ The universe is expanding, which means that empty space
is continuously appearing between us and any distant galaxy.

@ The rate v at which a distance to a distant galaxy is increas-
ing (the galaxy appears to be moving at speed v) is given by
the Hubble law:

v = Hr,

where r is the current distance to the galaxy and H is the
Hubble constant, which we take to be

H =71.0km/s - Mpc = 21.8 mm/s - ly.

@ The expansion causes a red shift in the light we receive
from distant galaxies. We can assume that the wavelength
shift AA is given (approximately) by the Doppler shift equa-

A Pause for Reflection

44-4 COSMOLOGY 1355

44.27 \dentify the cosmic background radiation and explain
the importance of its detection.

44.28 Explain the evidence for the dark matter that apparently
surrounds every galaxy.

44.29 Discuss the various stages of the universe from very
soon after the big bang until atoms began to form.

44.30 Identify that the expansion of the universe is being
accelerated by some unknown property dubbed dark
energy.

44,31 Identify that the total energy of baryonic matter (pro-
tons and neutrons) is only a small part of the total energy
of the universe.

 

tion for light discussed in Module 37-5:
[Aal

v=——ce
Xo

where Ao is the proper wavelength as measured in the frame
of the light source (the galaxy).

@ The expansion described by Hubble's law and the pres-
ence of ubiquitous background microwave radiation reveal
that the universe began in a “big bang” 13.7 billion years ago.
@ The rate of expansion is increasing due to a mysterious
property of the vacuum called dark energy.

@ Much of the energy of the universe is hidden in dark matter
that apparently interacts with normal (baryonic) matter
through the gravitational force.

Let us put what you have just learned in perspective. If all we are interested in is
the structure of the world around us, we can get along nicely with the electron,
the neutrino, the neutron, and the proton. As someone has said, we can operate
“Spaceship Earth” quite well with just these particles. We can see a few of the
more exotic particles by looking for them in the cosmic rays; however, to see most
of them, we must build massive accelerators and look for them at great effort and
expense.

The reason we must go to such effort is that—measured in energy terms —
we live in a world of very low temperatures. Even at the center of the Sun, the
value of kT is only about | keV. To produce the exotic particles, we must be able
to accelerate protons or electrons to energies in the GeV and TeV range and
higher.

Once upon a time the temperature everywhere was high enough to provide
such energies. That time of extremely high temperatures occurred in the big bang
beginning of the universe, when the universe (and both space and time) came
