1338

CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

Hadron or Lepton?

We can also classify particles in terms of the four fundamental forces that act on
them. The gravitational force acts on all particles, but its effects at the level of
subatomic particles are so weak that we need not consider that force (at least not
in today’s research). The electromagnetic force acts on all electrically charged
particles; its effects are well known, and we can take them into account when we
need to; we largely ignore this force in this chapter.

We are left with the strong force, which is the force that binds nucleons
together, and the weak force, which is involved in beta decay and similar
processes. The weak force acts on all particles, the strong force only on some.

We can, then, roughly classify particles on the basis of whether the strong
force acts on them. Particles on which the strong force acts are called hadrons.
Particles on which the strong force does not act, leaving the weak force and the
electromagnetic force as the dominant forces, are called leptons. Protons, neu-
trons, and pions are hadrons; electrons and neutrinos are leptons.

We can make a further distinction among the hadrons because some of them
are bosons (we call them mesons); the pion is an example. The other hadrons are
fermions (we call them baryons); the proton is an example.

Particle or Antiparticle?

In 1928 Dirac predicted that the electron e~ should have a positively charged
counterpart of the same mass and spin. The counterpart, the positron e*, was dis-
covered in cosmic radiation in 1932 by Carl Anderson. Physicists then gradually
realized that every particle has a corresponding antiparticle. The members of such
pairs have the same mass and spin but opposite signs of electric charge (if they are
charged) and opposite signs of quantum numbers that we have not yet discussed.

At first, particle was used to refer to the common particles such as elec-
trons, protons, and neutrons, and antiparticle referred to their rarely detected
counterparts. Later, for the less common particles, the assignment of particle
and antiparticle was made so as to be consistent with certain conservation laws
that we shall discuss later in this chapter. (Confusingly, both particles and an-
tiparticles are sometimes called particles when no distinction is needed.) We of-
ten, but not always, represent an antiparticle by putting a bar over the symbol
for the particle. Thus, p is the symbol for the proton, and p (pronounced “p
bar”) is the symbol for the antiproton.

Annihilation. When a particle meets its antiparticle, the two can annihilate
each other. That is, the particle and antiparticle disappear and their combined en-
ergies reappear in other forms. For an electron annihilating with a positron, this
energy reappears as two gamma-ray photons:

e tet>yty. (44-5)

If the electron and positron are stationary when they annihilate, their total
energy is their total mass energy, and that energy is then shared equally by the
two photons. To conserve momentum and because photons cannot be stationary,
the photons fly off in opposite directions.

Antihydrogen atoms (each with an antiproton and positron instead of a pro-
ton and electron in a hydrogen atom) are now being manufactured and studied at
CERN. The Standard Model predicts that a transition in an antihydrogen atom
(say, between the first excited state and the ground state) is identical to the same
transition in a hydrogen atom. Thus, any difference in the transitions would clearly
signal that the Standard Model is erroneous; no difference has yet been spotted.

An assembly of antiparticles, such as an antihydrogen atom, is often called
antimatter to distinguish it from an assembly of common particles (matter). (The
terms can easily be confusing when the word “matter” is used to describe any-
thing that has mass.) We can speculate that future scientists and engineers may
construct objects of antimatter. However, no evidence suggests that nature has
