43-4 THERMONUCLEAR FUSION: THE BASIC PROCESS 1323

Figure 43-10 sums things up. The curve marked n(K) in this figure is a
Maxwell distribution curve for the protons in the Sun’s core, drawn to correspond
to the Sun’s central temperature. This curve differs from the Maxwell distribution
curve given in Fig. 19-8 in that here the curve is drawn in terms of energy and not
of speed. Specifically, for any kinetic energy K, the expression n(K) dK gives the
probability that a proton will have a kinetic energy lying between the values K and
K + dK. The value of kT in the core of the Sun is indicated by the vertical line in y(K)
the figure; note that many of the Sun’s core protons have energies greater than
this value.

The curve marked p(K) in Fig. 43-10 is the probability of barrier penetration o 12 3 4° 5 6 7
by two colliding protons. The two curves in Fig. 43-10 suggest that there is a par- Kinetic energy (keV)
ticular proton energy at which proton—proton fusion events occur ata maximum __ Figure 43-10 The curve marked (K) gives the
rate. At energies much above this value, the barrier is transparent enough but too ™mber density per unit energy for protons
few protons have these energies, and so the fusion reaction cannot be sustained. auihe center ofthe Sun The curve marked
At energies much below this value, plenty of protons have these energies but the et hevestusion, for ee
Coulomb barrier is too formidable. . Profon proton

collisions at the Sun’s core temperature.
lv] Checkpoint 2

The vertical line marks the value of kT at
this temperature. Note that the two curves
are drawn to (separate) arbitrary vertical

Which of these potential fusion reactions will not result in the net release of energy:

(a) “Li + “Li,(b) He + “He, (c) 2C + C, (d) "Ne + "Ne, (e) SCI + Cl, and (f)

N+ 35C1? (Hint: Consult the curve of Fig. 42-7.)

n( K)

scales.

Sample Problem 43.03 Fusion ina gas of protons, and the required temperature

Assume a proton is a sphere of radius R ~ 1 fm. Two protons
are fired at each other with the same kinetic energy K.

This yields, with known values,

2

ik
(a) What must K be if the particles are brought to rest 16729R
by their mutual Coulomb repulsion when they are just

“touching” each other? We can take this value of K asa

_ (1.60 x 10-" ©?
(1677)(8.85 X 10-2 Fim)(1 x 10-5 m)

representative measure of the height of the Coulomb = 5.75 X 10-4 J = 360 keV ~ 400 keV. (Answer)
Dar (b) At what temperature would a proton in a gas of protons
KEY IDEAS have the average kinetic energy calculated in (a) and thus have

energy equal to the height of the Coulomb barrier?
The mechanical energy E of the two-proton system is con-
served as the protons move toward each other and momen-
tarily stop. In particular, the initial mechanical energy £; is

KEY IDEA

 

equal to the mechanical energy E; when they stop. The ini-
tial energy E; consists only of the total kinetic energy 2K of
the two protons. When the protons stop, energy E; consists
only of the electric potential energy U of the system, as
given by Eq. 24-46 (U = qiqz/4 zor).

Calculations: Here the distance r between the protons
when they stop is their center-to-center distance 2R, and
their charges q, and q> are both e. Then we can write the
conservation of energy E; = E; as

1 @

2K = =,
de) 2R

 

WILEY

If we treat the proton gas as an ideal gas, then from Eq.
19-24, the average energy of the protons is Kayg = 3kT,
where k is the Boltzmann constant.

Calculation: Solving that equation for T and using the
result of (a) yield
2Kavg (2)(5.75 X 10-14 J)
3k (3)(1.38 x 10-3 J/K)
~3x10°K. (Answer)

The temperature of the core of the Sun is only about
1.5 X 10’ K; thus fusion in the Sun’s core must involve pro-
tons whose energies are far above the average energy.

 

T=

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS
