1320

Calculation: At start-up, we know that the total mass of
235U is 3.0% of the 8.60 x 10+ kg of uranium oxide. So, the
time T required to consume this total mass of °U at the
steady rate of 4.5 kg/d is

_ (0.080)(8.60 x 10¢kg)

T
45 kg/d

~ 570d. (Answer)

CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

linked only to the fissioning that produces the input power
(3400 MW) and not to the nonfission capture of neutrons
(although both these processes affect the rate at which *°U
is consumed).

Calculation: From Einstein’s relation E = mc?, we can
write

 

In practice, the fuel rods must be replaced (usually in ia dEldt 34x 10°W

ir 35 4 4 —= ee ae ‘43-8
batches) before their *°U content is entirely consumed. oY 2D G.00 x 10° mis? ( )
(e) At what rate is mass being converted to other forms of =38X 10-*kg/s = 3.3 g/d. (ones)

energy by the fission of *U in the reactor core?
We see that the mass conversion rate is about the mass of
one common coin per day, considerably less (by about three
orders of magnitude) than the fuel consumption rate calcu-
lated in (c).

KEY IDEA

 

The conversion of mass energy to other forms of energy is

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

43-3 A NATURAL NUCLEAR REACTOR

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

43.16 Describe the evidence that a natural nuclear reactor
operated in Gabon, West Africa, about 2 billion years ago.

 

43.17 Explain why a deposit of uranium ore could go critical
in the past but not today.

Key Idea

@ A natural nuclear reactor occurred in West Africa about two billion years ago.

A Natural Nuclear Reactor

On December 2, 1942, when their reactor first became operational (Fig. 43-8),
Enrico Fermi and his associates had every right to assume that they had put into
operation the first fission reactor that had ever existed on this planet. About
30 years later it was discovered that, if they did in fact think that, they were wrong.

Some two billion years ago, in a uranium deposit recently mined in Gabon, West
Africa, a natural fission reactor apparently went into operation and ran for perhaps
several hundred thousand years before shutting down. We can test whether this could
actually have happened by considering two questions:

1. Was There Enough Fuel? The fuel for a uranium-based fission reactor must
be the easily fissionable isotope 230, which, as noted earlier, constitutes only
0.72% of natural uranium. This isotopic ratio has been measured for terrestrial
samples, in Moon rocks, and in meteorites; in all cases the abundance values
are the same. The clue to the discovery in West Africa was that the uranium
in that deposit was deficient in 7°U, some samples having abundances as low
as 0.44%. Investigation led to the speculation that this deficit in *°U could be
accounted for if, at some earlier time, the “°U was partially consumed by the
operation of a natural fission reactor.

The serious problem remains that, with an isotopic abundance of only
0.72%, a reactor can be assembled (as Fermi and his team learned) only after
