who study these matters. However, you must not imagine that the big bang was
like the explosion of some gigantic firecracker and that, in principle at least, you
could have stood to one side and watched. There was no “one side” because the
big bang represents the beginning of spacetime itself. From the point of view of
our present universe, there is no position in space to which you can point and say,
“The big bang happened there.” It happened everywhere.

Moreover, there was no “before the big bang,” because time began with
that creation event. In this context, the word “before” loses its meaning. We can,
however, conjecture about what went on during succeeding intervals of time after
the big bang (Fig. 44-6).

t~10~s, This is the earliest time at which we can say anything meaningful
about the development of the universe. It is at this moment that the concepts
of space and time come to have their present meanings and the laws of
physics as we know them become applicable. At this instant, the entire uni-
verse (that is, the entire spatial extent of the universe) is much smaller than a
proton and its temperature is about 10°? K. Quantum fluctuations in the fab-
ric of spacetime are the seeds that will eventually lead to the formation of
galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and superclusters of galaxies.

t~10~™s, By this moment the universe has undergone a tremendously rapid
inflation, increasing in size by a factor of about 10*°, causing the formation of
matter in a distribution set by the initial quantum fluctuations. The universe
has become a hot soup of photons, quarks, and leptons at a temperature of
about 107’ K, which is too hot for protons and neutrons to form.

t ~ 10~4s. Quarks can now combine to form protons and neutrons and their
antiparticles. The universe has now cooled to such an extent by continued
(but much slower) expansion that photons lack the energy needed to break
up these new particles. Particles of matter and antimatter collide and annihi-
late each other. There is a slight excess of matter, which, failing to find annihi-
lation partners, survives to form the world of matter that we know today.

t ~ 1 min. The universe has now cooled enough so that protons and neutrons, in
colliding, can stick together to form the low-mass nuclei 7H, *He, ‘He, and 7Li.
The predicted relative abundances of these nuclides are just what we observe
in the universe today. Also, there is plenty of radiation present at ¢ ~ 1 min,

aug
rer] Expansion
er a
eed Pact
Ena ea Galaxies, Planets, etc.

ee

Inflation ,

ee)
retin)

Seascy
Pree Con anos

Eur hee eae

CRAB Te

Courtesy NASA,

 

44-4 COSMOLOGY 1359

Figure 44-6 An illustration of the universe
from the initial quantum fluctuations just
after f= 0 (at the left) to the current
accelerated expansion, 13.7 X 10’y later
(at the right). Don’t take the illustration
literally—there is no such “external vie
of the universe because there is no exterior
to the universe.

  
