1324 CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

43-5 THERMONUCLEAR FUSION IN THE SUN AND OTHER STARS

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

43.21 Explain the proton-proton cycle for the Sun. 43.23 Explain the probable source of the elements that are
43.22 Explain the stages after the Sun has consumed its more massive than hydrogen and helium.

hydrogen.
Key Ideas
@ The Sun's energy arises mainly from the thermonuclear @ Elements up to A ~ 56 (the peak of the binding energy
burning of hydrogen to form helium by the proton-proton curve) can be built up by other fusion processes once the hy-
cycle. drogen fuel supply of a star has been exhausted.

 

Figure 43-11 The proton—proton mechanism
that accounts for energy production in the
Sun. In this process, protons fuse to form an
alpha particle (*He), with a net energy
release of 26.7 MeV for each event.

Thermonuclear Fusion in the Sun and Other Stars

The Sun has been radiating energy at the rate of 3.9 x 10° W for several billion
years. Where does all this energy come from? It does not come from chemical burn-
ing. (Even if the Sun were made of coal and had its own oxygen, burning the coal
would last only 1000 y.) It also does not come from the Sun shrinking, transferring
gravitational potential energy to thermal energy. (Its lifetime would be short by a fac-
tor of at least 500.) That leaves only thermonuclear fusion. The Sun, as you will see,
burns not coal but hydrogen, and in a nuclear furnace, not an atomic or chemical one.

The fusion reaction in the Sun is a multistep process in which hydrogen is
burned to form helium, hydrogen being the “fuel” and helium the “ashes.”
Figure 43-11 shows the proton—proton (p-p) cycle by which this occurs.

The p-p cycle starts with the collision of two protons (1H + 'H) to form a
deuteron (7H), with the simultaneous creation of a positron (e*) and a neutrino
(v). The positron immediately annihilates with any nearby electron (e~), their
mass energy appearing as two gamma-ray photons (¥) as in Module 21-3.

A pair of such events is shown in the top row of Fig. 43-11. These events
are actually extremely rare. In fact, only once in about 10° proton—
proton collisions is a deuteron formed; in the vast majority of cases, the two
protons simply rebound elastically from each other. It is the slowness of this
“bottleneck” process that regulates the rate of energy production and keeps the
Sun from exploding. In spite of this slowness, there are so very many protons in
the huge and dense volume of the Sun’s core that deuterium is produced in just
this way at the rate of 10? kg/s.

Once a deuteron has been produced, it quickly collides with another proton and
forms a *He nucleus, as the middle row of Fig. 43-11 shows. Two such *He nuclei may
eventually (within 10° y; there is plenty of time) find each other, forming an alpha
particle (*He) and two protons, as the bottom row in the figure shows.

Overall, we see from Fig. 43-11 that the p-p cycle amounts to the combination
of four protons and two electrons to form an alpha particle, two neutrinos, and
