17.4 Aging can be considered a developmental process.

Theories of Aging

All humans die. The oldest documented person, Jeanne
Louise Calment of Arles, France, reached the age of 122
years before her death in 1997. The “safest” age is around
puberty. As you can see in figure 17.26, 10- to 15-year-olds
have the lowest risk of dying. The death rate begins to in-
crease rapidly after puberty; the rate of mortality then be-
gins to increase as an exponential function of increasing
age. Plotted on a log scale as in figure 17.26 (in a so-called
Gompertz plot), the mortality rate increases as a straight
line from about 15 to 90 years, doubling about every eight
years (the “Gompertz number”). By the time we reach 100,
age has taken such a toll that the risk of dying reaches 50%
per year.

A wide variety of theories have been advanced to explain
why humans and other animals age. No one theory has
gained general acceptance, but the following four are being
intensively investigated:

Accumulated Mutation Hypothesis

The oldest general theory of aging is that cells accumulate
mutations as they age, leading eventually to lethal damage.
Careful studies have shown that somatic mutations do in-
deed accumulate during aging. As cells age, for example,
they tend to accumulate the modified base 8-hydroxygua-
nine, in which an —OH group is added to the base gua-
nine. There is little direct evidence, however, that these
mutations cause aging. No acceleration in aging occurred
among survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki despite their
enormous added mutation load, arguing against any gen-
eral relationship between mutation and aging.

Telomere Depletion Hypothesis

In a seminal experiment carried out in 1961, Leonard
Hayflick demonstrated that fibroblast cells growing in tis-
sue culture will divide only a certain number of times (fig-
ure 17.27). After about 50 population doublings, cell divi-
sion stops, the cell cycle blocked just before DNA
replication. If a cell sample is taken after 20 doublings and
frozen, when thawed it resumes growth for 30 more dou-
blings, then stops.

An explanation of the “Hayflick limit” was suggested in
1986 when Howard Cooke first glimpsed an extra length
of DNA at the ends of chromosomes. These telomeric
regions, repeats of the sequence TTAGGG, were found
to be substantially shorter in older somatic tissue, and
Cooke speculated that a 100 base-pair portion of the
telomere cap was lost by a chromosome during each cycle
of DNA replication. Eventually, after some 50 replication
cycles, the protective telomeric cap would be used up, and

358 =PartV Molecular Genetics

 

@ India, 1900

0 Mexico, 1940

1 Sweden, 1949
United States, 1900
© United States,

© United States,

Deaths per 1000 men per year

 

“0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Age (years)

 

 

 

FIGURE 17.26

Gompertz curves. While human populations may differ 25-fold
in their mortality rates before puberty, the slopes of their
Gompertz curves are about the same in later years.

the cell line would then enter senescence, no longer able
to proliferate. Cancer cells appear to avoid telomeric
shortening.

Research reported in 1998 has confirmed Cooke’s hy-
pothesis, providing direct evidence for a causal relation be-
tween telomeric shortening and cell senescence. Using ge-
netic engineering, researchers transferred into human
primary cell cultures a gene that leads to expression of
telomerase, an enzyme that builds TTAGGG telomeric
caps. The result was unequivocal. New telomeric caps were
added to the chromosomes of the cells, and the cells with
the artificially elongated telomeres did not senesce at the
Hayflick limit, continuing to divide in a healthy and vigor-
ous manner for more than 20 additional generations.

Wear-and-Tear Hypothesis

Numerous theories of aging focus in one way or another on
the general idea that cells wear out over time, accumulating
damage until they are no longer able to function. Loosely
dubbed the “wear-and-tear” hypothesis, this idea implies
that there is no inherent designed-in limit to aging, just a
statistical one—over time, disruption, wear, and damage
eventually erode a cell’s ability to function properly.
