44-2 LEPTONS, HADRONS, AND STRANGENESS

The minus sign means that the reaction is endothermic; that
is, the incoming pion (7 ) must have a kinetic energy greater
than a certain threshold value if the reaction is to occur. The
threshold energy is actually greater than 605 MeV because
linear momentum must be conserved. (The incoming pion

(Ante

1343

has momentum.) This means that the kaon (K~) and the
sigma (=~) not only must be created but also must be given
some kinetic energy. A relativistic calculation whose details
are beyond our scope shows that the threshold energy for
the reaction is 907 MeV.

LUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

44-2 LEPTONS, HADRONS, AND STRANGENESS

 

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

44.09 Identify that there are six leptons (with an antiparticle
each) in three families, with a different type of neutrino in
each family.

44.10 To see if a given process for elementary particles is
physically possible, determine whether it conserves lepton
number and whether it conserves the individual family lep-
ton numbers.

44.11 Identify that there is a quantum number called baryon
number associated with the baryons.

Key Ideas

@ We can classify particles and their antiparticles into two
main types: leptons and hadrons. The latter consists of
mesons and baryons.

@ Three of the leptons (the electron, muon, and tau) have
electric charge equal to — le. There are also three uncharged
neutrinos (also leptons), one corresponding to each of the
charged leptons. The antiparticles for the charged leptons
have positive charge.

@ To explain the possible and impossible reactions of these
particles, each is assigned a lepton quantum number, which
must be conserved in a reaction.

@ The leptons have half-integer spin quantum numbers and

are thus fermions, which obey the Pauli exclusion principle.

The Leptons

44.12 To see if a given process for elementary particles is
physically possible, determine whether the process con-
serves baryon number.

44.13 Identify that there is a quantum number called strange-
ness associated with some of the baryons and mesons.

44.14 Identify that strangeness must be conserved in an in-
teraction involving the strong force, but this conservation
law can be broken for other interactions.

44.15 Describe the eightfold-way patterns.

@ Baryons, including protons and neutrons, are hadrons
with half-integer spin quantum numbers and thus are also
fermions.

@ Mesons are hadrons with integer spin quantum numbers

and thus are bosons, which do not obey the Pauli exclusion
principle.

@ To explain the possible and impossible reactions of these
particles, baryons are assigned a baryon quantum number,

which must be conserved in a reaction.

@ Baryons are also assigned a strangeness quantum

number, but it is conserved only in reactions involving the
strong force.

In this module, we discuss some of the particles of one of our classification
schemes: lepton or hadron. We begin with the leptons, those particles on which
the strong force does not act. So far, we have encountered the familiar electron
and the neutrino that accompanies it in beta decay. The muon, whose decay is
described in Eq. 44-8, is another member of this family. Physicists gradually
learned that the neutrino that appears in Eq. 44-7, associated with the production
of a muon, is not the same particle as the neutrino produced in beta decay, associ-
ated with the appearance of an electron. We call the former the muon neutrino
(symbol v,) and the latter the electron neutrino (symbol v,) when it is necessary

to distinguish between them.
