43-2 THE NUCLEAR REACTOR 1317

selves an edge by artificially enriching the uranium fuel so that it contains
perhaps 3% *°U. Three difficulties still stand in the way of a working reactor.

1. The Neutron Leakage Problem. Some of the neutrons produced by fission
will leak out of the reactor and so not be part of the chain reaction. Leakage
is a surface effect; its magnitude is proportional to the square of a typical
reactor dimension (the surface area of a cube of edge length a is 6a’).
Neutron production, however, occurs throughout the volume of the fuel and
is thus proportional to the cube of a typical dimension (the volume of the
same cube is a*). We can make the fraction of neutrons lost by leakage as
small as we wish by making the reactor core large enough, thereby reducing
the surface-to-volume ratio (= 6/a for a cube).

2. The Neutron Energy Problem. The neutrons produced by fission are fast,
with kinetic energies of about 2 MeV. However, fission is induced most effec-
tively by thermal neutrons. The fast neutrons can be slowed down by mixing
the uranium fuel with a substance —called a moderator —that has two prop-
erties: It is effective in slowing down neutrons via elastic collisions, and it does
not remove neutrons from the core by absorbing them so that they do not
result in fission. Most power reactors in North America use water as a moder-
ator; the hydrogen nuclei (protons) in the water are the effective component.
‘We saw in Chapter 9 that if a moving particle has a head-on elastic collision
with a stationary particle, the moving particle loses all its kinetic energy if the
two particles have the same mass. Thus, protons form an effective moderator
because they have approximately the same mass as the fast neutrons whose
speed we wish to reduce.

3. The Neutron Capture Problem. As the fast (2 MeV) neutrons generated by
fission are slowed down in the moderator to thermal energies (about 0.04 eV),
they must pass through a critical energy interval (from 1 to 100 eV) in which
they are particularly susceptible to nonfission capture by **U nuclei. Such
resonance capture, which results in the emission of a
gamma ray, removes the neutron from the fission ‘Themial peutron
chain. To minimize such nonfission capture, the ura- leakage
nium fuel and the moderator are not intimately
mixed but rather are placed in different regions of Thermal
the reactor volume. capuures

In a typical reactor, the uranium fuel is in the pe onance
form of uranium oxide pellets, which are inserted captures
end to end into long, hollow metal tubes. The liquid
moderator surrounds bundles of these fuel rods,
forming the reactor core. This geometric arrange-
ment increases the probability that a fast neutron,
produced in a fuel rod, will find itself in the moder-
ator when it passes through the critical energy in-
terval. Once the neutron has reached thermal ener- Fast neutron
gies, it may still be captured in ways that do not leakage
result in fission (called thermal capture). However,
it is much more likely that the thermal neutron will
wander back into a fuel rod and produce a fission
event.

  
   
 

Fast
Figure 43-5 shows the neutron balance in a typical fissions

Power reactor operating at constant power. Let us face Figure 43-5 Neutron bookkeeping in a reactor. A generation of 1000 ther-

a sample of 1000 thermal neutrons through one com- jy) neutrons interacts with the ““U fuel, the 2*U matrix,and the modera-
plete cycle, or generation, in the reactor core. They pro- tor. They produce 1370 neutrons by fission, but 370 of these are lost by
duce 1330 neutrons by fission in the *°U fuel and 40 _ ponfission capture or by leakage, meaning that 1000 thermal neutrons are
neutrons by fast fission in 78U, which gives 370 neu- _ left to form the next generation. The figure is drawn for a reactor running
trons more than the original 1000, all of them fast. ata steady power level.
