1352 CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

Note that three quarks are exceptionally massive, the most massive of them
(top) being almost 190 times more massive than a proton.To generate particles that
contain such quarks, with such large mass energies, we must go to higher and higher
energies, which is the reason that these three quarks were not discovered earlier.

The first particle containing a charm quark to be observed was the J/y
meson, whose quark structure is cé. It was discovered simultaneously and inde-
pendently in 1974 by groups headed by Samuel Ting at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory and Burton Richter at Stanford University.

The top quark defied all efforts to generate it in the laboratory until 1995,
when its existence was finally demonstrated in the Tevatron, a large particle
accelerator at Fermilab. In this accelerator, protons and antiprotons, each with
an energy of 0.9 TeV (= 9 X 10" eV), were made to collide at the centers of two
large particle detectors. In a very few cases, the colliding particles generated
a top—antitop (tt) quark pair, which very quickly decays into particles that can be
detected and thus can be used to infer the existence of the top—antitop pair.

Look back for a moment at Table 44-5 (the quark family) and Table 44-2 (the
lepton family) and notice the neat symmetry of these two “six-packs” of particles,
each dividing naturally into three corresponding two-particle families. In terms of
what we know today, the quarks and the leptons seem to be truly fundamental
particles having no internal structure.

Sample Problem 44.05 Quark composition of a xi-minus particle
strange quark is -} Thus, the third quark x must have a
charge quantum number of —3,so that we can have

q(B) = q(ssx)
—3+ (-3) + (-) = -1.

The =~ (xi-minus) particle is a baryon with a spin quantum
number s of 3, a charge quantum number g of —1, and a
strangeness quantum number S of —2. Also, it does not contain
a bottom quark. What combination of quarks makes up =~?

Reasoning: Because the S~ is a baryon, it must consist of

three quarks (not two as for a meson).

Let us next consider the strangeness S = —2 of the =~.
Only the strange quark s and the antistrange quark § have
nonzero values of strangeness (see Table 44-5). Further, be-
cause only the strange quark s has a negative value of
strangeness, =~ must contain that quark. In fact, for 2~ to
have a strangeness of —2, it must contain two strange quarks.

To determine the third quark, call it x, we can consider
the other known properties of =”. Its charge quantum
number q is —1,and the charge quantum number q of each

Rwiney

Besides the strange quark, the only quarks with q = 4 are
the down quark d and bottom quark b. Because the problem
statement ruled out a bottom quark, the third quark must be
a down quark. This conclusion is also consistent with the
baryon quantum numbers:

B(E~) = B(ssd)
=ftGth=41

Thus, the quark composition of the 2” particle is ssd.

PLUS jdditional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

The Basic Forces and Messenger Particles

We turn now from cataloging the particles to considering the forces between them.

The Electromagnetic Force

At the atomic level, we say that two electrons exert electromagnetic forces on
each other according to Coulomb’s law. At a deeper level, this interaction is
described by a highly successful theory called quantum electrodynamics (QED).
From this point of view, we say that each electron senses the presence of the other
by exchanging photons with it.
