43-6 CONTROLLED THERMONUCLEAR FUSION

A sustained and controllable source of fusion power—a fusion reactor as
part of, say, an electric generating plant—is considerably more difficult to
achieve. That goal is nonetheless being pursued vigorously in many countries
around the world, because many people look to the fusion reactor as the power
source of the future, at least for the generation of electricity.

The p-p scheme displayed in Fig. 43-11 is not suitable for an Earth-bound fusion
reactor because it is hopelessly slow. The process succeeds in the Sun only because
of the enormous density of protons in the center of the Sun. The most attractive re-
actions for terrestrial use appear to be two deuteron—deuteron (d-d) reactions,

7H +?7H—>*He +n (Q=+3.27MeV), (43-13)

7H +7?7H>3H+'H (Q= +4.03 MeV), (43-14)
and the deuteron—triton (d-t) reaction

°H+3H>‘*He+n  (Q= +17.59MeV). (43-15)

(The nucleus of the hydrogen isotope 3H (tritium) is called the triton and has a
half-life of 12.3 y.) Deuterium, the source of deuterons for these reactions, has an
isotopic abundance of only 1 part in 6700 but is available in unlimited quantities
as a component of seawater. Proponents of power from the nucleus have de-
scribed our ultimate power choice —after we have burned up all our fossil fuels —
as either “burning rocks” (fission of uranium extracted from ores) or “burning
water” (fusion of deuterium extracted from water).
There are three requirements for a successful thermonuclear reactor:

1. A High Particle Density n. The number density of interacting particles (the
number of, say, deuterons per unit volume) must be great enough to ensure
that the d-d collision rate is high enough. At the high temperatures required,
the deuterium would be completely ionized, forming an electrically neutral
plasma (ionized gas) of deuterons and electrons.

2. A High Plasma Temperature T. The plasma must be hot. Otherwise the col-
liding deuterons will not be energetic enough to penetrate the Coulomb
barrier that tends to keep them apart. A plasma ion temperature of 35 keV,
corresponding to 4 X 10° K, has been achieved in the laboratory. This is about
30 times higher than the Sun’s central temperature.

3. A Long Confinement Time tr. A major problem is containing the hot plasma
long enough to maintain it at a density and a temperature sufficiently high to
ensure the fusion of enough of the fuel. Because it is clear that no solid con-
tainer can withstand the high temperatures that are necessary, clever confining
techniques are called for; we shall shortly discuss two of them.

It can be shown that, for the successful operation of a thermonuclear reactor

using the d-t reaction, it is necessary to have

nr> 10” sim’. (43-16)
This condition, known as Lawson’s criterion, tells us that we have a choice
between confining a lot of particles for a short time or fewer particles for a longer
time. Also, the plasma temperature must be high enough.

Two approaches to controlled nuclear power generation are currently under
study. Although neither approach has yet been successful, both are being pursued
because of their promise and because of the potential importance of controlled
fusion to solving the world’s energy problems.

Magnetic Confinement

One avenue to controlled fusion is to contain the fusing material in a very strong
magnetic field—hence the name magnetic confinement. In one version of this
approach, a suitably shaped magnetic field is used to confine the hot plasma in an
evacuated doughnut-shaped chamber called a tokamak (the name is an abbrevia-
tion consisting of parts of three Russian words). The magnetic forces acting on

1327
