tion E = mc?, we can generalize the statement: energy can cause curvature of
space. This certainly happens to the space around the energy packed into a black
hole and, more weakly, to the space around any other astronomical body, but is
the space of the universe as a whole curved by the energy the universe contains?

The question was answered first by the 1992 COBE measurements of the
cosmic background radiation. It was then answered more definitively by the 2003
WMAP measurements that produced the image in Fig. 44-7. The spots we see in
that image are the original sources of the cosmic background radiation, and the an-
gular distribution of the spots reveals the curvature of the universe through which
the light has to travel to reach us. If adjacent spots subtend either more than 1° (Fig.
44-8a) or less than 1° (Fig. 44-8) in the detector’s view (or our view) into the uni-
verse, then the universe is curved. Analysis of the spot distribution in the WMAP
image shows that the spots subtend about 1° (Fig. 44-8c), which means that the
universe is flat (having no curvature). Thus, the initial curvature the universe pre-
sumably had when it began must have been flattened out by the rapid inflation
the universe underwent at t~ 10s,

This flatness poses a very difficult problem for physicists because it requires
that the universe contain a certain amount of energy (as mass or otherwise). The
trouble is that all estimations of the amount of energy in the universe (both in
known forms and in the form of the unknown type of dark matter) fall dramati-
cally short of the required amount.

One theory proposed about this missing energy gave it the gothic name of
dark energy and predicted that it has the strange property of causing the expan-
sion of the universe to accelerate. Until 1998, determining whether the expansion
is, in fact, accelerating was very difficult because it requires measuring distances
to very distant astronomical bodies where the acceleration might show up.

In 1998, however, advances in astronomical technology allowed astronomers to
detect a certain type of supernovae at very great distances. More important, the as-
tronomers could measure the duration of the burst of light from such a supernova.
The duration reveals the brightness of the supernova that would be seen by an ob-
server near the supernova. By measuring the brightness of the supernova as seen
from Earth, astronomers could then determine the distance to the supernova. From
the redshift of the light from the galaxy containing the supernova, astronomers
could also determine how fast the galaxy is receding from us. Combining all this in-
formation, they could then calculate the expansion rate of the universe. The conclu-
sion is that the expansion is indeed accelerating as predicted by the theory of dark
energy (Fig. 44-6). However, we have no clue as to what this dark energy is.

Figure 44-9 gives our current state of knowledge about the energy in the uni-
verse. About 4% is associated with baryonic matter, which we understand fairly
well. About 23% is associated with nonbaryonic dark matter, about which we
have a few clues that might be fruitful. The rest, a whopping 73%, is associated
with dark energy, about which we are clueless. There have been times in the his-
tory of physics, even in the 1990s, when pontiffs proclaimed that physics was
nearly complete, that only details were left. In fact, we are nowhere near the end.

A Summing Up

In this closing paragraph, let’s consider where we are headed as we accumulate
knowledge about the universe more and more rapidly. What we have found is mar-
velous and profound, but it is also humbling in that each new step seems to reveal
more clearly our own relative insignificance in the grand scheme of things. Thus, in
roughly chronological order, we humans have come to realize that

Our Earth is not the center of the solar system.
Our Sun is but one star among many in our galaxy.
Our galaxy is but one of many, and our Sun is an insignificant star in it.

44-4 COSMOLOGY 1361

Spot

Spot

Us

(@

(b)

(©)
Figure 44-8 Light rays from two adjacent
spots in our view of the cosmic background
radiation would reach us at an angle (a)
greater than 1° or (b) less than 1° if the
space along the light-ray paths through the
universe were curved. (c) Anangle of 1°
means that the space is not curved.

Nonbaryonic
dark matter
(a few clues)

Baryonic
matter

 

Dark energy
(no clues)

Figure 44-9 The distribution of energy
(including mass) in the universe.
