H A P T CE

Quarks, Leptons, and the Big Bang

44-1 GENERAL PROPERTIES OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

Learning Objectives

After reading this module, you should be able to...

44.01 Identify that a great many different elementary particles
exist or can be created and that nearly all of them are
unstable.

44.02 For the decay of an unstable particle, apply the same
decay equations as used for the radioactive decay of
nuclei.

44.03 Identify spin as the intrinsic angular momentum of a
particle.

44.04 Distinguish fermions from bosons, and identify which
are required to obey the Pauli exclusion principle.

Key Ideas

44.05 Distinguish leptons and hadrons, and then identify the
two types of hadrons.

44.06 Distinguish particle from antiparticle, and identify that if
they meet, they undergo annihilation and are transformed
into photons or into other elementary particles.

44.07 Distinguish the strong force and the weak force.

44.08 To see if a given process for elementary particles is
physically possible, apply the conservation laws for charge,
linear momentum, spin angular momentum, and energy (in-
cluding mass energy).

 

@ The term fundamental particles refers to the basic building
blocks of matter. We can divide the particles into several broad
categories.

@ The terms particles and antiparticles originally referred
to common particles (such as the electrons, protons, and
neutrons in your body) and their antiparticle counterparts

(the positrons, antiprotons, and antineutrons), but for most
of the rarely detected particles, the distinction between
particles and antiparticles is made largely to be consistent
with experimental results.

@ Fermions (such as the particles in your body) obey the Pauli
exclusion principle; bosons do not.

What Is Physics?

1334

Physicists often refer to the theories of relativity and quantum physics as “mod-
ern physics,” to distinguish them from the theories of Newtonian mechanics and
Maxwellian electromagnetism, which are lumped together as “classical physics.”
As the years go by, the word “modern” seems less and less appropriate for
theories whose foundations were laid down in the opening years of the 20th
century. After all, Einstein published his paper on the photoelectric effect and
his first paper on special relativity in 1905, Bohr published his quantum model of
the hydrogen atom in 1913, and Schrédinger published his matter wave equation
in 1926. Nevertheless, the label of “modern physics” hangs on.

In this closing chapter we consider two lines of investigation that are truly
“modern” but at the same time have the most ancient of roots. They center
around two deceptively simple questions:

What is the universe made of?
How did the universe come to be the way it is?

Progress in answering these questions has been rapid in the last few decades.
Many new insights are based on experiments carried out with large particle
accelerators. However, as they bang particles together at higher and higher
