44-1 GENERAL PROPERTIES OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLES

Particles with zero or integer spin quantum numbers are called bosons,
after Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, who (simultaneously with Albert
Einstein) discovered the governing statistical laws for those particles. Photons,
which have s = 1, are bosons; you will soon meet other particles in this class.

This may seem a trivial way to classify particles, but it is very important for
this reason:

TAN

a] Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle, which asserts that only a single parti-
cle can be assigned to a given quantum state. Bosons do not obey this principle.
Any number of bosons can occupy a given quantum state.

We saw how important the Pauli exclusion principle is when we “built up” the
atoms by assigning (spin-}) electrons to individual quantum states. Using that
principle led to a full accounting of the structure and properties of atoms of
different types and of solids such as metals and semiconductors.

Because bosons do not obey the Pauli principle, those particles tend to pile
up in the quantum state of lowest energy. In 1995 a group in Boulder, Colorado,
succeeded in producing a condensate of about 2000 rubidium-87 atoms—they
are bosons—in a single quantum state of approximately zero energy.

For this to happen, the rubidium has to be a vapor with a temperature so low
and a density so great that the de Broglie wavelengths of the individual atoms are
greater than the average separation between the atoms. When this condition is
met, the wave functions of the individual atoms overlap and the entire assembly
becomes a single quantum system (one big atom) called a Bose-Einstein
condensate. Figure 44-1 shows that, as the temperature of the rubidium vapor is
lowered to about 1.70 X 10-7 K, the atoms do indeed “collapse” into a single
sharply defined state corresponding to approximately zero speed.

 

Courtesy Michael Mathews

@ o C)

Figure 44-1 Three plots of the particle speed distribution in a vapor of rubidium-87
atoms. The temperature of the vapor is successively reduced from plot (a) to plot (c).
Plot (c) shows a sharp peak centered around zero speed; that is, all the atoms are in the
same quantum state. The achievement of such a Bose-Einstein condensate, often
called the Holy Grail of atomic physics, was finally recorded in 1995.

1337
