There is considerable evidence that aging cells do accu-
mulate damage. Some of the most interesting evidence
concerns free radicals, fragments of molecules or atoms
that contain an unpaired electron. Free radicals are very re-
active chemically and can be quite destructive in a cell. Free
radicals are produced as natural by-products of oxidative
metabolism, but most are mopped up by special enzymes
that function to sweep the cell interior free of their de-
structive effects.

One of the most damaging free radical reactions that oc-
curs in cells causes glucose to become linked to proteins, a
nonenzymatic process called glycation. Two of the most
commonly glycated proteins are collagen and elastin, key
components of the connective tissues in our joints. Gly-
cated collagen and elastin are not replaced, and individual
molecules may be as old as the individual.

Glycation of collagen, elastin, and a diverse collection of
other proteins within the cell produces a complex mixture
of glucose-linked proteins called advanced glycosylation
end products (AGEs). AGEs can cross-link to one another,
reducing the flexibility of connective tissues in the joints
and producing many of the other characteristic symptoms
of aging.

Gene Clock Hypothesis

There is very little doubt that at least some aspects of aging
are under the direct control of genes. Just as genes regulate
the body’s development, so they appear to regulate its rate
of aging. Mutations in these genes can produce premature
aging in the young. In the very rare recessive Hutchinson-
Gilford syndrome, growth, sexual maturation, and skeletal
development are retarded; atherosclerosis and strokes usu-
ally lead to death by age 12 years. Only some 20 cases have
ever been described.

The similar Werner’s syndrome is not as rare, affect-
ing some 10 people per million worldwide. The syn-
drome is named after Otto Werner, who in Germany in
1904 reported a family affected by premature aging and
said a genetic component was at work. Werner’s syn-
drome makes its appearance in adolescence, usually pro-
ducing death before age 50 of heart attack or one of a va-
riety of rare connective tissue cancers. The gene
responsible for Werner’s syndrome was identified in
1996. Located on the short arm of chromosome 8, it
seems to affect a helicase enzyme involved in the repair
of DNA. The gene, which codes for a 1432-amino-acid
protein, has been fully sequenced, and four mutant alle-
les identified. Helicase enzymes are needed to unwind
the DNA double helix whenever DNA has to be repli-
cated, repaired, or transcribed. The high incidence of
certain cancers among Werner’s syndrome patients leads
investigators to speculate that the mutant helicase may
fail to activate critical tumor suppressor genes. The po-
tential role of helicases in aging is the subject of heated
research.

 

Transfers to new plates
10 20 30 40 50

Cancer cells

Diploid
fibroblasts

Relative growth rate ———>

 

1 23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Months

 

 

 

FIGURE 17.27

Hayflick’s experiment. Fibroblast cells stop growing after about
50 doublings. Growth is rapid in phases I and II, but slows in
phase III, as the culture becomes senescent, until the final
doubling. Cancer cells, by contrast, do not “age.”

Research on aging in other animals strongly supports
the hypothesis that genes regulate the rate of aging. Partic-
ularly impressive results have been obtained in the nema-
tode Caenorhabditis elegans, where genes discovered in 1996
seem to affect an intrinsic genetic clock. A combination of
mutations can increase the worm’s lifespan fivefold, the
largest increase in lifespan seen in any organism! Mutations
in the clock gene clk-1 cause individual cells to divide more
slowly, and the animal spends more time in each phase of
its life cycle. Mutations in two other clock genes, k-2 and
clk-3, have similar effects. Nematodes with mutations in
two of the clock genes lived three to four times longer than
normal. It seems that slowing life down in nematodes ex-
tends it. Perhaps, as the “wear-and-tear” theory suggests,
aging results from damage to cells and their DNA by
highly reactive oxidative by-products of metabolism. Living
more slowly, destructive by-products may be produced less
frequently, accumulate more slowly, and their damage be
repaired more efficiently. Similar genes have been reported
in yeasts, and attempts are now underway to isolate and
clone these genes.

 

 

Among the many theories advanced to explain aging,
many involve the progressive accumulation of damage
to DNA. When genes affecting aging have been
isolated, they affect DNA repair processes.

 

Chapter 17. Cellular Mechanisms of Development 359
