IS

Altering the Genetic
Message

 

Concept Outline

18.1 Mutations are changes in the genetic message.

Mutations Are Rare But Important. Changes in genes
provide the raw material for evolution.

Kinds of Mutation. Some mutations alter genes
themselves, others alter the positions of genes.

Point Mutations. Radiation damage or chemical
modification can change one or a few nucleotides.
Changes in Gene Position. Chromosomal
rearrangement and insertional inactivation reflect changes
in gene position.

18.2 Cancer results from mutation of growth-
regulating genes.
What Is Cancer? Cancer is a growth disorder of cells.
Kinds of Cancer. Cancer occurs in almost all tissues, but
more in some than others.
Some Tumors Are Caused by Chemicals. Chemicals
that mutate DNA cause cancer.
Other Tumors Result from Viral Infection. Viruses
carrying growth-regulating genes can cause cancer.
Cancer and the Cell Cycle. Cancer results from
mutation of genes regulating cell proliferation
Smoking and Cancer. Smoking causes lung cancer.
Curing Cancer. New approaches offer promise of a cure.

18.3 Recombination alters gene location.

An Overview of Recombination. Recombination is
produced by gene transfer and by reciprocal recombination.
Gene Transfer. Many genes move within small circles of
DNA called plasmids. Plasmids can move between bacterial
cells and carry bacterial genes. Some gene sequences move
from one location to another on a chromosome.
Reciprocal Recombination. Reciprocal recombination
can alter genes in several ways.

Trinucleotide Repeats. Increases in the number of
repeated triplets can produce gene disorders.

18.4 Genomes are continually evolving.

Classes of Eukaryotic DNA. Unequal crossing over
expands eukaryotic genomes.

 

FIGURE 18.1

Cancer. A scanning electron micrograph of deadly cancer cells
(8000%).

n general, the genetic message can be altered in two

broad ways: mutation and recombination. A change in
the content of the genetic message—the base sequence of
one or more genes—is referred to as a mutation. Some mu-
tations alter the identity of a particular nucleotide, while
others remove or add nucleotides to a gene. A change in
the position of a portion of the genetic message is referred
to as recombination. Some recombination events move a
gene to a different chromosome; others alter the location
of only part of a gene. In this chapter, we will first consider
gene mutation, using cancer as a focus for our inquiry (fig-
ure 18.1). Then we will turn to recombination, focusing on
how it has affected the organization of the eukaryotic
genome.

361
