1358 CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

200

&
&

Rotational speed (km/s)
w S
g s

 

0 30 60 90
Distance from galactic center (10° ly)

Figure 44-5 The rotational speed of stars in a
typical galaxy as a function of their distance
from the galactic center. The theoretical
solid curve shows that if a galaxy contained
only the mass that is visible, the observed
rotational speed would drop off with
distance at large distances. The dots are the
experimental data, which show that the
rotational speed is approximately constant
at large distances.

able to tell that it originated at point A. However, after the particles began to
form atoms, the scattering of light greatly decreased. A light ray from point A
might then be able to travel for billions of years without being scattered. This
light is the cosmic background radiation.

As soon as the nature of the radiation was recognized, researchers won-
dered, “Can we use this incoming radiation to distinguish the points at which it
originated, so that we then can produce an image of the early universe, back
when atoms first formed and light scattering largely ceased?” The answer is yes,
and that image is coming up in a moment.

Dark Matter

At the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona, Vera Rubin and her
co-worker Kent Ford measured the rotational rates of a number of distant galax-
ies. They did so by measuring the Doppler shifts of bright clusters of stars located
within each galaxy at various distances from the galactic center. As Fig. 44-5
shows, their results were surprising: The orbital speed of stars at the outer visible
edge of the galaxy is about the same as that of stars close to the galactic center.

As the solid curve in Fig. 44-5 attests, that is not what we would expect to find
if all the mass of the galaxy were represented by visible light. Nor is the pattern
found by Rubin and Ford what we find in the solar system. For example, the
orbital speed of Pluto (the “planet” most distant from the Sun) is only about
one-tenth that of Mercury (the planet closest to the Sun).

The only explanation for the findings of Rubin and Ford that is consistent
with Newtonian mechanics is that a typical galaxy contains much more matter
than what we can actually see. In fact, the visible portion of a galaxy represents
only about 5 to 10% of the total mass of the galaxy. In addition to these studies of
galactic rotation, many other observations lead to the conclusion that the universe
abounds in matter that we cannot see. This unseen matter is called dark matter be-
cause either it does not emit light or its light emission is too dim for us to detect.

Normal matter (such as stars, planets, dust, and molecules) is often called
baryonic matter because its mass is primarily due to the combined mass of
the protons and neutrons (baryons) it contains. (The much smaller mass of the
electrons is neglected.) Some of the normal matter, such as burned-out stars and
dim interstellar gas, is part of the dark matter in a galaxy.

However, according to various calculations, this dark normal matter is only
a small part of the total dark matter. The rest is called nonbaryonic dark matter
because it does not contain protons and neutrons. We know of only one member
of this type of dark matter—the neutrinos. Although the mass of a neutrino is
very small relative to the mass of a proton or neutron, the number of neutrinos in
a galaxy is huge and thus the total mass of the neutrinos is large. Nevertheless,
calculations indicate that not even the total mass of the neutrinos is enough to
account for the total mass of the nonbaryonic dark matter. In spite of over a hun-
dred years in which elementary particles have been detected and studied, the
particles that make up the rest of this type of dark matter are undetected and
their nature is unknown. Because we have no experience with them, they must
interact only gravitationally with the common particles.

The Big Bang

In 1985, a physicist remarked at a scientific meeting:

It is as certain that the universe started with a big bang about 15 billion years ago as
it is that the Earth goes around the Sun.

This strong statement suggests the level of confidence in which the big bang
theory, first advanced by Belgian physicist Georges Lemaitre, is held by those
