1326 CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

In such an event the outer shell of the star is blown outward into space, where it
mixes with the tenuous medium that fills the space between the stars. It is from this
medium, continually enriched by debris from stellar explosions, that new stars form,
by condensation under the influence of the gravitational force.

The abundance on Earth of elements heavier than hydrogen and helium
suggests that our solar system has condensed out of interstellar material that
contained the remnants of such explosions. Thus, all the elements around us—
including those in our own bodies—were manufactured in the interiors of stars that
no longer exist. As one scientist put it:“In truth, we are the children of the stars.”

Sample Problem 43.04 Consumption rate of hydrogen in the Sun

At what rate dm/dt is hydrogen being consumed in the core
of the Sun by the p-p cycle of Fig. 43-11?

KEY IDEA

 

The rate dE/dt at which energy is produced by hydrogen
(proton) consumption within the Sun is equal to the rate P at

where AE is the energy produced when protons of mass Am
are consumed. From our discussion in this module, we know
that 26.2 MeV (= 4.20 x 10-!? J) of thermal energy is pro-
duced when four protons are consumed. That is, AE = 4.20 «
10-” J for amass consumption of Am = 4(1.67 X 10-~’ kg).
Substituting these data into Eq. 43-12 and using the power P
of the Sun given in Appendix C, we find that

which energy is radiated by the Sun:

dE =
lamer dt
dt
Calculations: To bring the mass consumption rate dm/dt
into the power equation, we can rewrite it as

_ dE _ dE dm

dm _ Am, 4(.67 x 10-7 kg)
~ AE” 420 10-®J
= 6.2 X 10" kg/s.

(3.90 x 10% wy

(Answer)

Thus, a huge amount of hydrogen is consumed by the Sun
every second. However, you need not worry too much
about the Sun running out of hydrogen, because its mass of 2 *
10” kg will keep it burning for a long, long time.

“dt — dm dt Cw)

Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

43-6 contROLLeD THERMONUCLEAR FUSION

Learning Objectives
After reading this module, you should be able to...

43.24 Give the three requirements for a thermonuclear reactor.
43.25 Define Lawson's criterion.

43.26 Give general descriptions of the magnetic confinement
approach and the inertial confinement approach.

Key Ideas

 

nt > 10°? sim’,
and must have a suitably high plasma temperature T.

@ Controlled thermonuclear fusion for energy generation has
not yet been achieved. The d-d and d-t reactions are the most

promising mechanisms. @ Ina tokamak, the plasma is confined by a magnetic field.

e A successful fusion reactor must satisfy Lawson's criterion, @ In laser fusion, inertial confinement is used.

 

Controlled Thermonuclear Fusion

The first thermonuclear reaction on Earth occurred at Eniwetok Atoll on
November 1, 1952, when the United States exploded a fusion device, generating
an energy release equivalent to 10 million tons of TNT. The high temperatures
and densities needed to initiate the reaction were provided by using a fission
bomb as a trigger.
