1356

CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

into existence. Thus, one reason scientists study particles at high energies is to
understand what the universe was like just after it began.

As we shall discuss shortly, all of space within the universe was initially tiny
in extent, and the temperature of the particles within that space was incredibly
high. With time, however, the universe expanded and cooled to lower tempera-
tures, eventually to the size and temperature we see today.

Actually, the phrase “we see today” is complicated: When we look out into
space, we are actually looking back in time because the light from the stars and
galaxies has taken a long time to reach us. The most distant objects that we can
detect are quasars (quasistellar objects), which are the extremely bright cores of
galaxies that are as much as 13 X 10° ly from us. Each such core contains a
gigantic black hole; as material (gas and even stars) is pulled into one of those
black holes, the material heats up and radiates a tremendous amount of light,
enough for us to detect in spite of the huge distance. We therefore “see” a quasar
not as it looks today but rather as it once was, when that light began its journey to
us billions of years ago.

The Universe Is Expanding

As we saw in Module 37-5, it is possible to measure the relative speeds at
which galaxies are approaching us or receding from us by measuring the shifts
in the wavelength of the light they emit. If we look only at distant galaxies, be-
yond our immediate galactic neighbors, we find an astonishing fact: They are
all moving away (receding) from us! In 1929 Edwin P. Hubble connected the
recession speed v of a galaxy and its distance r from us— they are directly pro-
portional:

v=Hr (Hubble's law), (44-19)

in which H is called the Hubble constant. The value of H is usually measured in
the unit kilometers per second-megaparsec (km/s -Mpc), where the megaparsec
is alength unit commonly used in astrophysics and astronomy:

1 Mpc = 3.084 X 10! km = 3.260 x 10° ly. (44-20)

The Hubble constant H has not had the same value since the universe began.
Determining its current value is extremely difficult because doing so involves
measurements of very distant galaxies. However, the Hubble constant is now
known to be

H =71.0 km/s-Mpe = 21.8 mm/s -ly. (44-21)

We interpret the recession of the galaxies to mean that the universe is expanding,
much as the raisins in what is to be a loaf of raisin bread grow farther apart as the
dough expands. Observers on all other galaxies would find that distant galaxies were
rushing away from them also, in accordance with Hubble’s law. In keeping with our
analogy, we can say that no raisin (galaxy) has a unique or preferred view.

Hubble’s law is consistent with the hypothesis that the universe began with
the big bang and has been expanding ever since. If we assume that the rate of
expansion has been constant (that is, the value of H has been constant), then we
can estimate the age T of the universe by using Eq. 44-19. Let us also assume that
since the big bang, any given part of the universe (say, a galaxy) has been reced-
ing from our location at a speed v given by Eq. 44-19. Then the time required for
the given part to recede a distance ris

T= 2 = 7 = 7 (estimated age of universe). (44-22)
For the value of H in Eq. 44-21, T works out to be 13.8 x 10° y. Much more
sophisticated studies of the expansion of the universe put Tat 13.7 x 10° y.
