1346

CHAPTER 44 QUARKS, LEPTONS, AND THE BIG BANG

lv] Checkpoint 2

This mode of decay for a neutron is not observed:
n>pte-.

Which of the following conservation laws does this process violate: (a) energy, (b) angular
momentum, (c) linear momentum, (d) charge, (e) lepton number, (f) baryon number?
The masses are m, = 939.6 MeV/c’, my = 938.3 MeV/c?, and m, = 0.511 MeV/c?.

Still Another Conservation Law

Particles have intrinsic properties in addition to the ones we have listed so far:
mass, charge, spin, lepton number, and baryon number. The first of these addi-
tional properties was discovered when researchers observed that certain new
particles, such as the kaon (K) and the sigma (=), always seemed to be produced
in pairs. It seemed impossible to produce only one of them at a time. Thus, if
a beam of energetic pions interacts with the protons in a bubble chamber, the
reaction

aw +p>K*+>* (44-15)
often occurs. The reaction
T+pom +d, (44-16)

which violates no conservation law known in the early days of particle physics,
never occurs.

It was eventually proposed (by Murray Gell-Mann in the United States and
independently by K. Nishijima in Japan) that certain particles possess a new
property, called strangeness, with its own quantum number S and its own con-
servation law. (Be careful not to confuse the symbol S here with the symbol for
spin.) The name strangeness arises from the fact that, before the identities of
these particles were pinned down, they were known as “strange particles,” and
the label stuck.

The proton, neutron, and pion have S = 0; that is, they are not “strange.” It
was proposed, however, that the K* particle has strangeness S = +1 and that
=* has S = —1.In the reaction of Eq. 44-15, the net strangeness is initially zero
and finally zero; thus, the reaction conserves strangeness. However, in the reac-
tion shown in Eq. 44-16, the final net strangeness is —1; thus, that reaction does
not conserve strangeness and cannot occur. Apparently, then, we must add one
more conservation law to our list— the conservation of strangeness:

os Strangeness is conserved in interactions involving the strong force.

Strange particles are produced only (rapidly) by strong interactions and only in
pairs with a net strangeness of zero. They then decay (slowly) through weak inter-
actions without conserving strangeness.

It may seem heavy-handed to invent a new property of particles just to account
for a little puzzle like that posed by Eqs. 44-15 and 44-16. However, strangeness
soon solved many other puzzles. Still, do not be misled by the whimsical name.
Strangeness is no more mysterious a property of particles than is charge. Both are
properties that particles may (or may not) have; each is described by an appropri-
ate quantum number. Each obeys a conservation law. Still other properties of
particles have been discovered and given even more whimsical names, such as
charm and bottomness, but all are perfectly legitimate properties. Let us see, as an
example, how the new property of strangeness “earns its keep” by leading us to
uncover important regularities in the properties of the particles.
