The Flowering Plant

Scientists are only beginning to unravel the molecular biol-
ogy of plant development, largely through intensive recent
study of a small weedy relative of the mustard plant, the
wall cress Arabidopsis thaliana. Easy to grow and cross, and
with a short generation time, Arabidopsis makes an ideal
model for investigating plant development. It is able to
self-fertilize, like Mendel’s pea plants, making genetic
analysis convenient. Arabidopsis can be grown indoors in
test tubes, a single plant producing thousands of offspring
after only two months. Its genome is approximately the
same size as those of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. An ordered library
of Arabidopsis gene clones was made available to researchers
in 1997, and the full genome sequence was completed in
1999.

Pattern Formation

Much of the current work investigating Arabidopsis devel-
opment has centered on obtaining and studying muta-
tions that alter the plant’s development. Many different
sorts of mutations have been identified. Some of the most
interesting of them alter the basic architecture of the em-
bryo, the pattern of tissues laid down as the embryo first
forms. Mutations in over 50 different genes that alter
pattern formation in Arabidopsis embryos are now known,
affecting every stage of development. While work in this
area is still very preliminary, it appears that the mecha-
nisms that establish patterns in the early Arabidopsis em-
bryo are broadly similar to those known to function in
animal development.

Organ Formation

Importantly, the subsequent development of organs in
Arabidopsis also seems to parallel organ development in
animals, and a similar set of regulatory genes control de-
velopment in Arabidopsis, Drosophila, and mice. Arabidopsis
flowers, for example, are modified leaves formed as four
whorls in a specific order, and homeotic mutations have
been identified that convert one part of the pattern to
another, just as they do in the body segments of a fly
(figure 17.25).

 

Scientists are only beginning to understand the
molecular biology of plant development. In broad
outline, it appears quite similar to the development in
animals. The genes that determine pattern formation
and organ development, for example, operate in the
same way in plants and animals.

 

356 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

Whorl 2 Whod 3

petal (Aand B) stamen (Band C)

   
   

Whorl 1 Whorl 4
sepal (A) carpel (C)

Floral meristem

Mutation: class B genes
not functioning

Homeotic mutant
flower

  

Class A genes Class B genes Class C genes
expressed in expressed in expressed in
meristem meristem meristem
FIGURE 17.25

Studying development in a flowering plant.
