44-4 COSMOLOGY 1357

Sample Problem 44.06 Using Hubble’s law to relate distance and recessional speed

The wavelength shift in the light from a particular quasar indi-
cates that the quasar has a recessional speed of 2.8 X 10° m/s
(which is 93% of the speed of light). Approximately how far
from us is the quasar?

KEY IDEA

 

‘We assume that the distance and speed are related by
Hubble’s law.

Calculation: From Egs. 44-19 and 44-21, we find

aan 2.8 X 10° m/s
 H 21.8mmis-ly
= 12.8 x 10° ly. (Answer)
This is only an approximation because the quasar has not
always been receding from our location at the same speed v;
that is, H has not had its current value throughout the time
during which the universe has been expanding.

(1000 mm/m)

Sample Problem 44.07 Using Hubble’s law to relate distance and Doppler shift

A particular emission line detected in the light from a
galaxy has a detected wavelength Ag. = 1.1A, where A is the

which leads us to

 

 

 

 

AA
proper wavelength of the line. What is the galaxy’s distance Toad sll, (44-24)
from us?
In this equation,
KEY IDEAS
AA = Age — A= 11A—A=0.1A.
(1) We assume that Hubble’s law (v = Hr) applies to the ee Pa Z .
recession of the galaxy. (2) We also assume that the astro- Se eee
nomical Doppler shift of Eq. 37-36 (v = c|AA|/A, for v <c) — c(0.1A) _ OAc
applies to the shift in wavelength due to the recession. a
Calculations: We can then set the right side of these two et
equations equal to each other to write = LUCIO) (1000 mm/m)
a _ claal nee 8mm/s-ly
aan (4-23) =14 x 10°ly. (Answer)

fait

LUS Additional examples, video, and practice available at WileyPLUS

The Cosmic Background Radiation

In 1965 Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, of what was then the Bell Telephone
Laboratories, were testing a sensitive microwave receiver used for commu-
nications research. They discovered a faint background “hiss” that remained
unchanged in intensity no matter where their antenna was pointed. It soon
became clear that Penzias and Wilson were observing a cosmic background
radiation, generated in the early universe and filling all space almost uniformly.
Currently this radiation has a maximum intensity at a wavelength of 1.1 mm,
which lies in the microwave region of electromagnetic radiation (or light, for
short). The wavelength distribution of this radiation matches the wavelength dis-
tribution of light that would be emitted by a laboratory enclosure with walls at a
temperature of 2.7 K. Thus, for the cosmic background radiation, we say that the
enclosure is the entire universe and that the universe is at an (average) tempera-
ture of 2.7 K. For their discovery of the cosmic background radiation, Penzias and
Wilson were awarded the 1978 Nobel Prize in physics.

The cosmic background radiation is now known to be light that has been in
flight across the universe since shortly after the universe began billions of years
ago. When the universe was even younger, light could scarcely go any significant
distance without being scattered by all the individual, high-speed particles along
its path. If a light ray started from, say, point A, it would be scattered in so many
directions that if you could have intercepted part of it, you would have not been
