1318

CHAPTER 43 ENERGY FROM THE NUCLEUS

‘When the reactor is operating at a steady power level, exactly the same number
of neutrons (370) is then lost by leakage from the core and by nonfission capture,
leaving 1000 thermal neutrons to start the next generation. In this cycle, of
course, each of the 370 neutrons produced by fission events represents a deposit
of energy in the reactor core, heating up the core.

The multiplication factor k—an important reactor parameter—is the ratio
of the number of neutrons present at the conclusion of a particular generation
to the number present at the beginning of that generation. In Fig. 43-5, the
multiplication factor is 1000/1000, or exactly unity. For k = 1, the operation of
the reactor is said to be exactly critical, which is what we wish it to be for
steady-power operation. Reactors are actually designed so that they are inher-
ently supercritical (k > 1); the multiplication factor is then adjusted to critical
operation (k = 1) by inserting control rods into the reactor core. These rods, con-
taining a material such as cadmium that absorbs neutrons readily, can be inserted
farther to reduce the operating power level and withdrawn to increase the power
level or to compensate for the tendency of reactors to go subcritical as (neutron-
absorbing) fission products build up in the core during continued operation.

If you pulled out one of the control rods rapidly, how fast would the reactor
power level increase? This response time is controlled by the fascinating circum-
stance that a small fraction of the neutrons generated by fission do not escape
promptly from the newly formed fission fragments but are emitted from these frag-
ments later, as the fragments decay by beta emission. Of the 370 “new” neutrons
produced in Fig. 43-5, for example, perhaps 16 are delayed, being emitted from frag-
ments following beta decays whose half-lives range from 0.2 to 55 s. These delayed
neutrons are few in number, but they serve the essential purpose of slowing the re-
actor response time to match practical mechanical reaction times.

Figure 43-6 shows the broad outlines of an electrical power plant based on
a pressurized-water reactor (PWR), a type in common use in North America. In
such a reactor, water is used both as the moderator and as the heat transfer
medium. In the primary loop, water is circulated through the reactor vessel and

Steam (high pressure)

    
      
 

 

£3 Electric

power

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Water
(hot)

 
     

Steam
generator

    
  

Steam
condenser

Reactor]
core

Reactor
pressure vessel Water
(high pressure)

Coolant out

Water
(cool)

 
  

Water
(low pressure)

er)

Primary loop Secondary loop

Figure 43-6 A simplified layout of a nuclear power plant, based on a pressurized-water
reactor. Many features are omitted —among them the arrangement for cooling the
reactor core in case of an emergency.
