Chapter 17 Summary

Summary

17.1 Development is a regulated process.

   

www.mhhe.com

Questions

Media Resources

 

* Vertebrate development is initiated by a rapid

cleavage of the fertilized egg into a hollow ball of
cells, the blastula. Cell movements then form primary
germ layers and organize the structure of the embryo.

Cells determined in the insect embryo are carried
within the body of larvae as imaginal discs, which are
assembled into the adult body during pupation.

Plant meristems continuously produce new tissues,
which then differentiate into body parts. This
differentiation is significantly influenced by the
environment.

* Introduction to

@ Development

* Vertebrate Limb

eS Formation

1. What is cleavage? How does
the type of cleavage influence
subsequent embryonic
development?

2. What is a blastula? How
does it form and what does it
turn into?

3. What is a gastrula? Where
are the germ layers in a gastrula?

4. What is neurulation? How
and when does it occur?

17.2 Multicellular organisms employ the same basic mechanisms of development.

 

* Cell movement in animal development is carried out

by altering a cell’s complement of surface adhesion
molecules, which it uses to pull itself over other cells.

Akey to animal development is the ability of cells to
alter the developmental paths of adjacent cells, a
process called induction. Induction is achieved by
diffusible chemicals called morphogens.

Determination of a cell’s ultimate developmental fate
often involves the addition to it of positional labels
that reflect its location in the embryo.

The location of structures within body segments is
dictated by a spatially organized assembly of
homeotic genes, first discovered in Drosophila but
now known to occur in all animals.

Many cells are genetically programmed to die, usually
soon after they are formed during development, in a
process called apoptosis.

5. What role do cadherins and
integrins play in cell movement?

6. What is the difference
between mosaic development
and regulative development?

* Induction

@ * Pattern Formation

7. How do organizers and
morphogens participate in
induction?

8. How is determination
distinguished from
differentiation?

9, What role does maternal
mRNA play in the development
of a Drosophila embryo?

10. What are homeotic genes
and what do they do?

17.3 Four model developmental systems have been extensively researched.

 

¢ The four most intensively studied model systems of

development are the mouse Mus musculus, the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster, the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans, and the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana.

17.4 Aging can be considered a developmental process.

11. What are the major
differences between vertebrate,
insect, and plant developmental
pathways? What are the
similarities?

 

* Aging is not well understood, although not for want
of theories, most of which involve progressive
damage to DNA.

360 = =PartV_ Molecular Genetics

12. Cancer cell cultures never
seem to grow old, dividing
ceaselessly. What can you
deduce about the state of their
telomerase gene?
