44-1 GENERAL PROPERTIES OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLES 1335

energies using larger and larger accelerators, physicists come to realize that no
conceivable Earth-bound accelerator can generate particles with energies great
enough to test the ultimate theories of physics. There has been only one source of
particles with these energies, and that was the universe itself within the first
millisecond of its existence.

In this chapter you will encounter a host of new terms and a veritable
flood of particles with names that you should not try to remember. If you are
temporarily bewildered, you are sharing the bewilderment of the physicists
who lived through these developments and who at times saw nothing but
increasing complexity with little hope of understanding. If you stick with it,
however, you will come to share the excitement physicists felt as marvelous
new accelerators poured out new results, as the theorists put forth ideas each
more daring than the last, and as clarity finally sprang from obscurity. The
main message of this book is that, although we know a lot about the physics of
the world, grand mysteries remain.

Particles, Particles, Particles

In the 1930s, there were many scientists who thought that the problem of the
ultimate structure of matter was well on the way to being solved. The atom
could be understood in terms of only three particles—the electron, the proton,
and the neutron. Quantum physics accounted well for the structure of the atom
and for radioactive alpha decay. The neutrino had been postulated and,
although not yet observed, had been incorporated by Enrico Fermi into a suc-
cessful theory of beta decay. There was hope that quantum theory applied to
protons and neutrons would soon account for the structure of the nucleus. What
else was there?

The euphoria did not last. The end of that same decade saw the beginning
of a period of discovery of new particles that continues to this day. The new
particles have names and symbols such as muon (2), pion (7), kaon (K), and
sigma (X). All the new particles are unstable; that is, they spontaneously trans-
form into other types of particles according to the same functions of time that
apply to unstable nuclei. Thus, if No particles of any one type are present in a
sample at time t = 0, the number N of those particles present at some later time ¢
is given by Eq. 42-15,

N= Me, (44-1)
the rate of decay R, from an initial value of Ro, is given by Eq. 42-16,
R=Re™, (44-2)

and the half-life T;,.,decay constant A,and mean life rare related by Eq. 42-18,

Tin = “2 = 7rin2. (44-3)

The half-lives of the new particles range from about 10~° s to 10~* s. Indeed,
some of the particles last so briefly that they cannot be detected directly but can
only be inferred from indirect evidence.

These new particles have been commonly produced in head-on collisions
between protons or electrons accelerated to high energies in accelerators at
places like Brookhaven National Laboratory (on Long Island, New York),
Fermilab (near Chicago), CERN (near Geneva, Switzerland), SLAC (at
Stanford University in California), and DESY (near Hamburg, Germany).They
have been discovered with particle detectors that have grown in sophistication
until they rival the size and complexity of entire accelerators of only a few
decades ago.
