Some Tumors Are Caused by
Chemicals

Early Ideas

The chemical carcinogenesis theory was first advanced over
200 years ago in 1761 by Dr. John Hill, an English physi-
cian, who noted unusual tumors of the nose in heavy snuff
users and suggested tobacco had produced these cancers. In
1775, a London surgeon, Sir Percivall Pott, made a similar
observation, noting that men who had been chimney
sweeps exhibited frequent cancer of the scrotum, and sug-
gesting that soot and tars might be responsible. British
sweeps washed themselves infrequently and always seemed
covered with soot. Chimney sweeps on the continent, who
washed daily, had much less of this scrotal cancer. These
and many other observations led to the hypothesis that
cancer results from the action of chemicals on the body.

Demonstrating That Chemicals Can Cause
Cancer

It was over a century before this hypothesis was directly
tested. In 1915, Japanese doctor Katsusaburo Yamagiwa ap-
plied extracts of coal tar to the skin of 137 rabbits every 2 or
3 days for 3 months. Then he waited to see what would
happen. After a year, cancers appeared at the site of applica-
tion in seven of the rabbits. Yamagiwa had induced cancer
with the coal tar, the first direct demonstration of chemical
carcinogenesis. In the decades that followed, this approach
demonstrated that many chemicals were capable of causing
cancer. Importantly, most of them were potent mutagens.

Because these were lab studies, many people did not ac-
cept that the results applied to real people. Do tars in fact in-
duce cancer in humans? In 1949, the American physician
Ernst Winder and the British epidemiologist Richard Doll
independently reported that lung cancer showed a strong
link to the smoking of cigarettes, which introduces tars into
the lungs. Winder interviewed 684 lung cancer patients and
600 normal controls, asking whether each had ever smoked.
Cancer rates were 40 times higher in heavy smokers than in
nonsmokers. Doll’s study was even more convincing. He in-
terviewed a large number of British physicians, noting which
ones smoked, then waited to see which would develop lung
cancer. Many did. Overwhelmingly, those who did were
smokers. From these studies, it seemed likely as long as 50
years ago that tars and other chemicals in cigarette smoke in-
duce cancer in the lungs of persistent smokers. While this
suggestion was (and is) resisted by the tobacco industry, the
evidence that has accumulated since these pioneering studies
makes a clear case, and there is no longer any real doubt.
Chemicals in cigarette smoke cause cancer.

Carcinogens Are Common

In ongoing investigations over the last 50 years, many
hundreds of synthetic chemicals have been shown capable

370 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

Table 18.3 Chemical Carcinogens in the Workplace

Workers at Risk

Chemical Cancer for Exposure

COMMON EXPOSURE

Benzene Myelogenous _ Painters; dye users;
leukemia furniture finishers

Railroad and
bus-garage workers;
truckers; miners

Diesel exhaust. Lung

Mineral oils Skin Metal machinists
Pesticides Lung Sprayers
Cigarette tar Lung Smokers
UNCOMMON EXPOSURE
Asbestos Mesothelioma, _ Brake-lining,
lung insulation workers
Synthetic mineral Lung Wall and pipe
fibers insulation and duct
wrapping users
Hhir dyes Bladder Hairdressers and
barbers
Paint Lung Painters
Polychlorinated —_Liver, skin Users of hydraulic
biphenyls fluids and
lubricants, inks,
adhesives, insecticides
Soot Skin Chimney sweeps;
bricklayers; firefighters;
heating-unit service
workers
RARE EXPOSURE
Arsenic Lung, skin Insecticide/herbicide

sprayers, tanners;
oil refiners

Formaldehyde Nose Wood product,
paper, textiles, and

metal product workers

of causing cancer in laboratory animals. Among them are
trichloroethylene, asbestos, benzene, vinyl chloride,
arsenic, arylamide, and a host of complex petroleum
products with chemical structures resembling chicken
wire. People in the workplace encounter chemicals daily
(table 18.3).

In addition to identifying potentially dangerous sub-
stances, what have the studies of potential carcinogens
told us about the nature of cancer? What do these cancer-
causing chemicals have in common? They are all mutagens,
each capable of inducing changes in DNA.

 

Chemicals that produce mutations in DNA are often.
potent carcinogens. Tars in cigarette smoke, for
example, are the direct cause of most lung cancers.

 
