Other Tumors Result from Viral
Infection

Chemical mutagens are not the only carcinogens, however.
Some tumors seem almost certainly to result from viral in-
fection. Viruses can be isolated from certain tumors, and
these viruses cause virus-containing tumors to develop in
other individuals. About 15% of human cancers are associ-
ated with viruses.

A Virus That Causes Cancer

In 1911, American medical researcher Peyton Rous re-
ported that a virus, subsequently named Rous avian sar-
coma virus (RSV), was associated with chicken sarcomas.
He found that RSV could infect and initiate cancer in
chicken fibroblast (connective tissue) cells growing in cul-
ture; from those cancerous cells, more viruses could be iso-
lated. Rous was awarded the 1966 Nobel Prize in Physiol-
ogy or Medicine for this discovery. RSV proved to be a
kind of RNA virus called a retrovirus. When retroviruses
infect a cell, they make a DNA copy of their RNA genome
and insert that copy into the host cell’s DNA.

How RSV Causes Cancer

How does RSV initiate cancer? When RSV was compared
to a closely related virus, RAV-O, which is unable to trans-
form normal chicken cells into cancerous cells, the two
viruses proved to be identical except for one gene that was
present in RSV but absent from RAV-O. That gene was
called the src gene, short for sarcoma.

How do viral genes cause cancer? An essential clue came
in 1970, when temperature-sensitive RSV mutants were
isolated. These mutants would transform tissue culture
cells into cancer cells at 35°C, but not at 41°C. Tempera-
ture sensitivity of this kind is almost always associated with
proteins. It seemed likely, therefore, that the sv gene was
actively transcribed by the cell, rather than serving as a
recognition site for some sort of regulatory protein. This
was an exciting result, suggesting that the protein specified
by this cancer-causing gene, or oncogene, could be iso-
lated and its properties studied.

The src protein was first isolated in 1977 by J. Michael
Bishop and Harold Varmus, who won the Nobel Prize for
their efforts. It turned out to be an enzyme of moderate
size that phosphorylates (adds a phosphate group to) the ty-
rosine amino acids of proteins. Such enzymes, called tyro-
sine kinases, are quite common in animal cells. One exam-
ple is an enzyme that also serves as a plasma membrane
receptor for epidermal growth factor, a protein that sig-
nals the initiation of cell division. This finding raised the
exciting possibility that RSV may cause cancer by introduc-
ing into cells an active form of a normally quiescent
growth-promoting enzyme. Later experiments showed this
is indeed the case.

Tyrosine kinase gene of chicken
chromosome with 6 introns

 

OPTI ANA transcript

| Reverse transcriptase

DNA copy

Retrovirus genome
without oncogene (RAV-0)

 

Envelope proteins

 

ee a

Genome of Rous avian sarcoma virus (RSV)

FIGURE 18.12

How a chicken gene got into the RSV genome. RSV contains
only a few genes: gag and env, which encode the viral protein coat
and envelope proteins, and po/, which encodes reverse
transcriptase. It also contains the s7z gene that causes sarcomas,
which the RAV-O virus lacks. RSV originally obtained its src gene
from chickens, where a copy of the gene occurs normally and is
controlled by the chicken’s regulatory genes.

Origin of the src Gene

Does the src gene actually integrate into the host cell’s
chromosome along with the rest of the RSV genome? One
way to answer this question is to prepare a radioactive ver-
sion of the gene, allow it to bind to complementary se-
quences on the chicken chromosomes, and examine where
the chromosomes become radioactive. The result of this
experiment is that radioactive src DNA does in fact bind to
the site where RSV DNA is inserted into the chicken
genome—but it also binds to a second site where there is
no part of the RSV genome!

The explanation for the second binding site is that the
src gene is not exclusively a viral gene. It is also a growth-
promoting gene that evolved in and occurs normally in
chickens. This normal chicken gene is the second site
where src binds to chicken DNA. Somehow, an ancestor of
RSV picked up a copy of the normal chicken gene in some
past infection. Now part of the virus, the gene is tran-
scribed under the control of viral promoters rather than
under the regulatory system of the chicken genome (figure
18.12).

 

Studies of RSV reveal that cancer results from the
inappropriate activity of growth-promoting genes that
are less active or completely inactive in normal cells.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 371
