Point Mutations
Physical Damage to DNA

Ionizing Radiation. High-energy
forms of radiation, such as X rays and
gamma rays, are highly mutagenic.
When such radiation reaches a cell, it is
absorbed by the atoms it encounters,
imparting energy to the electrons in
their outer shells. These energized
electrons are ejected from the atoms,
leaving behind free radicals, ionized
atoms with unpaired electrons. Free
radicals react violently with other mol-
ecules, including DNA.

When a free radical breaks both
phosphodiester bonds of a DNA helix,
causing a double-strand break, the
cell’s usual mutational repair enzymes
cannot fix the damage. The two frag-
ments created by the break must be aligned while the phos-
phodiester bonds between them form again. Bacteria have
no mechanism to achieve this alignment, and double-strand
breaks are lethal to their descendants. In eukaryotes, which
almost all possess multiple copies of their chromosomes,
the synaptonemal complex assembled in meiosis is used to
pair the fragmented chromosome with its homologue. In
fact, it is speculated that meiosis may have evolved initially
as a mechanism to repair double-strand breaks in DNA (see
chapter 12).

FIGURE 18.3

Ultraviolet Radiation. Ultraviolet (UV) radiation, the
component of sunlight that tans (and burns), contains much
less energy than ionizing radiation. It does not induce atoms
to eject electrons, and thus it does not produce free radicals.
The only molecules capable of absorbing UV radiation are
certain organic ring compounds, whose outer-shell elec-
trons become reactive when they absorb UV energy.

DNA strongly absorbs UV radiation in the pyrimidine
bases, thymine and cytosine. If one of the nucleotides on
either side of the absorbing pyrimidine is also a pyrimidine,
a double covalent bond forms between them. The resulting
cross-link between adjacent pyrimidines is called a pyrimi-
dine dimer (figure 18.3). In most cases, cellular UV repair
systems either cleave the bonds that link the adjacent
pyrimidines or excise the entire pyrimidine dimer from the
strand and fill in the gap, using the other strand as a tem-
plate (figure 18.4). In those rare instances in which a
pyrimidine dimer goes unrepaired, DNA polymerase may
fail to replicate the portion of the strand that includes the
dimer, skipping ahead and leaving the problem area to be
filled in later. This filling-in process is often error-prone,
however, and it may create mutational changes in the base
sequence of the gap region. Some unrepaired pyrimidine
dimers block DNA replication altogether, which is lethal to
the cell.

364 = PartV Molecular Genetics

 

Ultraviolet
2 light
fee
Thymine
dimer

 

Making a pyrimidine dimer. When two pyrimidines, such as two thymines, are adjacent to
each other in a DNA strand, the absorption of UV radiation can cause covalent bonds to
form between them—creating a pyrimidine dimer. The dimer introduces a “kink” into the
double helix that prevents replication of the duplex by DNA polymerase.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 LABPRLEE
e/ 7 fpr Yr7fe,
ey AVAWAVATAWA FIGURE 18.4
Repair of a
pyrimidine dimer.
Some pyrimidine
eL7 [Arr TLE. dimers are repaired
by excising the
3 LAALALL dimer, as well as a
short run of
nucleotides on either
3 7 EEE Fe side of it, and then
filling in the gap
4 2PRATZ YW), using the other

strand as a template.

Sunlight can wreak havoc on the cells of the skin be-
cause its UV light causes mutations. Indeed, a strong and
direct association exists between exposure to bright sun-
light, UV-induced DNA damage, and skin cancer. A deep
tan is not healthy! A rare hereditary disorder among hu-
mans called xeroderma pigmentosum causes these prob-
lems after a lesser exposure to UV. Individuals with this
disorder develop extensive skin tumors after exposure to
sunlight because they lack a mechanism for repairing the
DNA damage UV radiation causes. Because of the many
different proteins involved in excision and repair of pyrimi-
dine dimers, mutations in as many as eight different genes
cause the disease.
