Chemical Modification of D!

 

Many mutations result from direct chemical modification
of the DNA. The chemicals that act on DNA fall into
three classes: (1) chemicals that resemble DNA nu-
cleotides but pair incorrectly when they are incorporated
into DNA (figure 18.5). Some of the new AIDS
chemotherapeutic drugs are analogues of nitrogenous
bases that are inserted into the viral or infected cell DNA.
This DNA cannot be properly transcribed, so viral
growth slows; (2) chemicals that remove the amino group
from adenine or cytosine, causing them to mispair; and (3)
chemicals that add hydrocarbon groups to nucleotide
bases, also causing them to mispair. This last group in-
cludes many particularly potent mutagens commonly used
in laboratories, as well as compounds sometimes released
into the environment, such as mustard gas.

Spontaneous Mutations

Many point mutations occur spontaneously, without ex-
posure to radiation or mutagenic chemicals. Sometimes
nucleotide bases spontaneously shift to alternative confor-
mations, or isomers, which form different kinds of hydro-
gen bonds than the normal conformations. During repli-
cation, DNA polymerase pairs a different nucleotide with
the isomer than it would have otherwise selected. Unre-
paired spontaneous errors occur in fewer than one in a
billion nucleotides per generation, but they are still an
important source of mutation.

Sequences sometimes misalign when homologous
chromosomes pair, causing a portion of one strand to
loop out. These misalignments, called slipped mispair-
ing, are usually only transitory, and the chromosomes
quickly revert to the normal arrangement (figure 18.6). If
the error-correcting system of the cell encounters a
slipped mispairing before it reverts, however, the system
will attempt to “correct” it, usually by excising the loop.
This may result in a deletion of several hundred nu-
cleotides from one of the chromosomes. Many of these
deletions start or end in the middle of a codon, thereby
shifting the reading frame by one or two bases. These so-
called frame-shift mutations cause the gene to be read
in the wrong three-base groupings, distorting the genetic
message, just as the deletion of the letter F from the sen-
tence, THE FAT CAT ATE THE RAT shifts the read-
ing frame of the sentence, producing the meaningless
message, THE ATC ATA TET HER AT. Some chemi-
cals specifically promote deletions and frame-shift muta-
tions by stabilizing the loops produced during slipped
mispairing, thus increasing the time the loops are vulner-
able to excision.

 

° ° NH.
H CH Br H
SN . nZ
ay ay
H H
Thymine 5-Bromouracil Cytosine
FIGURE 18.5

Chemicals that resemble DNA bases can cause mutations. For
example, DNA polymerase cannot distinguish between thymine
and 5-bromouracil, which are similar in shape. Once incorporated
into a DNA molecule, however, 5-bromouracil tends to rearrange
to a form that resembles cytosine and pairs with guanine. When
this happens, what was originally an A-T base-pair becomes a G-
C base-pair.

 

Correct =
pairing sii

i |
Slipped =
mispairing = =

Resumption of Excision
correct pairing [7 \\, ofloop

Result | Result

FIGURE 18.6

Slipped mispairing. Slipped mispairing occurs when a sequence
is present in more than one copy on a chromosome and the copies
on homologous chromosomes pair out of register, like a shirt
buttoned wrong. The loop this mistake produces is sometimes
excised by the cell’s repair enzymes, producing a short deletion
and often altering the reading frame. Any chemical that stabilizes
the loop increases the chance it will be excised.

 

The major sources of physical damage to DNA are
ionizing radiation, which breaks the DNA strands;
ultraviolet radiation, which creates nucleotide cross-
links whose removal often leads to errors in base
selection; and chemicals that modify DNA bases and
alter their base-pairing behavior. Unrepaired
spontaneous errors in DNA replication occur rarely.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 365
