18.2 Cancer results from mutation of growth-regulating genes.

What Is Cancer?

Cancer is a growth disorder of cells. It starts when an ap-
parently normal cell begins to grow in an uncontrolled and
invasive way (figure 18.8). The result is a cluster of cells,
called a tumor, that constantly expands in size. Cells that
leave the tumor and spread throughout the body, forming
new tumors at distant sites, are called metastases (figure
18.9). Cancer is perhaps the most pernicious disease. Of
the children born in 1999, one-third will contract cancer at
some time during their lives; one-fourth of the male chil-
dren and one-third of the female children will someday die
of cancer. Most of us have had family or friends affected by
the disease. In 1997, 560,000 Americans died of cancer.

Not surprisingly, researchers are expending a great deal
of effort to learn the cause of this disease. Scientists have
made a great deal of progress in the last 20 years using
molecular biological techniques, and the rough outlines of
understanding are now emerging. We now know that can-
cer is a gene disorder of somatic tissue, in which damaged
genes fail to properly control cell proliferation. The cell di-
vision cycle is regulated by a sophisticated group of pro-
teins described in chapter 11. Cancer results from the mu-
tation of the genes encoding these proteins.

Cancer can be caused by chemicals that mutate DNA or
in some instances by viruses that circumvent the cell’s nor-
mal proliferation controls. Whatever the immediate cause,
however, all cancers are characterized by unrestrained
growth and division. Cell division never stops in a cancer-
ous line of cells. Cancer cells are virtually immortal—auntil

the body in which they reside dies.

 

Cancer is unrestrained cell proliferation caused by
damage to genes regulating the cell division cycle.

 

FIGURE 18.9

Portrait of a cancer. This ball of cells is a Connective tissue
carcinoma (cancer tumor) developing from
epithelial cells that line the interior surface
of a human lung. As the mass of cells
grows, it invades surrounding tissues, ;
eventually penetrating lymphatic and Lymphatic vessel
blood vessels, both plentiful within the

lung. These vessels carry metastatic cancer

Blood vessel

Smooth muscle ——————
cells throughout the body, where they wm

lodge and grow, forming new masses of
cancerous tissue.

 

FIGURE 18.8

Lung cancer cells (530x). These cells are from a tumor located
in the alveolus (air sac) of a lung.

Carcinoma of the lung

   

Metastatic cells Blood vessel

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 367
