Kinds of Mutation

Because mutations can occur randomly anywhere in a cell’s
DNA, mutations can be detrimental, just as making a ran-
dom change in a computer program or a musical score usu-
ally worsens performance. The consequences of a detri-
mental mutation may be minor or catastrophic, depending
on the function of the altered gene.

Mutations in Germ-Line Tissues

The effect of a mutation depends critically on the identity
of the cell in which the mutation occurs. During the em-
bryonic development of all multicellular organisms, there
comes a point when cells destined to form gametes (germ-
line cells) are segregated from those that will form the
other cells of the body (somatic cells). Only when a muta-
tion occurs within a germ-line cell is it passed to subse-
quent generations as part of the hereditary endowment of
the gametes derived from that cell.

Mutations in Somatic Tissues

Mutations in germ-line tissue are of enormous biological
importance because they provide the raw material from
which natural selection produces evolutionary change.
Change can occur only if there are new, different allele
combinations available to replace the old. Mutation pro-
duces new alleles, and recombination puts the alleles to-
gether in different combinations. In animals, it is the oc-
currence of these two processes in germ-line tissue that is
important to evolution, as mutations in somatic cells (so-
matic mutations) are not passed from one generation to
the next. However, a somatic mutation may have drastic ef-
fects on the individual organism in which it occurs, as it is
passed on to all of the cells that are descended from the
original mutant cell. Thus, if a mutant lung cell divides, all
cells derived from it will carry the mutation. Somatic muta-
tions of lung cells are, as we shall see, the principal cause of
lung cancer in humans.

Point Mutations

One category of mutational changes affects the message it-
self, producing alterations in the sequence of DNA nu-
cleotides (table 18.1 summarizes the sources and types of
mutations). If alterations involve only one or a few base-
pairs in the coding sequence, they are called point muta-
tions. While some point mutations arise due to sponta-
neous pairing errors that occur during DNA replication,
others result from damage to the DNA caused by muta-
gens, usually radiation or chemicals. The latter class of
mutations is of particular practical importance because
modern industrial societies often release many chemical
mutagens into the environment.

Table 18.1 Types of Mutation

Mutation

NO MUTATION

 

POINT MUTATION,
Base substitution

‘Substitution of one

: or afew bases

Example result

Normal B protein is
produced by the
Beene.

B protein is inactive
because changed
amino acid disrupts
function.

Insertion B protein is inactive
(= Addition of because inserted
one ora material disrupts
few bases proper shape.
Cas) C >
Deletion B protein is inactive
Tener onmore because portion of
few bases protein is missing.
CATS

CHANGES IN GENE POSITION

Transposition

B gene or B protein
may be regulated
differently because of
change in gene
position.

B gene may be
inactivated or
regulated differently in
its new location on
chromosome.

 

Changes in Gene Position

Another category of mutations affects the way the genetic
message is organized. In both bacteria and eukaryotes, indi-
vidual genes may move from one place in the genome to
another by transposition. When a particular gene moves
to a different location, its expression or the expression of
neighboring genes may be altered. In addition, large seg-
ments of chromosomes in eukaryotes may change their rel-
ative locations or undergo duplication. Such chromosomal
rearrangements often have drastic effects on the expres-
sion of the genetic message.

 

Point mutations are changes in the hereditary message
ofan organism. They may result from spontaneous
errors during DNA replication or from damage to the
DNA due to radiation or chemicals.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 363
