Changes in Gene Position

Chromosome location is an important factor in determin-
ing whether genes are transcribed. Some genes cannot be
transcribed if they are adjacent to a tightly coiled region of
the chromosome, even though the same gene can be tran-
scribed normally in any other location. Transcription of
many chromosomal regions appears to be regulated in this
manner; the binding of specific proteins regulates the de-
gree of coiling in local regions of the chromosome, deter-
mining the accessibility RNA polymerase has to genes lo-
cated within those regions.

Chromosomal Rearrangements

Chromosomes undergo several different kinds of gross
physical alterations that have significant effects on the loca-
tions of their genes. The two most important are translo-
cations, in which a segment of one chromosome becomes
part of another chromosome, and inversions, in which the
orientation of a portion of a chromosome is reversed.
Translocations often have significant effects on gene ex-
pression. Inversions, on the other hand, usually do not alter
gene expression, but they are nonetheless important. Re-
combination within a region that is inverted on one homo-
logue but not the other (figure 18.7) leads to serious prob-
lems: none of the gametes that contain chromatids
produced following such a crossover event will have a com-
plete set of genes.

Other chromosomal alterations change the number of
gene copies an individual possesses. Particular genes or seg-
ments of chromosomes may be deleted or duplicated,
whole chromosomes may be lost or gained (aneuploidy), and
entire sets of chromosomes may be added (polyploidy). Most
deletions are harmful because they halve the number of
gene copies within a diploid genome and thus seriously af-
fect the level of transcription. Duplications cause gene im-
balance and are also usually harmful.

  

Insertional Inactivation

Many small segments of DNA are capable of moving
from one location to another in the genome, using an en-
zyme to cut and paste themselves into new genetic neigh-
borhoods. We call these mobile bits of DNA transpos-
able elements, or transposons. Transposons select their
new locations at random, and are as likely to enter one
segment of a chromosome as another. Inevitably, some
transposons end up inserted into genes, and this almost
always inactivates the gene. The encoded protein now
has a large meaningless chunk inserted within it, disrupt-
ing its structure. This form of mutation, called inser-
tional inactivation, is common in nature. Indeed, it
seems to be one of the most significant causes of muta-
tion. The original white-eye mutant of Drosophila discov-
ered by Morgan (see chapter 13) is the result of a trans-
position event, a transposon nested within a gene
encoding a pigment-producing enzyme.

As you might expect, a variety of human gene disorders
are the result of transposition. The human transposon
called Alu, for example, is responsible for an X-linked he-
mophilia, inserting into clotting factor IX and placing a
premature stop codon there. It also causes inherited high
levels of cholesterol (hypercholesterolemia), Alu elements
inserting into the gene encoding the low density lipopro-
tein (LDL) receptor. In one very interesting case, a
Drosophila transposon called Mariner proves responsible for
a rare human neurological disorder called Charcot-Marie-
Tooth disease, in which the muscles and nerves of the legs
and feet gradually wither away. The Mariner transposon is
inserted into a key gene called CMT on chromosome 17,
creating a weak site where the chromosome can break. No
one knows how the Drosophila transposon got into the
human genome.

 

Many mutations result from changes in gene location or
from insertional inactivation.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A Inverted SE A

Ul segment

© & c

D

E

F D

6 7 E

H FR

wW, oo 5 an
FIGURE 18.7

The consequence of inversion. (1) When a segment of a chromosome is inverted, (2) it can pair in meiosis only by forming an internal
loop. (3) Any crossing over that occurs within the inverted segment during meiosis will result in nonviable gametes; some genes are lost
from each chromosome, while others are duplicated (4 and 5). For clarity, only two strands are shown, although crossing over occurs in the
four-strand stage. The pairing that occurs between inverted segments is sometimes visible under the microscope as a characteristic loop

(inset).

366 = =PartV_ Molecular Genetics
