Cancer and the Cell Cycle

An important technique used to study tumors is called
transfection. In this procedure, the nuclear DNA from
tumor cells is isolated and cleaved into random fragments.
Each fragment is then tested individually for its ability to
induce cancer in the cells that assimilate it.

Using transfection, researchers have discovered that
most human tumors appear to result from the mutation of
genes that regulate the cell cycle. Sometimes the mutation
of only one or two gene is all that is needed to transform
normally dividing cells into cancerous cells in tissue culture

(table 18.4).

Point Mutations Can Lead to Cancer

The difference between a normal gene encoding a protein
that regulates the cell cycle and a cancer-inducing version
can be a single point mutation in the DNA. In one case of
ras-induced bladder cancer, for example, a single DNA
base change from guanine to thymine converts a glycine
in the normal sas protein into a valine in the cancer-caus-
ing version. Several other ras-induced human carcinomas
have been shown to also involve single nucleotide substi-
tutions.

Telomerase and Cancer

Telomeres are short sequences of nucleotides repeated
thousands of times on the ends of chromosomes. Because
DNA polymerase is unable to copy chromosomes all the
way to the tip (there is no place for the primer necessary to
copy the last Okazaki fragment), telomeric segments are
lost every time a cell divides.

In healthy cells a tumor suppressor inhibits production
of a special enzyme called telomerase that adds the lost
telomere material back to the tip. Without this enzyme, a
cell’s chromosomes lose material from their telomeres with
each replication. Every time a chromosome is copied as the
cell prepares to divide, more of the tip is lost. After some
30 divisions, so much is lost that copying is no longer pos-
sible. Cells in the tissues of an adult human have typically
undergone 25 or more divisions. Cancer can’t get very far
with only the 5 remaining cell divisions. Were cancer to
start, it would grind to a halt after only a few divisions for
lack of telomere.

 

 

Thus, we see that the cell’s inhibition of telomerase in
somatic cells is a very effective natural brake on the cancer
process. Any mutation that destroys the telomerase in-
hibitor releases that brake, making cancer possible. Thus,
when researchers looked for telomerase in human ovarian
tumor cells, they found it. These cells contained muta-
tions that had inactivated the cell control that blocks the
transcription of the telomerase gene. Telomerase pro-
duced in these cells reversed normal telomere shortening,
allowing the cells to proliferate and gain the immortality
of cancer cells.

372. PartV_ Molecular Genetics

Growth-factor receptors: Growth-factors:

PDGF receptor PDGF

   

G proteins:

ree Membrane/cytoskeleton-

protein kinases:

Cytoplasmic tyrosine- ro

specific protein kinases: Cytoplasmic

N-ras serine/threonine-specific
protein kinases:

raf

     
 
 
 

Nuclear Cytoplasmic steroid-type
proteins: growth-factor receptors:
myc RET
bel
MDM

FIGURE 18.13

The main classes of oncogenes. Before they are altered by
mutation to their cancer-causing condition, oncogenes are called
proto-oncogenes (that is, genes able to become oncogenes).
Illustrated here are the principal classes of proto-oncogenes, with
some typical representatives indicated.

Mutations in Proto-Oncogenes: Accelerating the
Cell Cycle

Most cancers are the direct result of mutations in growth-
regulating genes. There are two general classes of cancer-
inducing mutations: mutations of proto-oncogenes and
mutations of tumor-suppressor genes.

Genes known as proto-oncogenes encode proteins
that stimulate cell division. Mutations that overactivate
these stimulatory proteins cause the cells that contain
them to proliferate excessively. Mutated proto-oncogenes
become cancer-causing genes called oncogenes (Greek
onco-, “tumor”) (figure 18.13). Often the induction of
these cancers involves changes in the activity of intracel-
lular signalling molecules associated with receptors on
the surface of the plasma membrane. In a normal cell, the
signalling pathways activated by these receptors trigger
passage of the G; checkpoint of cell proliferation (see fig-
ure 11.17).

The mutated alleles of these oncogenes are genetically
dominant. Among the most widely studied are myc and ras.
Expression of myc stimulates the production of cyclins and
cyclin-dependent protein kinases (Cdks), key elements in
regulating the checkpoints of cell division.
