Gene Transfer by Conjugation

One of the startling discoveries Lederberg and Tatum
made was that plasmids can pass from one bacterium to an-
other. The plasmid they studied was part of the genome of
Escherichia coli. Tt was given the name F for fertility factor
because only cells which had that plasmid integrated into
their DNA could act as plasmid donors. These cells are
called Hfr cells (for “high-frequency recombination”). The
F plasmid contains a DNA replication origin and several
genes that promote its transfer to other cells. These genes
encode protein subunits that assemble on the surface of the
bacterial cell, forming a hollow tube called a pilus.

When the pilus of one cell (F*) contacts the surface of
another cell that lacks a pilus, and therefore does not con-
tain an F plasmid (F>), the pilus draws the two cells close
together so that DNA can be exchanged (figure 18.25).
First, the F plasmid binds to a site on the interior of the F*
cell just beneath the pilus. Then, by a process called
rolling-circle replication, the F plasmid begins to copy its
DNA at the binding point. As it is replicated, the single-
stranded copy of the plasmid passes into the other cell.
There a complementary strand is added, creating a new,
stable F plasmid (figure 18.26). In this way, genes are
passed from one bacterium to another. This transfer of
genes between bacteria is called conjugation.

In an Hfr cell, with the F plasmid integrated into the
main bacterial genome rather than free in the cytoplasm,
the F plasmid can still organize the transfer of genes. In
this case, the integrated F region binds beneath the pilus
and initiates the replication of the bacterial genome, transfer-
ring the newly replicated portion to the recipient cell.
Transfer proceeds as if the bacterial genome were simply a
part of the F plasmid. By studying this phenomenon, re-
searchers have been able to locate the positions of different
genes in bacterial genomes (figure 18.27).

Fe F Conjugation
(donor cell) (recipient cell) bridge

 

 

FIGURE 18.25

Contact by a pilus. The pilus of an F* cell connects to an F- cell
and draws the two cells close together so that DNA transfer can
occur.

Gene Transfer by Transposition

Like plasmids, transposons (figure 18.28) move from one
genomic location to another. After spending many genera-
tions in one position, a transposon may abruptly move to a
new position in the genome, carrying various genes along
with it. Transposons encode an enzyme called trans-
posase, that inserts the transposon into the genome (figure
18.29). Because this enzyme usually does not recognize any
particular sequence on the genome, transposons appear to
move to random destinations.

The movement of any given transposon is relatively
rare: it may occur perhaps once in 100,000 cell generations.
Although low, this rate is still about 10 times as frequent as

 

Bacterial
chromosome

F Plasmid

FIGURE 18.26

Gene transfer between bacteria. Donor cells (F*) contain an F plasmid that recipient cells (F-) lack. The F plasmid replicates itself and
transfers the copy across a conjugation bridge. The remaining strand of the plasmid serves as a template to build a replacement. When the
single strand enters the recipient cell, it serves as a template to assemble a double-stranded plasmid. When the process is complete, both
cells contain a complete copy of the plasmid.

382  PartV Molecular Genetics
