Gene Transfer Excision

Genes are not fixed in their locations on
chromosomes or the circular DNA mole-
cules of bacteria; they can move around.
Some genes move because they are part of
small, circular, extrachromosomal DNA
segments called plasmids. Plasmids enter
and leave the main genome at specific places Vv
where a nucleotide sequence matches one

present on the plasmid. Plasmids occur pri- 2
marily in bacteria, in which the main ge-

nomic DNA can interact readily with other

DNA fragments. About 5% of the DNA

that occurs in a bacterium is plasmid DNA.

Some plasmids are very small, containing

only one or a few genes, while others are Vv
quite complex and contain many genes.
Other genes move within transposons,
which jump from one genomic position to
another at random in both bacteria and eu-
karyotes.

Gene transfer by plasmid movement was
discovered by Joshua Lederberg and Edward
Tatum in 1947. Three years later, trans-
posons were discovered by Barbara McClin-
tock. However, her work implied that the
position of genes in a genome need not be

3

constant. Researchers accustomed to viewing
genes as fixed entities, like beads on a string,
did not readily accept the idea of trans-
posons. Therefore, while Lederberg and
Tatum were awarded a Nobel Prize for their
discovery in 1958, McClintock did not re-
ceive the same recognition for hers until

1983 (figure 18.23).

genome.

Plasmid Creation

To understand how plasmids arise, consider a hypotheti-
cal stretch of bacterial DNA that contains two copies of
the same nucleotide sequence. It is possible for the two
copies to base-pair with each other and create a transient
“loop,” or double duplex. All cells have recombination
enzymes that can cause such double duplexes to undergo
a reciprocal exchange, in which they exchange strands.
As a result of the exchange, the loop is freed from the
rest of the DNA molecule and becomes a plasmid (figure
18.24, steps 1-3). Any genes between the duplicated se-
quences (such as gene A in figure 18.24) are transferred
to the plasmid.

Once a plasmid has been created by reciprocal exchange,
DNA polymerase will replicate it if it contains a replication
origin, often without the controls that restrict the main
genome to one replication per cell division. Consequently,
some plasmids may be present in multiple copies, others in
just a few copies, in a given cell.

a chromosome
Dic DCB
———=== 1

Excision

FIGURE 18.24

Integration and excision of a plasmid. Because the ends of the two sequences in
the bacterial genome are the same (D’, C’, B’, and D, C, B), it is possible for the two
ends to pair. Steps 1-3 show the sequence of events if the strands exchange during
the pairing. The result is excision of the loop and a free circle of DNA—a plasmid.
Steps 4-6 show the sequence when a plasmid integrates itself into a bacterial

Bacterial Integration

B’ A
6

a

Homologous
pairing

Integration

a

Homologous
pairing

 

 

Plasmid

Integration

A plasmid created by recombination can reenter the main
genome the same way it left. Sometimes the region of the
plasmid DNA that was involved in the original exchange,
called the recognition site, aligns with a matching se-
quence on the main genome. If a recombination event oc-
curs anywhere in the region of alignment, the plasmid will
integrate into the genome (figure 18.24, steps 4-6). Inte-
gration can occur wherever any shared sequences exist, so
plasmids may be integrated into the main genome at posi-
tions other than the one from which they arose. If a plas-
mid is integrated at a new position, it transfers its genes to
that new position.

 

Transposons and plasmids transfer genes to new
locations on chromosomes. Plasmids can arise from and
integrate back into a genome wherever DNA sequences
in the genome and in the plasmid match.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 381
