18.3

An Overview of Recombination

Mutation is a change in the content of an organism’s genetic
message, but it is not the only source of genetic diversity.
Diversity is also generated when existing elements of the
genetic message move around within the genome. As an
analogy, consider the pages of this book. A point mutation
would correspond to a change in one or more of the letters
on the pages. For example, “. . . in one or more of the let-
ters of the pages” is a mutation of the previous sentence, in
which an “n” is changed to an “f.” A significant alteration is
also achieved, however, when we move the position of
words, as in“. . . in one or more of the pages on the let-
ters.” The change alters (and destroys) the meaning of the
sentence by exchanging the position of the words “letters”
and “pages.” This second kind of change, which represents
an alteration in the genomic /ocation of a gene or a fragment
of a gene, demonstrates genetic recombination.

Gene Transfer

Viewed broadly, genetic recombination can occur by two
mechanisms (table 18.5). In gene transfer, one chromo-
some or genome donates a segment to another chromo-
some or genome. The transfer of genes from the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) to a human chromosome is
an example of gene transfer. Because gene transfer occurs
in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, it is thought to be the
more primitive of the two mechanisms.

Reciprocal Recombination

Reciprocal recombination is when
two chromosomes trade segments. It is
exemplified by the crossing over that
occurs between homologous chromo-

Class Occurrence

Recombination alters gene location.

 

FIGURE 18.23

A Nobel Prize for discovering gene transfer by transposition.
Barbara McClintock receiving her Nobel Prize in 1983.

Table 18.5 Classes of Genetic Recombination

 

somes during meiosis. Independent as-
sortment during meiosis is another
form of reciprocal recombination. Dis-
cussed in chapters 12 and 13, it is re-
sponsible for the 9:3:3:1 ratio of pheno-
types in a dihybrid cross and occurs
only in eukaryotes.

Conjugation

Transposition

Crossing over

Genetic recombination is a change
in the genomic association among
genes. It often involves a change in
the position of a gene or portion of
a gene. Recombination of this sort
may result from one-way gene
transfer or reciprocal gene
exchange.

Gene conversion

380 Part V Molecular Genetics

GENE TRANSFERS

Unequal crossing over

Independent assortment

Occurs predominantly but not exclusively in bacteria
and is targeted to specific locations in the genome
Common in both bacteria and eukaryotes; genes move
to new genomic locations, apparently at random

RECIPROCAL RECOMBINATIONS,

Requires the pairing of homologous chromosomes and
may occur anywhere along their length

‘The result of crossing over between mismatched
segments; leads to gene duplication and deletion
Occurs when homologous chromosomes pair and one is
“corrected” to resemble the other

Haploid cells produced by meiosis contain only one

randomly selected member of each pair of homologous
chromosomes
