get repaired in a reasonable time, p53 pulls the plug, trigger-
ing events that kill the cell. In this way, mutations such as
those that cause cancer are either repaired or the cells con-
taining them eliminated. If p53 is itself destroyed by muta-
tion, future damage accumulates unrepaired. Among this
damage are mutations that lead to cancer. Fifty percent of all
cancers have a disabled p53. Fully 70 to 80% of lung cancers
have a mutant inactive p53—the chemical benzo[a]pyrene in
cigarette smoke is a potent mutagen of p53.

‘A promising new therapy using adenovirus (responsible
for mild colds) is being targeted at cancers with a mutant
p53. To grow in a host cell, adenovirus must use the prod-
uct of its gene EIB to block the host cell’s p53, thereby en-
abling replication of the adenovirus DNA. This means that
while mutant adenovirus without EJB cannot grow in
healthy cells, the mutants should be able to grow in, and
destroy, cancer cells with defective p53. When human
colon and lung cancer cells are introduced into mice lack-
ing an immune system and allowed to produce substantial
tumors, 60% of the tumors simply disappear when treated
with E1B-deficient adenovirus, and do not reappear later.
Initial clinical trials are less encouraging, as many people
possess antibodies to adenovirus.

6. Stepping on the Gas. Cell division starts with replica-
tion of the DNA. In healthy cells, another tumor suppressor
“keeps the gas tank nearly empty” for the DNA replication
process by inhibiting production of an enzyme called telom-
erase. Without this enzyme, a cell’s chromosomes lose ma-
terial from their tips, called telomeres. Every time a chro-
mosome is copied, more tip material is lost. After some
thirty divisions, so much is lost that copying is no longer
possible. Cells in the tissues of an adult human have typi-
cally undergone twenty five or more divisions. Cancer can’t
get very far with only the five remaining cell divisions, so
inhibiting telomerase is a very effective natural break on the
cancer process. It is thought that almost all cancers involve a
mutation that destroys the telomerase inhibitor, releasing
this break and making cancer possible. It should be possible
to block cancer by reapplying this inhibition. Cancer thera-
pies that inhibit telomerase are just beginning clinical trials.

Preventing the Spread of Cancer

7. Tumor Growth. Once a cell begins cancerous growth,
it forms an expanding tumor. As the tumor grows ever-
larger, it requires an increasing supply of food and nutri-
ents, obtained from the body’s blood supply. To facilitate
this necessary grocery shopping, tumors leak out sub-
stances into the surrounding tissues that encourage angio-
genesis, the formation of small blood vessels. Chemicals
that inhibit this process are called angiogenesis inhibitors.
In mice, two such angiogenesis inhibitors, angiostatin and
endostatin, caused tumors to regress to microscopic size.
This very exciting result has proven controversial, but ini-
tial human trials seem promising.

  
  
 
  
   

 

 

 

® ( -
o “Capillary
fe Nucleus network
Cell
surface \
protein »
\
Division
occurs

 

 

 

 

Cell migration

 

 

 

FIGURE 18.22

New molecular therapies for cancer target eight different
stages in the cancer process. (1) On the cell surface, a growth
factor signals the cell to divide. (2) Just inside the cell, a protein
relay switch passes on the divide signal. (3) In the cytoplasm,
enzymes amplify the signal. In the nucleus, (#) a “brake”
preventing DNA replication is released, (5) proteins check that
the replicated DNA is not damaged, and (6) other proteins rebuild
chromosome tips so DNA can replicate. (7) The new tumor
promotes angiogenesis, the formation of growth-promoting blood
vessels. (8) Some cancer cells break away from the extracellular
matrix and invade other parts of the body.

8. Metastasis. If cancerous tumors simply continued to
grow where they form, many could be surgically removed,
and far fewer would prove fatal. Unfortunately, many can-
cerous tumors eventually metastasize, individual cancer
cells breaking their moorings to the extracellular matrix
and spreading to other locations in the body where they ini-
tiate formation of secondary tumors. This process involves
metal-requiring protease enzymes that cleave the cell-ma-
trix linkage, components of the extracellular matrix such as
fibronectin that also promote the migration of several non-
cancerous cell types, and RhoC, a GTP-hydrolyzing en-
zyme that promotes cell migration by providing needed
GTP. All of these components offer promising targets for
future anti-cancer therapy.

Therapies such as those described here are only part of a
wave of potential treatments under development and clini-
cal trial. The clinical trials will take years to complete, but
in the coming decade we can expect cancer to become a
curable disease.

 

Understanding of how mutations produce cancer has
progressed to the point where promising potential
therapies can be tested.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 379
