Curing Cancer

Potential cancer therapies are being developed on many
fronts (figure 18.22). Some act to prevent the start of can-
cer within cells. Others act outside cancer cells, preventing
tumors from growing and spreading.

Preventing the Start of Cancer

Many promising cancer therapies act within potential can-
cer cells, focusing on different stages of the cell’s “Shall I
divide?” decision-making process.

1. Receiving the Signal to Divide. The first step in the
decision process is the reception of a “divide” signal, usu-
ally a small protein called a growth factor released from a
neighboring cell. The growth factor is received by a pro-
tein receptor on the cell surface. Mutations that increase
the number of receptors on the cell surface amplify the di-
vision signal and so lead to cancer. Over 20% of breast can-
cer tumors prove to overproduce a protein called HER2 as-
sociated with the receptor for epidermal growth factor.

Therapies directed at this stage of the decision process
utilize the human immune system to attack cancer cells.
Special protein molecules called “monoclonal antibodies,”
created by genetic engincering, are the therapeutic agents.
These monoclonal antibodies are designed to seek out and
stick to HER2. Like waving a red flag, the presence of the
monoclonal antibody calls down attack by the immune sys-
tem on the HER? cell. Because breast cancer cells overpro-
duce HER2, they are killed preferentially. Genentech’s re-
cently approved monoclonal antibody, called “herceptin,”
has given promising results in clinical tests. In other tests,
the monoclonal antibody C225, directed against epidermal
growth factor receptors, has succeeded in curing advanced
colon cancer. Clinical trials of C225 have begun.

2. The Relay Switch. The second step in the decision
process is the passage of the signal into the cell’s interior,
the cytoplasm. This is carried out in normal cells by a pro-
tein called Ras that acts as a relay switch. When growth
factor binds to a receptor like EGF, the adjacent Ras pro-
tein acts like it has been “goosed,” contorting into a new
shape. This new shape is chemically active, and initiates a
chain of reactions that passes the “divide” signal inward to-
ward the nucleus. Mutated forms of the Ras protein behave
like a relay switch stuck in the “ON” position, continually
instructing the cell to divide when it should not. 30% of all
cancers have a mutant form of Ras.

Therapies directed at this stage of the decision process
take advantage of the fact that normal Ras proteins are in-
active when made. Only after it has been modified by the
special enzyme farnesyl transferase does Ras protein become
able to function as a relay switch. In tests on animals, farne-
syl transferase inhibitors induce the regression of tumors
and prevent the formation of new ones.

378 = PartV Molecular Genetics

3. Amplifying the Signal. The third step in the decision
process is the amplification of the signal within the cyto-
plasm. Just as a TV signal needs to be amplified in order to
be received at a distance, so a “divide” signal must be am-
plified if it is to reach the nucleus at the interior of the cell,
a very long journey at a molecular scale. Cells use an inge-
nious trick to amplify the signal. Ras, when “ON,” activates
an enzyme, a protein kinase. This protein kinase activates
other protein kinases that in their turn activate still others.
The trick is that once a protein kinase enzyme is activated,
it goes to work like a demon, activating hoards of others
every second! And each and every one it activates behaves
the same way too, activating still more, in a cascade of ever-
widening effect. At each stage of the relay, the signal is am-
plified a thousand-fold. Mutations stimulating any of the
protein kinases can dangerously increase the already ampli-
fied signal and lead to cancer. Five percent of all cancers,
for example, have a mutant hyperactive form of the protein
kinase Sre.

Therapies directed at this stage of the decision process
employ so-called “anti-sense RNA” directed specifically
against Src or other cancer-inducing kinase mutations. The
idea is that the src gene uses a complementary copy of itself
to manufacture the Src protein (the “sense” RNA or mes-
senger RNA), and a mirror image complementary copy of
the sense RNA (“anti-sense RNA”) will stick to it, gum-
ming it up so it can’t be used to make Sre protein. The ap-
proach appears promising. In tissue culture, anti-sense
RNAs inhibit the growth of cancer cells, and some also ap-
pear to block the growth of human tumors implanted in
laboratory animals. Human clinical trials are underway.

4. Releasing the Brake. The fourth step in the decision
process is the removal of the “brake” the cell uses to re-
strain cell division. In healthy cells this brake, a tumor sup-
pressor protein called Rb, blocks the activity of a transcrip-
tion factor protein called E2F. When free, E2F enables the
cell to copy its DNA. Normal cell division is triggered to
begin when Rb is inhibited, unleashing E2F. Mutations
which destroy Rb release E2F from its control completely,
leading to ceaseless cell division. Forty percent of all can-
cers have a defective form of Rb.

Therapies directed at this stage of the decision process
are only now being attempted. They focus on drugs able to
inhibit E2F, which should halt the growth of tumors aris-
ing from inactive Rb. Experiments in mice in which the
E2F genes have been destroyed provide a model system to
study such drugs, which are being actively investigated.

 

5. Checking That Everything Is Ready. The fifth step in
the decision process is the mechanism used by the cell to en-
sure that its DNA is undamaged and ready to divide. This job
is carried out in healthy cells by the tumor-suppressor protein
p53, which inspects the integrity of the DNA. When it de-
tects damaged or foreign DNA, p53 stops cell division and
activates the cell’s DNA repair systems. If the damage doesn’t
