Amino Acids Are the Building Blocks

of Proteins

Although proteins are complex and versatile molecules, they
are all polymers of only 20 amino acids, in a specific order.
Many scientists believe amino acids were among the first
molecules formed in the early earth. It seems highly likely
that the oceans that existed early in the history of the earth
contained a wide variety of amino acids.

Amino Acid Structure

An amino acid is a molecule containing an amino group
(NID), a carboxyl group (—COOH), and a hydrogen
atom, all bonded to a central carbon atom:

R

|

H,N—C—COOH
|
H

Each amino acid has unique chemical properties deter-
mined by the nature of the side group (indicated by R) cova-
lently bonded to the central carbon atom. For example,
when the side group is -CH)OH, the amino acid (serine) is
polar, but when the side group is —CH3, the amino acid
(alanine) is nonpolar. The 20 common amino acids are
grouped into five chemical classes, based on their side
groups:

1. Nonpolar amino acids, such as leucine, often have R
groups that contain —CH) or —CH.

2. Polar uncharged amino acids, such as threonine, have
R groups that contain oxygen (or only —H).

3. Tonizable amino acids, such as glutamic acid, have R
groups that contain acids or bases.

4. Aromatic amino acids, such as phenylalanine, have R
groups that contain an organic (carbon) ring with al-
ternating single and double bonds.

5. Special-function amino acids have unique individual
properties; methionine often is the first amino acid in
a chain of amino acids, proline causes kinks in chains,
and cysteine links chains together.

Each amino acid affects the shape of a protein differently
depending on the chemical nature of its side group. Portions
of a protein chain with numerous nonpolar amino acids, for
example, tend to fold into the interior of the protein by hy-
drophobic exclusion.

Proteins Are Polymers of Amino Acids

In addition to its R group, each amino acid, when ionized,
has a positive amino (NH;*) group at one end and a nega-
tive carboxyl (COO>) group at the other end. The amino
and carboxyl groups on a pair of amino acids can undergo a
condensation reaction, losing a molecule of water and

40 Part I The Origin of Living Things

Amino acid Amino acid

® 4H ®

| Io
I ol |

H Oo H

 

H,0

Polypeptide chain
® H ®
| Io]

=o O= N=
I ol |
ie) H
FIGURE 3.5

The peptide bond. A peptide bond forms when the —NH, end
of one amino acid joins to the —COOH end of another. Because
of the partial double-bond nature of peptide bonds, the resulting
peptide chain cannot rotate freely around these bonds.

forming a covalent bond. A covalent bond that links two
amino acids is called a peptide bond (figure 3.5). The two
amino acids linked by such a bond are not free to rotate
around the N—C linkage because the peptide bond has a
partial double-bond character, unlike the N—C and C—C
bonds to the central carbon of the amino acid. The stiffness
of the peptide bond is one factor that makes it possible for
chains of amino acids to form coils and other regular
shapes.

A protein is composed of one or more long chains, or
polypeptides, composed of amino acids linked by peptide
bonds. It was not until the pioneering work of Frederick
Sanger in the early 1950s that it became clear that each
kind of protein had a specific amino acid sequence. Sanger
succeeded in determining the amino acid sequence of insu-
lin and in so doing demonstrated clearly that this protein
had a defined sequence, the same for all insulin molecules
in the solution. Although many different amino acids occur
in nature, only 20 commonly occur in proteins. Figure 3.6
illustrates these 20 “common” amino acids and their side
groups.

 

A protein is a polymer containing a combination of up
to 20 different kinds of amino acids. The amino acids
fall into five chemical classes, each with different
properties. These properties determine the nature of
the resulting protein.

 
