Mutations in Tumor-Suppressor Genes:
Inactivating the Cell’s Inhibitors of Proliferation

If the first class of cancer-inducing mutations “steps on the
accelerator” of cell division, the second class of cancer-
inducing mutations “removes the brakes.” Cell division is
normally turned off in healthy cells by proteins that pre-
vent cyclins from binding to Cdks. The genes that encode
these proteins are called tumor-suppressor genes. Their
mutant alleles are genetically recessive.

Among the most widely studied tumor-suppressor
genes are Rb, p16, p21, and p53. The unphosphorylated
product of the Rb gene ties up transcription factor E2F,
which transcribes several genes required for passage

 

Retinoblastoma protein

p16 Tumor suppressor

 

  

@&

 

 

 

 

 

 

Growth | JL Growth
blocked blocked
at Gy at Gy

 

p16 binds to Cdk, preventing
phosphorylation of Rb

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
  
  

Cell

Cell
nucleus

nucleus

     
   

     
 
 

Mitosis
inhibited

No cell division

Mitosis

initiated

 

 

 

 

NS
Cell division

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 18.14

How the tumor-suppressor genes Rb and p16 interact to
block cell division. The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) binds to the
transcription factor (E2F) that activates genes in the nucleus,
preventing this factor from initiating mitosis. The G; checkpoint is
passed when Cdk interacts with cyclins to phosphorylate Rb,
releasing E2F. The p16 tumor-suppressor protein reinforces Rb’s
inhibitory action by binding to Cdk so that Cdk is not available to
phosphorylate Rb.

374 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

through the G, checkpoint into S phase of the cell cycle
(figure 18.14). The proteins encoded by p16 and p21 re-
inforce the tumor-suppressing role of the Rb protein,
preventing its phosphorylation by binding to the appro-
priate Cdk/cyclin complex and inhibiting its kinase activ-
ity. The p53 protein senses the integrity of the DNA and
is activated if the DNA is damaged (figure 18.15). It ap-
pears to act by inducing the transcription of p21, which
binds to cyclins and Cdk and prevents them from inter-
acting. One of the reasons repeated smoking leads inex-
orably to lung cancer is that it induces p53 mutations. In-
deed, almost half of all cancers involve mutations of the
(p53 gene.

@

Damage to
DNA

}
J

>

 

 

 

 

 

2. Activates DNA
repair system

L \

1. Halts cell cycle
at G, checkpoint

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Initiates Initiates
transcription gL transcription
of p21 of repair
eo
u DNA
repair
Blocks cell cycle Prevents DNA
at G, checkpoint = replication

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 18.15

The role of tumor-suppressor p53 in regulating the cell
cycle. The p53 protein works at the G; checkpoint to check for
DNA damage. If the DNA is damaged, p53 activates the DNA.
repair system and stops the cell cycle at the G; checkpoint (before
DNA replication). This allows time for the damage to be repaired.
p53 stops the cell cycle by inducing the transcription of p21. The
p21 protein then binds to cyclins and prevents them from
complexing with Cdk.
