Smoking and Cancer

How can we prevent cancer? The most obvious strategy is
to minimize mutational insult. Anything that decreases ex-
posure to mutagens can decrease the incidence of cancer
because exposure has the potential to mutate a normal gene
into an oncogene. It is no accident that the most reliable
tests for the carcinogenicity of a substance are tests that
measure the substance’s mutagenicity.

The Association between Smoking and Cancer

About a third of all cases of cancer in the United States are
directly attributable to cigarette smoking. The association
between smoking and cancer is particularly striking for
lung cancer (figure 18.18). Studies of male smokers show a
highly positive correlation between the number of ciga-
rettes smoked per day and the incidence of lung cancer
(figure 18.19). For individuals who smoke two or more
packs a day, the risk of contracting lung cancer is at least 40
times greater than it is for nonsmokers, whose risk level ap-
proaches zero. Clearly, an effective way to avoid lung can-
cer is not to smoke. Other studies have shown a clear rela-
tionship between cigarette smoking and reduced life
expectancy (figure 18.20). Life insurance companies have
calculated that smoking a single cigarette lowers one’s life
expectancy by 10.7 minutes (longer than it takes to smoke
the cigarette)! Every pack of 20 cigarettes bears an unwrit-
ten label:

“The price of smoking this pack of cigarettes is 34 hours
of your life.”

Smoking Introduces Mutagens to the Lungs

Over half a million people died of cancer in the United
States in 1999; about 28% of them died of lung cancer.
About 140,000 persons were diagnosed with lung cancer
each year in the 1980s. Around 90% of them died within
three years after diagnosis; 96% of them were cigarette
smokers.

Smoking is a popular pastime. In the United States, 24%
of the population smokes, and U.S. smokers consumed over
450 billion cigarettes in 1999. The smoke emitted from
these cigarettes contains some 3000 chemical components,
including vinyl chloride, benzo[a]pyrenes, and nitroso-nor-
nicotine, all potent mutagens. Smoking places these muta-
gens into direct contact with the tissues of the lungs.

Mutagens in the Lung Cause Cancer

Introducing powerful mutagens to the lungs causes consid-
erable damage to the genes of the epithelial cells that line
the lungs and are directly exposed to the chemicals. Among
the genes that are mutated as a result are some whose nor-
mal function is to regulate cell proliferation. When these
genes are damaged, lung cancer results.

376 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

 

FIGURE 18.18

Photo of a cancerous human lung. The bottom half of the lung
is normal, while a cancerous tumor has completely taken over the
top half. The cancer cells will eventually break through into the
lymph and blood vessels and spread through the body.

 

400

Incidence of cancer per 100,000 men

 

10 20 30 40
Cigarettes smoked per day

 

 

 

FIGURE 18.19

Smoking causes cancer. The annual incidence of lung cancer per
100,000 men clearly increases with the number of cigarettes
smoked per day.
