Using Restriction
Endonucleases to
Manipulate Genes

{Bbq

‘Amphibian
DNA

Achimera is a mythical creature with the
head of a lion, body of a goat, and tail of
a serpent. Although no such creatures ex-
isted in nature, biologists have made
chimeras of a more modest kind through
genetic engineering.

Constructing pSC101

One of the first chimeras was manufac-
tured from a bacterial plasmid called a
resistance transfer factor by American
geneticists Stanley Cohen and Herbert
Boyer in 1973. Cohen and Boyer used a
restriction endonuclease called EcoRI,
which is obtained from Escherichia coli,
to cut the plasmid into fragments. One
fragment, 9000 nucleotides in length,
contained both the origin of replication
necessary for replicating the plasmid and
a gene that conferred resistance to the
antibiotic tetracycline (tet'). Because
both ends of this fragment were cut by
the same restriction endonuclease, they
could be ligated to form a circle, a
smaller plasmid Cohen dubbed pSC101
(figure 19.3).

plasmid

FIGURE 19.3

Using pSC101 to Make Recombinant DNA

Cohen and Boyer also used EcoRI to cleave DNA that
coded for rRNA that they had isolated from an adult am-
phibian, the African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis. They
then mixed the fragments of Xenopus DNA with pSC101
plasmids that had been “reopened” by EcoRI and allowed
bacterial cells to take up DNA from the mixture. Some of
the bacterial cells immediately became resistant to tetra-
cycline, indicating that they had incorporated the pSC101
plasmid with its antibiotic-resistance gene. Furthermore,
some of these pSC101-containing bacteria also began to
produce frog ribosomal RNA! Cohen and Boyer con-
cluded that the frog rRNA gene must have been inserted
into the pSC101 plasmids in those bacteria. In other
words, the two ends of the pSC101 plasmid, produced by
cleavage with EcoRI, had joined to the two ends of a frog
DNA fragment that contained the rRNA gene, also
cleaved with EcoRI.

The pS$C101 plasmid containing the frog rRNA gene is
a true chimera, an entirely new genome that never existed
in nature and never would have evolved by natural means.
It is a form of recombinant DNA—that is, DNA created

392 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

Recombinant

Endonuclease EcoRI

Vy

ds =

~

rRNA gene

 

Cleave amphibian
DNA with restriction
endonuclease EcoRI.

 

 

 

 

Cleave plasmid
pSC101 with
EcoRI.

 
  
     
 

 

 

 

 

a
Cleaved plasmid tet’ gene

i$ combined with
amphibian fragment.

 

 

 

One of the first genetic engineering experiments. This diagram illustrates how
Cohen and Boyer inserted an amphibian gene encoding rRNA into pSC101. The
plasmid contains a single site cleaved by the restriction endonuclease EcoRI; it also
contains fet", a gene which confers resistance to the antibiotic tetracycline. The rRNA-
encoding gene was inserted into pSC101 by cleaving the amphibian DNA and the
plasmid with EcoRI and allowing the complementary sequences to pair.

in the laboratory by joining together pieces of different
genomes to form a novel combination.

Other Vectors

The introduction of foreign DNA fragments into host cells
has become common in molecular genetics. The genome
that carries the foreign DNA into the host cell is called a
vector. Plasmids, with names like pUC18 can be induced
to make hundreds of copies of themselves and thus of the
foreign genes they contain. Much larger pieces of DNA can
be introduced using YAKs (yeast artificial chromosomes) as
a vector instead of a plasmid. Not all vectors have bacterial
targets. Animal viruses such as the human cold virus aden-
ovirus, for example, are serving as vectors to carry genes
into monkey and human cells, and animal genes have even
been introduced into plant cells.

 

One of the first recombinant genomes produced by
genetic engineering was a bacterial plasmid into which
an amphibian ribosomal RNA gene was inserted.
Viruses can also be used as vectors to insert foreign
DNA into host cells and create recombinant genomes.

 
