Table 18.6 Classes of DNA Sequences Found in Eukaryotes

Class Description

‘Transposons
Tandem clusters
Multigene families
Satellite DNA
Dispersed pseudogenes
Single-copy genes

or a few nucleotides. Each gene in the cluster is separated
from its neighbors by a short “spacer” sequence that is not
transcribed. Unlike the genes, the spacers in a cluster vary
considerably in sequence and in length.

Multigene Families

As we have learned more about the nucleotide sequences of
eukaryotic genomes, it has become apparent that many
genes exist as parts of multigene families, groups of re-
lated but distinctly different genes that often occur to-
gether in a cluster. Multigene families differ from tandem
clusters in that they contain far fewer genes (from three to
several hundred), and those genes differ much more from
one another than the genes in tandem clusters. Despite
their differences, the genes in a multigene family are clearly
related in their sequences, making it likely that they arose
from a single ancestral sequence through a series of un-
equal crossing over events. For example, studies of the evo-
lution of the hemoglobin multigene family indicate that the
ancestral globin gene is at least 800 million years old. By
the time modern fishes evolved, this ancestral gene had al-
ready duplicated, forming the o and B forms. Later, after
the evolutionary divergence of amphibians and reptiles,
these two globin gene forms moved apart on the chromo-
some; the mechanism of this movement is not known, but
it may have involved transposition. In mammals, two more
waves of duplication occurred to produce the array of 11
globin genes found in the human genome. Three of these
genes are silent, encoding nonfunctional proteins. Other
genes are expressed only during embryonic (¢ and €) or
fetal (y) development. Only four (8, B, 041, and 02) encode
the polypeptides that make up adult human hemoglobin.

Satellite DNA

Some short nucleotide sequences are repeated several mil-
lion times in eukaryotic genomes. These sequences are col-
lectively called satellite DNA and occur outside the main
body of DNA. Almost all satellite DNA is either clustered
around the centromere or located near the ends of the
chromosomes, at the telomeres. These regions of the chro-
mosomes remain highly condensed, tightly coiled, and un-

Thousands of copies scattered around the genome

Clusters containing hundreds of nearly identical copies of a gene

Clusters of a few to several hundred copies of related but distinctly different genes
Short sequences present in millions of copies per genome

Inactive members of a multigene family separated from other members of the family
Genes that exist in only one copy in the genome

transcribed throughout the cell cycle; this suggests that
satellite DNA may serve some sort of structural function,
such as initiating the pairing of homologous chromosomes
in meiosis. About 4% of the human genome consists of
satellite DNA.

Dispersed Pseudogenes

Silent copies of a gene, inactivated by mutation, are called
pseudogenes. Such mutations may affect the gene’s pro-
moter (see chapter 16), shift the reading frame of the gene,
or produce a small deletion. While some pseudogenes
occur within a multigene family cluster, others are widely
separated. The latter are called dispersed pseudogenes
because they are believed to have been dispersed from their
original position within a multigene family cluster. No one
suspected the existence of dispersed pseudogenes until a
few years ago, but they are now thought to be of major
evolutionary significance in eukaryotes.

Single-Copy Genes

Ever since eukaryotes appeared, processes such as unequal
crossing over between different copies of transposons have
repeatedly caused segments of chromosomes to duplicate,
and it appears that no portion of the genome has escaped
this phenomenon. The duplication of genes, followed by
the conversion of some of the copies into pseudogenes, has
probably been the major source of “new” genes during the
evolution of eukaryotes. As pseudogenes accumulate muta-
tional changes, a fortuitous combination of changes may
eventually result in an active gene encoding a protein with
different properties. When that new gene first arises, it is a
single-copy gene, but in time it, too, will be duplicated.
Thus, a single-copy gene is but one stage in the cycle of
duplication and divergence that has characterized the evo-
lution of the eukaryotic genome.

 

Gene sequences in eukaryotes vary greatly in copy
number, some occurring many thousands of times,
others only once. Many protein-encoding eukaryotic
genes occur in several nonidentical copies, some of
them not transcribed.

 

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 387
