19.1

Restriction Endonucleases

In 1980, geneticists used the relatively new technique of
gene splicing, which we will describe in this chapter, to
introduce the human gene that encodes interferon into
a bacterial cell’s genome. Interferon is a rare blood pro-
tein that increases human resistance to viral infection,
and medical scientists have been interested in its possible
usefulness in cancer therapy. This possibility was diffi-
cult to investigate before 1980, however, because purifi-
cation of the large amounts of interferon required for
clinical testing would have been prohibitively expensive,
given interferon’s scarcity in the blood. An inexpensive
way to produce interferon was needed, and introducing
the gene responsible for its production into a bacterial
cell made that possible. The cell that had acquired the
human interferon gene proceeded to produce interferon
at a rapid rate, and to grow and divide. Soon there were
millions of interferon-producing bacteria in the culture,
all of them descendants of the cell that had originally re-
ceived the human interferon gene.

The Advent of Genetic Engineering

This procedure of producing a line of genetically identical
cells from a single altered cell, called cloning, made every
cell in the culture a miniature factory for producing inter-
feron. The human insulin gene has also been cloned in bac-
teria, and now large amounts of insulin, a hormone essen-
tial for treating some forms of diabetes, can be
manufactured at relatively little expense. Beyond these clin-
ical applications, cloning and related molecular techniques
are used to obtain basic information about how genes are
put together and regulated. The interferon experiment and
others like it marked the beginning of a new genetics, ge-
netic engineering.

The essence of genetic engineering is the ability to cut
DNA into recognizable pieces and rearrange those pieces
in different ways. In the interferon experiment, a piece of
DNA carrying the interferon gene was inserted into a plas-
mid, which then carried the gene into a bacterial cell. Most
other genetic engineering approaches have used the same
general strategy, bringing the gene of interest into the tar-
get cell by first incorporating it into a plasmid or an infec-
tive virus. To make these experiments work, one must be
able to cut the source DNA (human DNA in the interferon
experiment, for example) and the plasmid DNA in such a
way that the desired fragment of source DNA can be
spliced permanently into the plasmid. This cutting is per-
formed by enzymes that recognize and cleave specific se-

390 = Part VV Molecular Genetics

The ability to manipulate DNA has led to a new genetics.

quences of nucleotides in DNA. These enzymes are the
basic tools of genetic engineering.

Discovery of Restriction Endonucleases

Scientific discoveries often have their origins in seemingly
unimportant observations that receive little attention by re-
searchers before their general significance is appreciated. In
the case of genetic engineering, the original observation
was that bacteria use enzymes to defend themselves against
viruses.

Most organisms eventually evolve means of defending
themselves from predators and parasites, and bacteria are
no exception. Among the natural enemies of bacteria are
bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria and multiply
within them. At some point, they cause the bacterial cells to
burst, releasing thousands more viruses. Through natural
selection, some types of bacteria have acquired powerful
weapons against these viruses: they contain enzymes called
restriction endonucleases that fragment the viral DNA as
soon as it enters the bacterial cell. Many restriction en-
donucleases recognize specific nucleotide sequences in a
DNA strand, bind to the DNA at those sequences, and
cleave the DNA at a particular place within the recognition
sequence.

Why don’t restriction endonucleases cleave the bacter-
ial cells’ own DNA as well as that of the viruses? The an-
swer to this question is that bacteria modify their own
DNA, using other enzymes known as methylases to add
methyl (—CH3) groups to some of the nucleotides in the
bacterial DNA. When nucleotides within a restriction en-
donuclease’s recognition sequence have been methylated,
the endonuclease cannot bind to that sequence. Conse-
quently, the bacterial DNA is protected from being de-
graded at that site. Viral DNA, on the other hand, has not
been methylated and therefore is not protected from enzy-
matic cleavage.

How Restriction Endonucleases Cut DNA

The sequences recognized by restriction endonucleases are
typically four to six nucleotides long, and they are often
palindromes. This means the nucleotides at one end of the
recognition sequence are complementary to those at the
other end, so that the two strands of the DNA duplex have
the same nucleotide sequence running in opposite direc-
tions for the length of the recognition sequence. Two im-
portant consequences arise from this arrangement of
nucleotides.
