azi ton lac gal

Direction \ | | |
of
transfer 1 1 \
Omin 10 min 20min 25 min

Time elapsed from beginning of
conjugation until interruption

(a)

FIGURE 18.27

A conjugation map of the E. coli chromosome. Scientists have

been able to break the Escherichia coli conjugation bridges by

agitating the cell suspension rapidly in a blender. By agitating at

different intervals after the start of conjugation, investigators can

locate the positions of various genes along the bacterial genome. (@)

The closer the genes are to the origin of replication, the sooner one

has to turn on the blender to block their transfer.

(}) Map of the E. coli genome developed using this method.

the rate at which random mutational changes occur. Fur-
thermore, there are many transposons in most cells. Hence,
over long periods of time, transposition can have an enor-
mous evolutionary impact.

One way this impact can be felt is through mutation.
The insertion of a transposon into a gene often destroys
the gene’s function, resulting in what is termed insertional
inactivation. This phenomenon is thought to be the cause
of a significant number of the spontaneous mutations ob-
served in nature,

Transposition can also facilitate gene mobilization,
the bringing together in one place of genes that are usu-
ally located at different positions in the genome. In bacte-
ria, for example, a number of genes encode enzymes that
make the bacteria resistant to antibiotics such as peni-
cillin, and many of these genes are located on plasmids.
The simultaneous exposure of bacteria to multiple antibi-
otics, a common medical practice some years ago, favors
the persistence of plasmids that have managed to acquire
several resistance genes. Transposition can rapidly gener-
ate such composite plasmids, called resistance transfer
factors (RTFs), by moving antibiotic resistance genes
from several plasmids to one. Bacteria possessing RTFs
are thus able to survive treatment with a wide variety of
antibiotics. RTFs are thought to be responsible for much
of the recent difficulty in treating hospital-engendered
Staphylococcus aureus infections and the new drug-resistant
strains of tuberculosis.

 

 

 

Plasmids transfer copies of bacterial genes (and even
entire genomes) from one bacterium to another.
Transposition is the one-way transfer of genes to a
randomly selected location in the genome. The genes
move because they are associated with mobile genetic
elements called transposons.

 

 

FIGURE 18.28
‘Transposon. Transposons
form characteristic stem-and-
loop structures called
“lollipops” because their two
ends have the same
nucleotide sequence as
inverted repeats. These ends
pair together to form the
stem of the lollipop.

   
  
 

Transposon

>

Transposon

 

 

FIGURE 18.29

Transposition. Transposase does not recognize any particular
DNA sequence; rather, it selects one at random, moving the
transposon to a random location. Some transposons leave a copy
of themselves behind when they move.

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 383
