Trinucleotide Repeats

In 1991, a new kind of change in the genetic material was
reported, one that involved neither changes in the identity
of nucleotides (mutation) nor changes in the position of
nucleotide sequences (recombination), but rather an in-
crease in the number of copies of repeated trinucleotide se-
quences. Called trinucleotide repeats, these changes ap-
pear to be the root cause of a surprisingly large number of
inherited human disorders.

The first examples of disorders resulting from the ex-
pansion of trinucleotide repeat sequences were reported in
individuals with fragile X syndrome (the most common form
of developmental disorder) and spinal muscular atrophy. In
both disorders, genes containing runs of repeated nu-
cleotide triplets (CGG in fragile X syndrome and CAG in
spinal muscular atrophy) exhibit large increases in copy
number. In individuals with fragile X syndrome, for exam-
ple, the CGG sequence is repeated hundreds of times (fig-
ure 18.31), whereas in normal individuals it repeats only
about 30 times.

Ten additional human genes are now known to have al-
leles with expanded trinucleotide repeats (figure 18.32).
Many (but not all) of these alleles are GC-rich. A few of the
alleles appear benign, but most are associated with herita-
ble disorders, including Huntington’s disease, myotonic
dystrophy, and a variety of neurological ataxias. In each
case, the expansion transmits as a dominant trait. Often the
repeats are found within the exons of their genes, but
sometimes, as in the case of fragile X syndrome, they are
located outside the coding segment. Furthermore, although
the repeat number is stably transmitted in normal families,
it shows marked instability once it has abnormally ex-
panded. Siblings often exhibit unique repeat lengths.

As the repeat number increases, disease severity tends to
increase in step. In fragile X syndrome, the CGG triplet
number first increases from the normal stable range of 5 to
55 times (the most common allele has 29 repeats) to an un-
stable number of repeats ranging from 50 to 200, with no

CGG GAA

Repeated

trinucleotide
Fragile X syndrome Friedreich's ataxia

Fragile site 11B

Fragile XE syndrome

Condition

FIGURE 18.32

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Normal | 5-55 —_.
allele [cae repeats
oes

PrefragileX 50-200.

allele cGG repeat |

Fragile X | 200-1300

allele cGG repeats
FIGURE 18.31

CGG repeats in fragile X alleles. The CGG triplet is repeated
approximately 30 times in normal alleles. Individuals with pre-
fragile X alleles show no detectable signs of the syndrome but do
have increased numbers of CGG repeats. In fragile X alleles, the
CGG triplet repeats hundreds of times.

detectable effect. In offspring, the number increases
markedly, with copy numbers ranging from 200 to 1300,
with significant mental retardation (see figure 18.31). Simi-
larly, the normal allele for myotonic dystrophy has 5 GTC
repeats. Mildly affected individuals have about 50, and se-
verely affected individuals have up to 1000.

Trinucleotide repeats appear common in human genes,
but their function is unknown. Nor do we know the mech-
anism behind trinucleotide repeat expansion. It may in-
volve unequal crossing over, which can readily produce
copy-number expansion, or perhaps some sort of stutter in
the DNA polymerase when it encounters a run of triplets.
The fact that di- and tetranucleotide repeat expansions are
not found seems an important clue. Undoubtedly, further
examples of this remarkable class of genetic change will be
reported in the future. Considerable research is currently
focused on this extremely interesting area.

 

Many human genes contain runs of a trinucleotide
sequence. Their function is unknown, but if the copy
number expands, hereditary disorders often result.

 

CAG CTG

 

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1
Huntington's disease
Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
Machado-Joseph disease

Myotonic dystrophy

A hypothetical gene showing the locations and types of trinucleotide repeats associated with various human diseases. The CGG
repeats of fragile X syndrome, fragile XE syndrome, and fragile site 11B occur in the first exon of their respective genes. GAA repeats
characteristic of Friedreich’s ataxia exist in the first intron of its gene. The genes for five different diseases, including Huntington’s disease,
have CAG repeats within their second exons. Lastly, the myotonic dystrophy gene contains CTG repeats within the third exon.

Chapter 18 Altering the Genetic Message 385
