First, because the same recognition
sequence occurs on both strands of the
DNA duplex, the restriction endonucle-
ase can bind to and cleave both strands,
effectively cutting the DNA in half.
This ability to cut across both strands is
almost certainly the reason that restric-
tion endonucleases have evolved to rec-
ognize nucleotide sequences with
twofold rotational symmetry.

Second, because the bond cleaved by
a restriction endonuclease is typically
not positioned in the center of the
recognition sequence to which it binds,
and because the DNA strands are an-
tiparallel, the cut sites for the two
strands of a duplex are offset from each
other (figure 19.2). After cleavage, each
DNA fragment has a single-stranded
end a few nucleotides long. The single-
stranded ends of the two fragments are
complementary to each other.

Why Restriction Endonucleases
Are So Useful

There are hundreds of bacterial restric-
tion endonucleases, and each one has a
specific recognition sequence. By
chance, a particular endonuclease’s
recognition sequence is likely to occur
somewhere in any given sample of
DNA; the shorter the sequence, the
more often it will arise by chance within
a sample. Therefore, a given restriction
endonuclease can probably cut DNA
from any source into fragments. Each
fragment will have complementary
single-stranded ends characteristic of
that endonuclease. Because of their
complementarity, these single-stranded
ends can pair with each other (conse-
quently, they are sometimes called
“sticky ends”). Once their ends have
paired, two fragments can then be
joined together with the aid of the en-

zyme DNA ligase, which re-forms the phosphodiester
bonds of DNA. What makes restriction endonucleases so
valuable for genetic engineering is the fact that any two frag-
ments produced by the same restriction endonuclease can be
joined together. Fragments of elephant and ostrich DNA
cleaved by the same endonuclease can be joined to one an-
other as readily as two bacterial DNA fragments.

Restriction sites

 

 

 

 

vy iv
GAATIC GAATIC } DNA
om CTTAAG CTTAAG ) J cuplex
yN v\

 

Restriction endonuclease
cleaves the DNA.

 

 

Sticky ends (complementary
single-stranded DNA tails)

 

os

 

DNA from another source
cut with the same restriction
endonuclease is added.

 

 

 

SS

 

DNAligase
joins the strands.

 

 

 

EEC
ee in /.\.\c

Recombinant DNA molecule

FIGURE 19.2

Many restriction endonucleases produce DNA fragments with “sticky ends.” The
restriction endonuclease EcoRI always cleaves the sequence GAATTC between Gand A.
Because the same sequence occurs on both strands, both are cut. However, the two
sequences run in opposite directions on the two strands. As a result, single-stranded tails
are produced that are complementary to each other, or “sticky.”

 

Genetic engineering involves manipulating specific genes
by cutting and rearranging DNA. A restriction
endonuclease cleaves DNA at a specific site, generating in
most cases two fragments with short single-stranded ends.
Because these ends are complementary to each other, any
pair of fragments produced by the same endonuclease,
from any DNA source, can be joined together.

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 391
