18.4 Genomes are continually evolving.

Classes of Eukaryotic DNA

The two main mechanisms of genetic recombination, gene
transfer and reciprocal recombination, are directly respon-
sible for the architecture of the eukaryotic chromosome.
They determine where genes are located and how many
copies of each exist. To understand how recombination
shapes the genome, it is instructive to compare the effects
of recombination in bacteria and eukaryotes.

Comparing Bacterial and Eukaryotic DNA

Sequences

Bacterial genomes are relatively simple, containing genes
that almost always occur as single copies. Unequal crossing
over between repeated transposition elements in their cir-
cular DNA molecules tends to delete material, fostering the
maintenance of a minimum genome size (figure 18.332).
For this reason, these genomes are very tightly packed,
with few or no noncoding nucleotides. Recall the efficient
use of space in the organization of the Jac genes described
in chapter 16.

HH

Lost

©

Unequal crossing over within
a bacterial genome deletes (b)
material

(a)

FIGURE 18.33

Unequal crossing over has different consequences in bacteria
and eukaryotes. (a) Bacteria have a circular DNA molecule, and a
crossover between duplicate regions within the molecule deletes
the intervening material. (J) In eukaryotes, with two versions of
each chromosome, crossing over adds material to one
chromosome; thus, gene amplification occurs in that
chromosome.

Unequal crossing over between
chromosomes adds material to
one and subtracts it from the other

386 = PartV_ Molecular Genetics

In eukaryotes, by contrast, the introduction of pairs of
homologous chromosomes (presumably because of their
importance in repairing breaks in double-stranded DNA)
has led to a radically different situation. Unequal crossing
over between homologous chromosomes tends to promote
the duplication of material rather than its reduction (figure
18.334). Consequently, eukaryotic genomes have been in a
constant state of flux during the course of their evolution.
Multiple copies of genes have evolved, some of them subse-
quently diverging in sequence to become different genes,
which in turn have duplicated and diverged.

Six different classes of eukaryotic DNA sequences are
commonly recognized, based on the number of copies of

each (table 18.6).

Transposons

Transposons exist in multiple copies scattered about the
genome. In Drosophila, for example, more than 30 different
transposons are known, most of them present at 20 to 40
different sites throughout the genome. In all, the known
transposons of Drosophila account for perhaps 5% of its
DNA. Mammalian genomes contain fewer kinds of trans-
posons than the genomes of many other organisms, al-
though the transposons in mammals are repeated more
often. The family of human transposons called ALU ele-
ments, for example, typically occurs about 300,000 times in
each cell. Transposons are transcribed but appear to play
no functional role in the life of the cell. As noted earlier in
this chapter, many transposition events carry transposons
into the exon portions of genes, disrupting the function of
the protein specified by the gene transcript. These inser-
tional inactivations are thought to be responsible for many
naturally occurring mutations.

Tandem Clusters

A second class consists of DNA sequences that are repeated
many times, one copy following another in tandem array.
By transcribing all of the copies in these tandem clusters
simultaneously, a cell can rapidly obtain large amounts of
the product they encode. For example, the genes encoding
rRNA are present in several hundred copies in most eu-
karyotic cells. Because these clusters are active sites of
rRNA synthesis, they are readily visible in cytological
preparations, where they are called nucleolar organizer
regions. When transcription of the rRNA gene clusters
ceases during cell division, the nucleolus disappears from
view under the microscope, but it reappears when tran-
scription begins again.

The genes present in a tandem cluster are very similar in
sequence but not always identical; some may differ by one
