Gene Technology

Concept Outline

19.1 The ability to manipulate DNA has led to a new
genetics.

Restriction Endonucleases. Enzymes that cleave DNA
at specific sites allow DNA segments from different sources
to be spliced together.

Using Restriction Endonucleases to Manipulate Genes.
Fragments produced by cleaving DNA with restriction
endonucleases can be spliced into plasmids, which can be
used to insert the DNA into host cells.

19.2 Genetic engineering involves easily understood
procedures.

The Four Stages of a Genetic Engineering Experiment.
Gene engineers cut DNA into fragments that they splice
into vectors that carry the fragments into cells.

Working with Gene Clones. Gene technology is used in
a variety of procedures involving DNA manipulation.

19.3 Biotechnology is producing a scientific
revolution.

DNA Sequence Technology. ‘The complete nucleotide
sequence of the genomes of many organisms are now
known. The unique DNA of every individual can be used to
identify sperm, blood, or other tissues.

Biochips. Biochips are squares of glass etched with DNA
strands and can be used for genetic screening.

Medical Applications. Many drugs and vaccines are now
produced with gene technology.

Agricultural Applications. Gene engineers have
developed crops resistant to pesticides and pests, as well as
commercially superior animals.

Cloning. Recent experiments show it is possible to clone
agricultural animals, a result with many implications for
both agriculture and society.

Stem Cells. Both embryonic stem cells and tissue-
specific stem cells can potentially be used to repair or
replace damaged tissue.

Ethics and Regulation. Genetic engineering raises
important questions about danger and privacy.

 

FIGURE 19.1

A famous plasmid. The circular molecule in this electron
micrograph is pSC101, the first plasmid used successfully to clone
a vertebrate gene. Its name comes from the fact that it was the
one-hundred-and-first plasmid isolated by Stanley Cohen.

Oz the past decades, the development of new and
powerful techniques for studying and manipulating
DNA has revolutionized genetics (figure 19.1). These tech-
niques have allowed biologists to intervene directly in the
genetic fate of organisms for the first time. In this chapter,
we will explore these technologies and consider how they
apply to specific problems of great practical importance.
Few areas of biology will have as great an impact on our fu-
ture lives.

389
