Reciprocal Recombination

In the second major mechanism for producing genetic re-
combination, reciprocal recombination, two homologous
chromosomes exchange all or part of themselves during the
process of meiosis.

Crossing Over

As we saw in chapter 12, crossing over occurs in the first
prophase of meiosis, when two homologous chromosomes
line up side by side within the synaptonemal complex. At
this point, the homologues exchange DNA strands at one
or more locations. This exchange of strands can produce
chromosomes with new combinations of alleles.

Imagine, for example, that a giraffe has genes encoding
neck length and leg length at two different loci on one of
its chromosomes. Imagine further that a recessive mutation
occurs at the neck length locus, leading after several rounds
of independent assortment to some individuals that are ho-
mozygous for a variant “long-neck” allele. Similarly, a re-
cessive mutation at the leg length locus leads to homozy-
gous “long-leg” individuals.

It is very unlikely that these two mutations would arise
at the same time in the same individual because the prob-
ability of two independent events occurring together is
the product of their individual probabilities. If the spon-
taneous occurrence of both mutations in a single individ-
ual were the only way to produce a giraffe with both a
long neck and long legs, it would be extremely unlikely
that such an individual would ever occur. Because of re-

 

 

combination, however, a crossover in the interval be-
tween the two genes could in one meiosis produce a
chromosome bearing both variant alleles. This ability to
reshuffle gene combinations rapidly is what makes re-
combination so important to the production of natural
variation.

Unequal Crossing Over

Reciprocal recombination can occur in any region along
two homologous chromosomes with sequences similar
enough to permit close pairing. Mistakes in pairing occa-
sionally happen when several copies of a sequence exist in
different locations on a chromosome. In such cases, one
copy of a sequence may line up with one of the duplicate
copies instead of with its homologous copy. Such misalign-
ment causes slipped mispairing, which, as we discussed ear-
lier, can lead to small deletions and frame-shift mutations.
If a crossover occurs in the pairing region, it will result in
unequal crossing over because the two homologues will ex-
change segments of unequal length.

In unequal crossing over, one chromosome gains extra
copies of the multicopy sequences, while the other chro-
mosome loses them (figure 18.30). This process can gener-

384 = PartV Molecular Genetics

 

16 Gene copies

 

nn ss

27 Gene copies

 

bD)_

FIGURE 18.30

Unequal crossing over. When a repeated sequence pairs out of
register, a crossover within the region will produce one
chromosome with fewer gene copies and one with more. Much of
the gene duplication that has occurred in eukaryotic evolution
may well be the result of unequal crossing over.

5 Gene copies

ate a chromosome with hundreds of copies of a particular
gene, lined up side by side in tandem array.

Because the genomes of most eukaryotes possess mul-
tiple copies of transposons scattered throughout the
chromosomes, unequal crossing over between copies of
transposons located in different positions has had a pro-
found influence on gene organization in eukaryotes. As
we shall see later, most of the genes of eukaryotes appear
to have been duplicated one or more times during their
evolution.

Gene Conversion

Because the two homologues that pair within a synaptone-
mal complex are not identical, some nucleotides in one ho-
mologue are not complementary to their counterpart in the
other homologue with which it is paired. These occasional
nonmatching pairs of nucleotides are called mismatch
pairs.

As you might expect, the cell’s error-correcting machin-
ery is able to detect mismatch pairs. If a mismatch is de-
tected during meiosis, the enzymes that “proofread” new
DNA strands during DNA replication correct it. The mis-
matched nucleotide in one of the homologues is excised
and replaced with a nucleotide complementary to the one
in the other homologue. Its base-pairing partner in the first
homologue is then replaced, producing two chromosomes
with the same sequence. This error correction causes one
of the mismatched sequences to convert into the other, a
process called gene conversion.

 

  

 

Unequal crossing over is a crossover between
chromosomal regions that are similar in nucleotide
sequence but are not homologous. Gene conversion is
the alteration of one homologue by the cell’s error-
detection and repair system to make it resemble the
other homologue.

 
