A Protein’s Function Depends

on the Shape of the Molecule

The shape of a protein is very important because it
determines the protein’s function. If we picture a
polypeptide as a long strand similar to a reed, a pro-
tein might be the basket woven from it.

Overview of Protein Structure

Proteins consist of long amino acid chains folded
into complex shapes. What do we know about the
shape of these proteins? One way to study the
shape of something as small as a protein is to look
at it with very short wavelength energy—with X
rays. X-ray diffraction is a painstaking procedure
that allows the investigator to build up a three-
dimensional picture of the position of each atom.
The first protein to be analyzed in this way was
myoglobin, soon followed by the related protein
hemoglobin. As more and more proteins were add-
ed to the list, a general principle became evident:
in every protein studied, essentially all the internal
amino acids are nonpolar ones, amino acids such as
leucine, valine, and phenylalanine. Water’s tenden-
cy to hydrophobically exclude nonpolar molecules
literally shoves the nonpolar portions of the amino
acid chain into the protein’s interior. This posi-
tions the nonpolar amino acids in close contact
with one another, leaving little empty space inside.
Polar and charged amino acids are restricted to the
surface of the protein except for the few that play
key functional roles.

Levels of Protein Structure

The structure of proteins is traditionally discussed
in terms of four levels of structure, as primary, sec-
ondary, tertiary, and quaternary (figure 3.7). Because
of progress in our knowledge of protein structure,
two additional levels of structure are increasingly
distinguished by molecular biologists: motifs and do-
mains. Because these latter two elements play im-
portant roles in coming chapters, we introduce
them here.

Primary Structure. The specific amino acid se-
quence of a protein is its primary structure. This
sequence is determined by the nucleotide se-
quence of the gene that encodes the protein. Be-
cause the R groups that distinguish the various
amino acids play no role in the peptide backbone
of proteins, a protein can consist of any sequence
of amino acids. Thus, a protein containing 100
amino acids could form any of 20! different ami-
no acid sequences (that’s the same as 10139, or 1

42 Part The Origin of Living Things

Primary
‘structure

 

‘structure

  

Tertiary =
‘structure

(c)

Quaternary
‘structure

(d)

 

FIGURE 3.7

Levels of protein structure. The amino acid sequence of a protein is called
its (@) primary structure. Hydrogen bonds form between nearby amino acids,
producing (J) fold-backs called beta-pleated sheets and coils called alpha
helices. These fold-backs and coils constitute the protein’s secondary
structure. A globular protein folds up on itself further to assume a three-
dimensional (¢) tertiary structure. Many proteins aggregate with other
polypeptide chains in clusters; this clustering is called the (@) quaternary
structure of the protein.
