Identifying DNA: Southern Blotting

Once a gene has been cloned, it may be used as a probe to
identify the same or a similar gene in another sample (fig-
ure 19.9). In this procedure, called a Southern blot, DNA
from the sample is cleaved into restriction fragments with a
restriction endonuclease, and the fragments are spread
apart by gel electrophoresis. The double-stranded helix of
each DNA fragment is then denatured into single strands
by making the pH of the gel basic, and the gel is “blotted”

Test nucleic

   
    

Radioactively
labeled markers
with specific
sizes

| Buffer
Electrophoretic ———

gel |
4

mm  sisaioydouoay

 

1. Electrophoresis is performed, using
radioactively labeled markers as a
size guide in the first lane.

 

 

 

 

 

with a sheet of nitrocellulose, transferring some of the
DNA strands to the sheet. Next, a probe consisting of puri-
fied, single-stranded DNA corresponding to a specific gene
(or mRNA transcribed from that gene) is poured over the
sheet. Any fragment that has a nucleotide sequence com-
plementary to the probe’s sequence will hybridize (base-
pair) with the probe. If the probe has been labeled with *°P,
it will be radioactive, and the sheet will show a band of ra-
dioactivity where the probe hybridized with the comple-
mentary fragment.

Stack of paper towels

   

Nitrocellulose paper

Sponge

 

 

2. The gel is covered with a sheet of nitrocellulose and
placed in a tray of buffer on top of a sponge. Alkaline
chemicals in the buffer denature the DNA into single
strands. The buffer wicks its way up through the gel
and nitrocellulose into a stack of paper towels placed
on top of the nitrocellulose.

 

 

Sealed container
= 7
= Film
* Radioactively
Nitrocellulose paper now e, mY labeled nucleic naa
contains nucleic acid "print" se acids
: | _

 

oer
Gel. nit

   
 

—_— ___ _

  

Size “T
markers

Hybridized ‘ii
nucleic acids

|
-_ |

 

 

3. Pattern on gel is copied faithfully,
or “blotted”, onto the nitrocellulose.

 

 

 

 

4, Blotted nitocellulose is incubated
with radioactively labeled nucleic
acids, and then rinsed.

5. Photographic film is laid over the paper and
is exposed only in areas that contain
radioactivity (autoradiography). Nitrocellulose

 

 

FIGURE 19.9

is examined for radioactive bands, indicating
hybridization of the original nucleic acids with
the radioactively labeled ones.

 

 

 

‘The Southern blot procedure. E. M. Southern developed this procedure in 1975 to enable DNA fragments of interest to be visualized in
a complex sample containing many other fragments of similar size. The DNA is separated on a gel, then transferred (“blotted”) onto a
solid support medium such as nitrocellulose paper or a nylon membrane. It is then incubated with a radioactive single-strand copy of the
gene of interest, which hybridizes to the blot at the location(s) where there is a fragment with a complementary sequence. The positions of

radioactive bands on the blot identify the fragments of interest.

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 399
