Stage 4: Screening

The clones containing a specific DNA fragment of interest,
often a fragment that includes a particular gene, are identi-
fied from the clone library. Let’s examine this stage in
more detail, as it is generally the most challenging in any
genetic engineering experiment.

4-1: The Preliminary Screening of Clones. Investiga-
tors initially try to eliminate from the library any clones
that do not contain vectors, as well as clones whose vectors
do not contain fragments of the source DNA. The first cat-
egory of clones can be eliminated by employing a vector
with a gene that confers resistance to a specific antibiotic,
such as tetracycline, penicillin, or ampicillin. In figure
19.6a, the gene amp" is incorporated into the plasmid and
confers resistance to the antibiotic ampicillin. When the
clones are exposed to a medium containing that antibiotic,
only clones that contain the vector will be resistant to the
antibiotic and able to grow.

lacZ’ gene (functional)

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

 

Eliminate cells
e without plasmid

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Colonies with
plasmid

One way to eliminate clones with vectors that do not
have an inserted DNA fragment is to use a vector that, in
addition to containing antibiotic resistance genes, contains
the /acZ' gene which is required to produce B-galactosidase,
an enzyme that enables the cells to metabolize the sugar,
X-gal. Metabolism of X-gal results in the formation of a
blue reaction product, so any cells whose vectors contain a
functional version of this gene will turn blue in the pres-
ence of X-gal (figure 19.6). However, if one uses a restric-
tion endonuclease whose recognition sequence lies within
the /acZ' gene, the gene will be interrupted when recombi-
nants are formed, and the cell will be unable to metabolize
X-gal. Therefore, cells with vectors that contain a fragment
of source DNA should remain colorless in the presence of
X-gal.

Any cells that are able to grow in a medium containing
the antibiotic but don’t turn blue in the medium with X-gal
must have incorporated a vector with a fragment of source
DNA. Identifying cells that have a specific fragment of the
source DNA is the next step in screening clones.

Bacterial cell that did not take up plasmid

lacZ’ gene
(nonfunctional)

Fragment of DNA

amp" gene

Gene of interest

Bacterial cell without
recombinant DNA

Colony with
recombinant
DNA

   

ri

 

 

  

 

Identify cells

recombinant DNA

without

 

 

Ampicillin in
media

    
 

(a)

Cells that did not take up the plasmid are
not resistant to ampicillin and do not form
colonies on media containing this antibiotic.

FIGURE 19.6

  

(b)

 

Cells that did not take up DNA fragments
have functional lacZ’ genes, are able to metabolize
X-gal, and tum blue on media that contain X-gal.

Stage 4-I: Using antibiotic resistance and X-gal as preliminary screens of restriction fragment clones. Bacteria are transformed
with recombinant plasmids that contain a gene (amp") that confers resistance to the antibiotic ampicillin and a gene (/acZ’) that is required
to produce B-galactosidase, the enzyme which enables the cells to metabolize the sugar X-gal. (@) Only those bacteria that have
incorporated a plasmid will be resistant to ampicillin and will grow on a medium that contains the antibiotic. () Ampicillin-resistant
bacteria will be able to metabolize X-gal if their plasmid does not contain a DNA fragment inserted in the /acZ' gene; such bacteria will
turn blue when grown on a medium containing X-gal. Bacteria with a plasmid that has a DNA fragment inserted within the /acZ' gene will
not be able to metabolize X-gal and, therefore, will remain colorless in the presence of X-gal.

396 Part V_ Molecular Genetics
