4-II: Finding the Gene of Interest. A clone library may
contain anywhere from a few dozen to many thousand indi-
vidual fragments of source DNA. Many of those fragments
will be identical, so to assemble a complete library of the
entire source genome, several hundred thousand clones
could be required. A complete Drosophila (fruit fly) library,
for example, contains more than 40,000 different clones; a
complete human library consisting of fragments 20 kilo-
bases long would require close to a million clones. To
search such an immense library for a clone that contains a
fragment corresponding to a particular gene requires inge-
nuity, but many different approaches have been successful.

The most general procedure for screening clone li-
braries to find a particular gene is hybridization (figure
19.7). In this method, the cloned genes form base-pairs
with complementary sequences on another nucleic acid.
The complementary nucleic acid is called a probe because
it is used to probe for the presence of the gene of interest.
At least part of the nucleotide sequence of the gene of in-
terest must be known to be able to construct the probe.

In this method of screening, bacterial colonies contain-
ing an inserted gene are grown on agar. Some cells are

transferred to a filter pressed onto the colonies, forming a
replica of the plate. The filter is then treated with a solu-
tion that denatures the bacterial DNA and that contains a
radioactively labeled probe. The probe hybridizes with
complementary single-stranded sequences on the bacterial
DNA.

When the filter is laid over photographic film, areas that
contain radioactivity will expose the film (autoradiography).
Only colonies which contain the gene of interest hybridize
with the radioactive probe and emit radioactivity onto the
film. The pattern on the film is then compared to the origi-
nal master plate, and the gene-containing colonies may be

identified.

 

Genetic engineering generally involves four stages:
cleaving the source DNA; making recombinants;

cloning copies of the recombinants; and screening the
cloned copies for the desired gene. Screening can be
achieved by making the desired clones resistant to
certain antibiotics and giving them other properties that
make them readily identifiable.

 

 

1. Colonies of plasmid-containing
bacteria, each from a clone from
the clone library, are grown on agar.

 

 

 

 

2. Areplica of the plate is made
by pressing filter against the
colonies. Some cells from each
colony adhere to the filter.

 

 

 

Filter

 

3. The filter is washed with a solution that denatures
the DNA and contains the radioactively labeled
probe. The probe contains nucleotide sequences
complementary to the gene of interest and binds
to cells containing the gene.

 

 

 

FIGURE 19.7

      

 

5. A comparison with the original
plate identifies the colony
containing the gene.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

—

 

4, Only those colonies containing the gene
will retain the probe and emit radioactivity
on film placed over the filter.

 

 

 

Stage 4-II: Using hybridization to identify the gene of interest. (1) Each of the colonies on these bacterial culture plates represents
millions of clones descended from a single cell. To test whether a certain gene is present in any particular clone, it is necessary to identify
colonies whose cells contain DNA that hybridizes with a probe containing DNA sequences complementary to the gene. (2) Pressing a
filter against the master plate causes some cells from each colony to adhere to the filter. (3) The filter is then washed with a solution that
denatures the DNA and contains the radioactively labeled probe. (4) Only those colonies that contain DNA that hybridizes with the probe,
and thus contain the gene of interest, will expose film in autoradiography. (5) The film is then compared to the master plate to identify the

gene-containing colony.

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 397
