Distinguishing Differences in

DNA: RFLP Analysis cutting sites.

Often a researcher wishes not to find

a specific gene, but rather to identify
eel

a particular individual using a specific
gene as a marker. One powerful way
to do this is to analyze restriction
fragment length polymorphisms,

Single base-pair

‘change
or RFLPs (figure 19.10). Point muta-
tions, sequence repetitions, and
transposons (see chapter 18) that =§ =p-==—y——-

occur within or between the restric-
tion endonuclease recognition sites
will alter the length of the DNA frag-
ments (restriction fragments) the re-
striction endonucleases produce.
DNA from different individuals

Restriction endonuclease

Sequence duplication

Larger
fragments

Smaller
fragments

==: ©

rarely has exactly the same array of SSS
restriction sites and distances be- (b) Cut DNA
: renee (a) Three different
tween sites, so the population is said DNA duplexes ) Gel electrophoresis of
to be polymorphic (having many  Nestacion fragments
forms) for their restriction fragment
FIGURE 19.10

patterns. By cutting a DNA sample
with a particular restriction endonu-
clease, separating the fragments ac-
cording to length on an elec-
trophoretic gel, and then using a
radioactive probe to identify the
fragments on the gel, one can obtain
a pattern of bands often unique for each region of DNA
analyzed. These “DNA fingerprints” are used in forensic
analysis during criminal investigations. RFLPs are also
useful as markers to identify particular groups of people
at risk for some genetic disorders.

Making an Intron-Free Copy of a Eukaryotic

Gene

Recall from chapter 15 that eukaryotic genes are encoded
in exons separated by numerous nontranslated introns.
When the gene is transcribed to produce the primary tran-
script, the introns are cut out during RNA processing to
produce the mature mRNA transcript. When transferring
eukaryotic genes into bacteria, it is desirable to transfer
DNA already processed this way, instead of the raw eu-
karyotic DNA, because bacteria lack the enzymes to carry
out the processing. To do this, genetic engineers first iso-
late from the cytoplasm the mature mRNA corresponding
to a particular gene. They then use an enzyme called re-
verse transcriptase to make a DNA version of the mature
mRNA transcript (figure 19.11). The single strand of
DNA can then serve as a template for the synthesis of a
complementary strand. In this way, one can produce a
double-stranded molecule of DNA that contains a gene
lacking introns. This molecule is called complementary
DNA, or cDNA.

400 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. (2) Three samples of DNA
differ in their restriction sites due to a single base-pair substitution in one case and a
sequence duplication in another case. (b) When the samples are cut with a restriction
endonuclease, different numbers and sizes of fragments are produced. (c) Gel electrophoresis
separates the fragments, and different banding patterns result.

Intron (noncoding region) Exon (coding region)
we
Eukaryotic DNA DS)
| Transcription
Primary RNA

 

transcript

Introns are cut out
| and coding regions are
spliced together

Mature mRNA transcript

Addition of reverse

Isolation of mRNA
| transcriptase

     

mRNA-cDNA hybrid
‘Addition of mRNA-
degrading enzymes
ss
| DNA polymerase
Double-stranded cDNA

gene without introns

FIGURE 19.11

The formation of cDNA. A mature mRNA transcript is isolated
from the cytoplasm of a cell. The enzyme reverse transcriptase is
then used to make a DNA strand complementary to the processed
mRNA. That newly made strand of DNA is the template for the
enzyme DNA polymerase, which assembles a complementary
DNA strand along it, producing cDNA, a double-stranded DNA
version of the intron-free mRNA.
