19.3 Biotechnology is producing a scientific revolution.

DNA Sequence Technology

The 1980s saw an explosion of interest in biotechnology,
the application of genetic engineering to practical human
problems. Let us examine some of the major areas where
these techniques have been put to use.

Genome Sequencing

Genetic engineering techniques are enabling us to learn a
great deal more about the human genome. Several clonal
libraries of the human genome have been assembled,
using large-size restriction fragments. Any cloned gene
can now be localized to a specific chromosomal site by
using probes to detect in situ hybridization (that is, bind-
ing between the probe and a complementary sequence on
the chromosome). Genes are now being mapped at an as-
tonishing rate: genes that contribute to dyslexia, obesity,
and cholesterol-proof blood are some of the important
ones that were mapped in 1994 and 1995 alone! With an
understanding of where specific genes are located in the
human genome and how they work, it is not difficult to
imagine a future in which virtually any genetic disease
could be treated or perhaps even cured with gene ther-
apy. As we mentioned in chapter 13, some success has al-
ready been reported in treating patients who have cystic
fibrosis with a genetically corrected version of the cystic
fibrosis gene.

An exciting scientific by-product of the human genome
project has been the complete genome sequencing of many
microorganisms with smaller genomes, on the order of a
few Mb (table 19.1). In general, about half of the genes
prove to have a known function; what the other half of the
genes are doing is a complete mystery. The first eukaryotic
genome to be sequenced in its entirety was that of brewer’s
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae; many of its approximately
6000 genes have a similar structure to some human genes.
The complete sequences of many much larger genomes
have recently been completed, including the malarial Plas-
modium parasite (30 Mb), the nematode (100 Mb), the plant
Arabidopsis (100 Mb) (figure 19.13), the fruit fly Drosophila
(120 Mb), and the mouse (300 Mb).

The international scientific community has over the last
several years mounted a major effort to sequence the entire
human genome. Because the human genome contains some
3000 Mb (million nucleotide base-pairs), this task has pre-
sented no small challenge. Rapid progress was made possi-
ble by the use of so-called shotgun cloning techniques, in
which the entire genome is first fragmented, then each of
the fragments is sequenced by automated machines, and fi-
nally computers use overlaps to order the fragments. All
but a small portion of the sequence was completed by the
beginning of the year 2000.

402 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

Table 19.1 Genome Sequencing Projects

 

Genome
Organism Size (Mb) Description
ARCHAEBACTERIA.
Methanococcus jannaschi 1.7 Extreme thermophile
EUBACTERIA
Excherichia coli 4.6 Laboratory standard
FUNGI
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 13. Baker’s yeast
PROTIST
Plasmodium 30 Malarial parasite
PLANT
Arabidopsis thaliana 100 Relative of mustard plant
ANIMAL
Caenorhabditis elegans 100 Nematode
Drosophila melanogaster 120 Fruit fly
Mus musculus 300 Mouse
Homo sapiens 3000 Human

 

 

Search | [Help |[Infornation |(Quit] Strand; Top

[Adj right cut |[Scale down [Scale up ][Suite
ERT

240 250 260
TIAAGTGAAT TTAGGT G GAC AAGACAC AAGTCTA
TIAAGTGAAT [TAGGT G GAC AAGACAC AAGICTA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 19.13

Part of the genome sequence of the plant Arabidopsis. Data
from an automated DNA-sequencing run shows the nucleotide
sequence for a small section of the Arabidopsis genome. Automated
DNA sequencing has greatly increased the speed at which
genomes can be sequenced.
