Working with Gene Clones

Once a gene has been successfully cloned, a variety of pro-
cedures are available to characterize it.

Getting Enough DNA to Work with: The
Polymerase Chain Reaction

Once a particular gene is identified within the library of
DNA fragments, the final requirement is to make multiple
copies of it. One way to do this is to insert the identified
fragment into a bacterium; after repeated cell divisions,
millions of cells will contain copies of the fragment. A far
more direct approach, however, is to use DNA polymerase
to copy the gene sequence of interest through the poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR; figure 19.8). Kary Mullis
developed PCR in 1983 while he was a staff chemist at the
Cetus Corporation; in 1993, it won him the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry. PCR can amplify specific sequences or add se-
quences (such as endonuclease recognition sequences) as
primers to cloned DNA. There are three steps in PCR:

Step 1: Denaturation. First, an excess of primer (typ-
ically a synthetic sequence of 20 to 30 nucleotides) is
mixed with the DNA fragment to be amplified. This
mixture of primer and fragment is heated to about
98° C. At this temperature, the double-stranded DNA
fragment dissociates into single strands.

Step 2: Annealing of Primers. Next, the solution is
allowed to cool to about 60°C. As it cools, the single
strands of DNA reassociate into double strands. How-
ever, because of the large excess of primer, each strand
of the fragment base-pairs with a complementary primer
flanking the region to be amplified, leaving the rest of
the fragment single-stranded.

Step 3: Primer Extension. Now a very heat-stable
type of DNA polymerase, called Taq polymerase (after
the thermophilic bacterium Thermus aquaticus, from
which Taq is extracted) is added, along with a supply of
all four nucleotides. Using the primer, the polymerase
copies the rest of the fragment as if it were replicating
DNA. When it is done, the primer has been lengthened
into a complementary copy of the entire single-stranded
fragment. Because both DNA strands are replicated,
there are now two copies of the original fragment.

Steps 1 to 3 are now repeated, and the two copies be-
come four. It is not necessary to add any more polymerase,
as the heating step does not harm this particular enzyme.
Each heating and cooling cycle, which can be as short as 1
or 2 minutes, doubles the number of DNA molecules. After
20 cycles, a single fragment produces more than one mil-
lion (2?) copies! In a few hours, 100 billion copies of the
fragment can be manufactured.

PCR, now fully automated, has revolutionized many as-
pects of science and medicine because it allows the investi-
gation of minute samples of DNA. In criminal investiga~

398 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

 

Target sequence

c Oo BB

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a
Hea L2T Lg
Primers
® Denaturation
J Cool
Cycle
1 = =]@ Annealing
of primers

 

 

 

DNA polymerase
Free nucleotides

=a
copies @ Primer
——> extension

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

J es
Ls
hz
Cycle
2 4 copies, J Cool
77 A ——
J ten
J Cool
8 copies
Cycle.
3

 

Cat =| et oJ
— | |
——== ee!
i :

FIGURE 19.8

The polymerase chain reaction. (1) Denaturation. A solution
containing primers and the DNA fragment to be amplified is
heated so that the DNA dissociates into single strands.

(2) Annealing of primers. The solution is cooled, and the primers
bind to complementary sequences on the DNA flanking the region
to be amplified. (3) Primer extension. DNA polymerase then copies
the remainder of each strand, beginning at the primer. Steps 1-3
are then repeated with the replicated strands. This process is
repeated many times, each time doubling the number of copies,
until enough copies of the DNA fragment exist for analysis.

 

 

 

 

tions, “DNA fingerprints” are prepared from the cells in a
tiny speck of dried blood or at the base of a single human
hair. Physicians can detect genetic defects in very early em-
bryos by collecting a few sloughed-off cells and amplifying
their DNA. PCR could also be used to examine the DNA
of historical figures such as Abraham Lincoln and of now-
extinct species, as long as even a minuscule amount of their
DNA remains intact.
