1.2 Scientists form generalizations from observations.

The Nature of Science

Biology is a fascinating and important subject, because it
dramatically affects our daily lives and our futures. Many
biologists are working on problems that critically affect our
lives, such as the world’s rapidly expanding population and
diseases like cancer and AIDS. The knowledge these biolo-
gists gain will be fundamental to our ability to manage the
world’s resources in a suitable manner, to prevent or cure
diseases, and to improve the quality of our lives and those
of our children and grandchildren.

Biology is one of the most successful of the “natural sci-
ences,” explaining what our world is like. To understand
biology, you must first understand the nature of science.
The basic tool a scientist uses is thought. To understand
the nature of science, it is useful to focus for a moment on
how scientists think. They reason in two ways: deductively
and inductively.

Deductive Reasoning

Deductive reasoning applies general principles to predict
specific results. Over 2200 years ago, the Greek Era-
tosthenes used deductive reasoning to accurately estimate
the circumference of the earth. At high noon on the longest
day of the year, when the sun’s rays hit the bottom of a
deep well in the city of Syene, Egypt, Eratosthenes mea-
sured the length of the shadow cast by a tall obelisk in Al-
exandria, about 800 kilometers to the north. Because he
knew the distance between the two cities and the height of
the obelisk, he was able to employ the principles of Euclid-
ean geometry to correctly deduce the circumference of the
earth (figure 1.3). This sort of analysis of specific cases us-
ing general principles is an example of deductive reasoning.
It is the reasoning of mathematics and philosophy and is
used to test the validity of general ideas in all branches of
knowledge. General principles are constructed and then
used as the basis for examining specific cases.

Inductive Reasoning

Inductive reasoning uses specific observations to construct
general scientific principles. Webster’s Dictionary defines sci-
ence as systematized knowledge derived from observation
and experiment carried on to determine the principles un-
derlying what is being studied. In other words, a scientist
determines principles from observations, discovering gen-
eral principles by careful examination of specific cases. In-
ductive reasoning first became important to science in the
1600s in Europe, when Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, and
others began to use the results of particular experiments to
infer general principles about how the world operates. If

6 PartI The Origin of Living Things

FIGURE 1.3
Deductive reasoning: How Eratosthenes estimated the cir-
cumference of the earth using deductive reasoning. 1. Ona
day when sunlight shone straight down a deep well at Syene in
Egypt, Eratosthenes measured the length of the shadow cast by a
tall obelisk in the city of Alexandria, about 800 kilometers away.
2. The shadow’s length and the obelisk’s height formed two sides
of a triangle. Using the recently developed principles of Euclidean
geometry, he calculated the angle, a, to be 7° and 12’, exactly 40f
a circle (360°). 3. If angle a = 35 0f a circle, then the distance
between the obelisk (in Alexandria) and the well (in Syene) must
equal 3; of the circumference of the earth. 4. Eratosthenes had
heard that it was a 50-day camel trip from Alexandria to Syene.
Assuming that a camel travels about 18.5 kilometers per day, he
estimated the distance between obelisk and well as 925 kilometers
(using different units of
measure, of course).

 

5. Eratosthenes thus de- Suntali pare
duced the circumference “ES y Ce

of the earth to be 50 x distance be,

925 = 46,250 sities = 809 Aen

      
   

kilometers. Modern
measurements put the
distance from the well to
the obelisk at just over
800 kilometers. Employ-
ing a distance of 800
kilometers, Era-
tosthenes’s value would
have been 50 x 800 =
40,000 kilometers. The
actual circumference is
40,075 kilometers.

 

 

 

you release an apple from your hand, what happens? The
apple falls to the ground. From a host of simple, specific
observations like this, Newton inferred a general principle:
all objects fall toward the center of the earth. What New-
ton did was construct a mental model of how the world
works, a family of general principles consistent with what
he could see and learn. Scientists do the same today. They
use specific observations to build general models, and then
test the models to see how well they work.

 

Science is a way of viewing the world that focuses on
objective information, putting that information to work
to build understanding.

 
