Biochips

A biochip, also called a gene microarray, is a square of glass
smaller than a postage stamp, covered with millions of
strands of DNA like blades of grass. Biochips were in-
vented nine years ago by gene scientist Stephen Fodor. In a
flash of insight, he saw that photolithography, the process
used to etch semiconductor circuits into silicon, could also
be used to assemble particular DNA molecules on a chip—
a biochip.

Think of the chip surface as a field of assembly sites,
much as a TV screen is a field of colored dots. Just as a
scanning beam moves over each individual TV dot instruct-
ing it to be red, green, or blue (the three components of
color), so a scanning beam moves over each biochip spot,
commanding the addition there of a base to a growing
strand of DNA. A computer, by varying the wavelength of
the scanning beam, determines which of four possible nu-
cleotides is added to the growing DNA strand anchored to
each spot. When the entire chip has been scanned, each
DNA strand has been lengthened one nucleotide unit. The
computer repeats the process, layer by layer, until each
DNA strand is an entire gene or gene fragment. One
biochip made in this way contains hundreds of thousands of
specific gene sequences.

How could you use such a biochip to delve into a per-
son’s genes? All you would have to do is to obtain a little of
the person’s DNA, say from a blood sample or even a bit of
hair. Flush fluid containing the DNA over the biochip sur-
face. Every place that the DNA has a gene matching one of
the biochip strands, it will stick to it ina way the computer
can detect.

Now here is where it gets interesting. The mad rush
to sequence the human genome is over. The gene re-
search firm Celera has recently announced it has essen-
tially completed the sequence, with over 90% of genes
done. Already the researchers are busily comparing their
consensus “reference sequence” to the DNA of individual
people, and noting any differences they detect. Called
single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs (pronounced
“snips”), these spot differences in the identity of particu-
lar nucleotides collectively record every way in which a
particular individual differs from the reference sequence.
Some SNPs cause diseases like cystic fibrosis or sickle
cell anemia. Others may give you red hair or elevated
cholesterol in your blood. As the human genome project
charges toward completion, its researchers are excitedly
assembling a huge database of SNPs. Research indicates
that SNPs can be expected to occur at a frequency of
about one per thousand nucleotides, scattered about ran-
domly over the chromosomes. Each of us thus differs
from the standard "type sequence" in several thousand
nucleotide SNPs. Everything genetic about you that is
diferent from a stranger you meet is caused by a few
thousand SNPs; otherwise you and that stranger are
identical.

404 = Part VV Molecular Genetics

How Biochips Can Be Used to Screen for Cancer

One of the biggest decisions facing an oncologist (cancer
doctor) treating a tumor is to select the proper treatment.
Most cancer cells look alike, although the tumors may in
fact be caused by quite different forms of cancer. If the on-
cologist could clearly identify the cancer, very targeted
therapies might be possible. Unable to tell the difference
for sure, however, oncologists take no chances. Tumors are
treated with therapy that attacks all cancers, usually with
severe side effects.

This year Boston researchers Todd Golub and Eric
Lander took a vital step towards treating cancer, using new
DNA technology to sniff out the differences between dif-
ferent forms of a deadly cancer of the immune system.
Golub and Lander worked with biochips.

The way to tell the difference between two kinds of can-
cer is to compare the mutations that led to the cancer in
the first place. Biologists call such gene changes mutations.
The mutations that cause many lung cancers are caused by
a tobacco-induced alteration of a single DNA nucleotide in
one gene. Such spot differences between the version of a
gene one person has and another person has, or a cancer
patient has, are examples of SNPs.

Golub and Lander obtained bone marrow cells from pa-
tients with two types of leukemia (cancer of white blood
cells), and exposed DNA from each to biochips containing
all known human genes, 6817 in all (figure 19.16). Using
high-speed computer programs, Golub and Lander exam-
ined each of the 6817 positions on the chip. The two
forms of leukemia each showed gene changes from normal,
but, importantly, the changes were different in each case!
Each had their own characteristic SNP.

Biochips thus may offer a quick and reliable way to iden-
tify any type of cancer. Just look and see what SNP is
present.

The Use of Gene Chips Will Soon
Be Widespread

Biochip technology is likely to dominate medicine in the
coming millennium, a prospect both exciting and scary. Re-
searchers have announced plans to compile a database of
hundreds of thousands of SNPs over the next two years.
Screening SNPs and comparing them to known SNP data-
bases will soon allow doctors to screen each of us for copies
of genes leading to genetic diseases. Many genetic diseases
are associated with SNPs, including cystic fibrosis and
muscular dystrophy.

Biochips Raise Critical Issues of Personal Privacy

The scary part is SNPs on chips. Researchers plan to have
identified some 300,000 different SNPs by 2001, all of
which could reside on a single biochip. When your DNA is
flushed over a SNP biochip, the sequences that light up
