DNA Fingerprinting

Figure 19.14 shows the DNA fingerprints a prosecuting
attorney presented in a rape trial in 1987. They consisted
of autoradiographs, parallel bars on X-ray film resembling
the line patterns of the universal price code found on gro-
ceries. Each bar represents the position of a DNA restric-
tion endonuclease fragment produced by techniques simi-
lar to those described in figures 19.4 and 19.10. The lane
with many bars represents a standardized control. Two
different probes were used to identify the restriction frag-
ments. A vaginal swab had been taken from the victim
within hours of her attack; from it semen was collected
and the semen DNA analyzed for its restriction endonu-
clease patterns.

Compare the restriction endonuclease patterns of the
semen to that of the suspect Andrews. You can see that the
suspect’s two patterns match that of the rapist (and are not
at all like those of the victim). Clearly the semen collected
from the rape victim and the blood sample from the sus-
pect came from the same person. The suspect was Tom-
mie Lee Andrews, and on November 6, 1987, the jury re-
turned a verdict of guilty. Andrews became the first person
in the United States to be convicted of a crime based on
DNA evidence.

Since the Andrews verdict, DNA fingerprinting has
been admitted as evidence in more than 2000 court cases
(figure 19.15). While some probes highlight
profiles shared by many people, others are
quite rare. Using several probes, identity can
be clearly established or ruled out. i

Just as fingerprinting revolutionized i
forensic evidence in the early 1900s, so DNA |
fingerprinting is revolutionizing it today. A
hair, a minute speck of blood, a drop of
semen can all serve as sources of DNA to
damn or clear a suspect. As the man who an-
alyzed Andrews’ DNA says: “It’s like leaving
your name, address, and social security num-
ber at the scene of the crime. It’s that pre-
cise.” Of course, laboratory analyses of DNA
samples must be carried out properly—
sloppy procedures could lead to a wrongful
conviction. After widely publicized instances
of questionable lab procedures, national
standards are being developed.

The genomes of several organisms have
been completely sequenced. When DNA
is digested with restriction
endonucleases, distinctive profiles on
electrophoresis gels can be used to
identify the individual that was the source
of the tissue.

 
  

Victim
Rapist’s semen

 
 

Suspect’s blood

‘
Victim

Rapist’s semen

Suspect's blood

  
  

 

FIGURE 19.14

Two of the DNA profiles that led to the conviction of
‘Tommie Lee Andrews for rape in 1987. The two DNA probes
seen here were used to characterize DNA isolated from the
victim, the semen left by the rapist, and the suspect. The dark
channels are multiband controls. There is a clear match between
the suspect’s DNA and the DNA of the rapist’s semen in these.

Heaps PREP UP

  

FIGURE 19.15

The DNA profiles of O. J. Simpson and blood samples from the murder

scene of his former wife from his highly publicized and controversial
murder trial in 1995.

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 403
