 

 
 

 

Bovine somatotropin
production

 

 

 

Escherichia coli
Plasmid _ “2p, \
_
A.
L 1. Plasmid is removed
a and cut open with
restriction endonuclease.

z~O>(

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. Bacteria producing
bovine somatotropin
are grown in
fermentation tanks.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Plasmid is reintroduced
into bacterium.

t

 

 

 

 

2. Cow somatotropin
gene is isolated
from cow cell, nest
3. Somatotropin gene is
inserted into bacterial
Gene Cow DNA
of interest
FIGURE 19.22

The production of bovine somatotropin (BST) through genetic

engineering. Although BST is functional, harmless, and sanctioned by the i

FDA, much controversy exists over whether it is actually desirable.

resentative of the very real promise of genetic engineer-
ing to help meet the challenges of the coming new
millennium.

The list of gene modifications that directly aid con-
sumers will only grow. In Holland, Dutch bioengineers an-
nounced last month that they are genetically engineering
plants to act as vaccine-producing factories! To petunias
they have added a gene for a vaccine against dog par-
vovirus, hiding the gene within the petunia genes that di-
rect nectar production. The drug is produced in the nec-
tar, collected by bees, and extracted from the honey. It is
hard to believe this isn't science fiction. Clearly, the real
promise of plant genetic engineering lies ahead, and not
very far.

Farm Animals

The gene encoding the growth hormone somatotropin
was one of the first to be cloned successfully. In 1994,
Monsanto received federal approval to make its recombi-
nant bovine somatotropin (BST) commercially available,
and dairy farmers worldwide began to add the hormone
as a supplement to their cows’ diets, increasing the ani-
mals’ milk production (figure 19.22). Genetically engi-

6. Somatotropin is
removed from
bacteria and purified.

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. Bovine somatotropin
is administered to

cow to enhance

milk production.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

neered somatotropin is also being tested to see if it in-
creases the muscle weight of cattle and pigs, and as a
treatment for human disorders in which the pituitary
gland fails to make adequate levels of somatotropin, pro-
ducing dwarfism. BST ingested in milk or meat has no
effect on humans, because it is a protein and is digested
in the stomach. Nevertheless, BST has met with some
public resistance, due primarily to generalized fears of
gene technology. Some people mistrust milk produced
through genetic engineering, even though the milk itself
is identical to other milk. Problems concerning public
perception are not uncommon as gene technology makes
an even greater impact on our lives.

Transgenic animals engineered to have specific desirable
genes are becoming increasingly available to breeders.
Now, instead of selectively breeding for several generations
to produce a racehorse or a stud bull with desirable quali-
ties, the process can be shortened by simply engineering
such an animal right at the start.

 

Gene technology is revolutionizing agriculture,
increasing yields and resistance to pests, and producing
animals with desirable traits.

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 411
