Agricultural Applications

Another major area of genetic engineering activity is ma-
nipulation of the genes of key crop plants. In plants the pri-
mary experimental difficulty has been identifying a suitable
vector for introducing recombinant DNA. Plant cells do
not possess the many plasmids that bacteria do, so the
choice of potential vectors is limited. The most successful
results thus far have been obtained with the Ti (tumor-
inducing) plasmid of the plant bacterium Agrobacterium
tumefaciens, which infects broadleaf plants such as tomato,
tobacco, and soybean. Part of the Ti plasmid integrates
into the plant DNA, and researchers have succeeded in at-
taching other genes to this portion of the plasmid (figure
19.19). The characteristics of a number of plants have been
altered using this technique, which should be valuable in
improving crops and forests. Among the features scientists
would like to affect are resistance to disease, frost, and
other forms of stress; nutritional balance and protein con-
tent; and herbicide resistance. Unfortunately, Agrobac-
terium generally does not infect cereals such as corn, rice,
and wheat, but alternative methods can be used to intro-
duce new genes into them.

A recent advance in genetically manipulated fruit is Cal-
gene’s “Flavr Savr” tomato, which has been approved for

   

Plasmid Agrobacterium

sale by the USDA. The tomato has been engineered to in-
hibit genes that cause cells to produce ethylene. In toma-
toes and other plants, ethylene acts as a hormone to speed
fruit ripening. In Flavr Savr tomatoes, inhibition of ethyl-
ene production delays ripening. The result is a tomato that
can stay on the vine longer and that resists overripening
and rotting during transport to market.

Herbicide Resistance

Recently, broadleaf plants have been genetically engineered
to be resistant to glyphosate, the active ingredient in
Roundup, a powerful, biodegradable herbicide that kills
most actively growing plants (figure 19.20). Glyphosate
works by inhibiting an enzyme called EPSP synthetase,
which plants require to produce aromatic amino acids. Hu-
mans do not make aromatic amino acids; they get them
from their diet, so they are unaffected by glyphosate. To
make glyphosate-resistant plants, agricultural scientists
used a Ti plasmid to insert extra copies of the EPSP syn-
thetase genes into plants. These engineered plants produce
20 times the normal level of EPSP synthetase, enabling
them to synthesize proteins and grow despite glyphosate’s
suppression of the enzyme. In later experiments, a bacterial
form of the EPSP synthetase gene that differs from the

 

 

Plant genetic engineering

 

 

   
 

 

1. Plasmid is removed and
cut open with restriction
endonuclease.

from the chromosome C

of another organism.
3. New gene is
inserted into plasmid.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gene
of interest

FIGURE 19.19

   
 

 

5. When mixed with plant
cells, Agrobacterium
duplicates the plasmid.

 

 

6. The bacterium transfers
the new gene into a
chromosome of the

plant cell,

 

4, Plasmid is put
back into
Agrobacterium.

 

 

 

 

 

7. The plant cell divides,
and each daughter cell
receives the new gene,
giving the whole plant
anew trait.

 

 

 

 

The Ti plasmid. This Agrobacterium tumefaciens plasmid is used in plant genetic engineering.

408 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics
