Cloning

The difficulty in using transgenic animals to improve live-
stock is in getting enough of them. Breeding produces off-
spring only slowly, and recombination acts to undo the
painstaking work of the genetic engineer. Ideally, one
would like to “Xerox” many exact genetic copies of the
transgenic strain—but until 1997 it was commonly ac-
cepted that adult animals can’t be cloned. Now the holy
grail of agricultural genetic engineers seems within reach.
In 1997, scientists announced the first successful cloning of
differentiated vertebrate tissue, a lamb grown from a cell
taken from an adult sheep. This startling result promises to
revolutionize agricultural science.

Spemann’s “Fantastical Experiment”

The idea of cloning animals was first suggested in 1938 by
German embryologist Hans Spemann (called the “father of
modern embryology”), who proposed what he called a
“fantastical experiment”: remove the nucleus from an egg
cell, and put in its place a nucleus from another cell.

Tt was 14 years before technology advanced far enough
for anyone to take up Spemann’s challenge. In 1952, two
American scientists, Robert Briggs and T. J. King, used
very fine pipettes to suck the nucleus from a frog egg (frog
eggs are unusually large, making the experiment feasible)
and transfer a nucleus sucked from a body cell of an adult
frog into its place. The experiment did not work when
done this way, but partial success was achieved 18 years
later by the British developmental biologist John Gurdon,
who in 1970 inserted nuclei from advanced frog embryos
rather than adult tissue. The frog eggs developed into tad-
poles, but died before becoming adults.

  
   

   

+ |Mammary cell is extracted
and grown in nutrient-

deficient solution that arrests

cle.

    
    

 

 

 

Nucleus is removed
from egg cell with a
micropipette.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Path to Success

For 14 years, nuclear transplant experiments were at-
tempted without success. Technology continued to advance
however, until finally in 1984, Steen Willadsen, a Danish
embryologist working in Texas, succeeded in cloning a
sheep using a nucleus from a cell of an early embryo. This
exciting result was soon replicated by others in a host of
other organisms, including cattle, pigs, and monkeys.

Only early embryo cells seemed to work, however. Re-
searchers became convinced that animal embryo cells be-
come irreversibly “committed” after the first few cell divi-
sions. After that, nuclei from differentiated animal cells
cannot be used to clone entire organisms.

We now know this conclusion to have been unwar-
ranted. The key advance for unraveling this puzzle was
made in Scotland by geneticist Keith Campbell, a specialist
in studying the cell cycle of agricultural animals. By the
early 1990s, knowledge of how the cell cycle is controlled,
advanced by cancer research, had led to an understanding
that cells don’t divide until conditions are appropriate. Just
as a washing machine checks that the water has completely
emptied before initiating the spin cycle, so the cell checks
that everything needed is on hand before initiating cell di-
vision. Campbell reasoned: “Maybe the egg and the do-
nated nucleus need to be at the same stage in the cell
cycle.”

This proved to be a key insight. In 1994 researcher Neil
First, and in 1995 Campbell himself working with repro-
ductive biologist Ian Wilmut, succeeded in cloning farm
animals from advanced embryos by first starving the cells,
so that they paused at the beginning of the cell cycle at the
G, checkpoint. Two starved cells are thus synchronized at
the same point in the cell cycle.

Nucleus containing
source DNA

 
 

. | A

 

 

= may cell is inserted
\ inside covering of egg cell.

 

 

Electric shock opens cell

 

  

  

membranes and triggers
cell division.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Preparation

 

Cell fusion Cell division

 

FIGURE 19.23

Wilmut’s animal cloning experiment. Wilmut combined a nucleus from a mammary cell and an egg cell (with its nucleus removed) to

successfully clone a sheep.

412 Part V_ Molecular Genetics
