plant form by a single nucleotide was introduced into
plants via Ti plasmids; the bacterial enzyme in these plants
is not inhibited by glyphosate.

These advances are of great interest to farmers because a
crop resistant to Roundup would never have to be weeded
if the field were simply treated with the herbicide. Because
Roundup is a broad-spectrum herbicide, farmers would no
longer need to employ a variety of different herbicides,
most of which kill only a few kinds of weeds. Furthermore,
glyphosate breaks down readily in the environment, unlike
many other herbicides commonly used in agriculture. A
plasmid is actively being sought for the introduction of the
EPSP synthetase gene into cereal plants, making them also
glyphosate-resistant.

Nitrogen Fixation

A long-range goal of agricultural genetic engineering is to
introduce the genes that allow soybeans and other legume
plants to “fix” nitrogen into key crop plants. These so-called
nif genes are found in certain symbiotic root-colonizing
bacteria. Living in the root nodules of legumes, these bacte-
ria break the powerful triple bond of atmospheric nitrogen
gas, converting N) into NH3 (ammonia). The plants then
use the ammonia to make amino acids and other nitrogen-
containing molecules. Other plants lack these bacteria and
cannot fix nitrogen, so they must obtain their nitrogen from
the soil. Farmland where these crops are grown soon be-
comes depleted of nitrogen, unless nitrogenous fertilizers
are applied. Worldwide, farmers applied over 60 million
metric tons of such fertilizers in 1987, an expensive under-
taking. Farming costs would be much lower if major crops
like wheat and corn could be engineered to carry out bio-
logical nitrogen fixation. However, introducing the
nitrogen-fixing genes from bacteria into plants has proved
difficult because these genes do not seem to function prop-
erly in eukaryotic cells. Researchers are actively experiment-
ing with other species of nitrogen-fixing bacteria whose
genes might function better in plant cells.

Insect Resistance

Many commercially important plants are attacked by in-
sects, and the traditional defense against such attacks is to
apply insecticides. Over 40% of the chemical insecticides
used today are targeted against boll weevils, bollworms, and
other insects that eat cotton plants. Genetic engineers are
now attempting to produce plants that are resistant to in-
sect pests, removing the need to use many externally ap-
plied insecticides.

The approach is to insert into crop plants genes encod-
ing proteins that are harmful to the insects that feed on the
plants but harmless to other organisms. One such insectici-
dal protein has been identified in Bacillus thuringiensis, a soil
bacterium. When the tomato hornworm caterpillar ingests
this protein, enzymes in the caterpillar’s stomach convert it

 

FIGURE 19.20

Genetically engineered herbicide resistance. All four of these
petunia plants were exposed to equal doses of the herbicide
Roundup. The two on top were genetically engineered to be
resistant to glyphosate, the active ingredient of Roundup, while
the two on the bottom were not.

into an insect-specific toxin, causing paralysis and death.
Because these enzymes are not found in other animals, the
protein is harmless to them. Using the Ti plasmid, scien-
tists have transferred the gene encoding this protein into
tomato and tobacco plants. They have found that these
transgenic plants are indeed protected from attack by the
insects that would normally feed on them. In 1995, the
EPA approved altered forms of potato, cotton, and corn.
The genetically altered potato can kill the Colorado potato
beetle, a common pest. The altered cotton is resistant to
cotton bollworm, budworm, and pink bollworm. The corn
has been altered to resist the European corn borer and
other mothlike insects.

Monsanto scientists screening natural compounds ex-
tracted from plant and soil samples have recently isolated a
new insect-killing compound from a fungus, the enzyme
cholesterol oxidase. Apparently, the enzyme disrupts mem-
branes in the insect gut. The fungus gene, called the Boll-
gard gene after its discoverer, has been successfully inserted
into a variety of crops. It kills a wide range of insects, in-
cluding the cotton boll weevil and the Colorado potato
beetle, both serious agricultural pests. Field tests began in
1996.

Some insect pests attack plant roots, and B. thuringiensis
is being employed to counter that threat as well. This bac-
terium does not normally colonize plant roots, so biologists
have introduced the B. thuringiensis insecticidal protein
gene into root-colonizing bacteria, especially strains of
Pseudomonas. Field testing of this promising procedure has
been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency.

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 409
