marrow
cells

‘
is fal

Leukemia
patient #1

Leukemia 1
SNP profile

  

 

 

1. DNAis obtained from the
bone marrow cells of patients
with two types of leukemia.

 

 

2, The DNAis exposed to
biochips containing all known
human genes.

 

 

 

 

 

3. High speed computer programs
examine the biochips and identify
any SNPs, or single nucleotide
polymorphisms.

 

 

 

 

4, The SNP profiles from each
type of leukemia patient are
examined. Leukemia 1 exhibits a
different SNP than leukemia 2.
Thus, the two types of leukemia
are associated with two different
gene changes.

 

 

 

 

Leukemia
patient # 2

Leukemia 2
SNP profile

 

FIGURE 19.16
Biochips can help in identifying precise forms of cancer.

will instantly reveal your SNP profile. The genetic charac-
teristics that make you you, genes that might affect your
health, your behavior, your future potential—all are there
to be read by anyone clever enough to interpret the profile.

To what extent are you your genes? Scientists fight about
this question, and no one really knows the answer. It is clear
that much of what each of us is like is strongly affected by
our genetic makeup. Researchers have proven beyond any
real dispute that intelligence and major personality traits
like aggressiveness and inquisitiveness are about 80% herita~
ble (that is, 80% of the variation in these traits reflects varia-
tion in genes).

Your SNP profile will reflect all of this variation, a table
of contents of your chromosomes, a molecular window to
who you are. When millions of such SNP profiles have been

 

gathered over the coming years, computers will be able to
identify other individuals with profiles like yours, and, by
examining health records, standard personality tests, and the
like, correlate parts of your profile with particular traits.
Even behavioral characteristics involving many genes, which
until now have been thought too complex to ever analyze,
cannot resist a determined assault by a computer comparing
SNP profiles.

 

A biochip is a discrete collection of gene fragments on a
stamp-sized chip that can be used to screen for the
presence of particular gene variants. Biochips allow
rapid screening of gene profiles, a tool that promises to
have a revolutionary impact on medicine and society.

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 405
