The Real Promise of Plant Genetic Engineering

In the last decade the cultivation of genetically modified
crops of corn, cotton, and soybeans has become com-
monplace in the United States—in 1999, over half of the
72 million acres planted with soybeans in the United
States were planted with seeds genetically modified to be
herbicide resistant, with the result that less tillage has
been needed, and as a consequence soil erosion has been
greatly lessened. These benefits, while significant, have
been largely confined to farmers, making their cultivation
of crops cheaper and more efficient. The food that the
public gets is the same, it just costs less to get it to the
table.

Like the first act of a play, these developments have
served mainly to set the stage for the real action, which is
only now beginning to happen. The real promise of plant
genetic engineering is to produce genetically modified
plants with desirable traits that directly benefit the con-
sumer.

One recent advance, nutritionally improved rice, gives
us a hint of what is to come. In developing countries large
numbers of people live on simple diets that are poor
sources of vitamins and minerals (what botanists called
micronutrients"). Worldwide, the two major micronutri-
ent deficiencies are iron, which affects 1.4 billion women,
24% of the world population, and vitamin A, affecting 40
million children, 7% of the world population. The defi-
ciencies are especially severe in developing countries where
the major staple food is rice. In recent research, Swiss bio-
engineer Ingo Potrykus and his team at the Institute of
Plant Sciences, Zurich, have gone a long way towards solv-
ing this problem. Supported by the Rockefeller Founda-
tion and with results to be made free to developing coun-
tries, the work is a model of what plant genetic engineering
can achieve.

To solve the problem of dietary iron deficiency among
rice eaters, Potrykus first asked why rice is such a poor
source of dietary iron. The problem, and the answer,
proved to have three parts:

1. Too little iron. The proteins of rice endosperm have
unusually low amounts of iron. To solve this prob-
lem, a ferritin gene was transferred into rice from
beans (figure 19.21). Ferritin is a protein with an ex-
traordinarily high iron content, and so greatly in-
creased the iron content of the rice.

2. Inhibition of iron absorption by the intestine. Rice con-
tains an unusually high concentration of a chemical
called phytate, which inhibits iron reabsorption in the
intestine—it stops your body from taking up the iron
in the rice. To solve this problem, a gene encoding an
enzyme that destroys phytate was transferred into rice
from a fungus.

3. Too little sulfur for efficient iron absorption. Sulfur is
required for iron uptake, and rice has very little of it.
To solve this problem, a gene encoding a particularly
sulfur-rich metallothionin protein was transferred
into rice from wild rice.

To solve the problem of vitamin A deficiency, the same
approach was taken. First, the problem was identified. It
turns out rice only goes part way toward making beta-
carotene (provitamin A); there are no enzymes in rice to
catalyze the last four steps. To solve the problem, genes en-
coding these four enzymes were added to rice from a famil-
iar flower, the daffodil.

Potrykus's development of transgenic rice to combat
dietary deficiencies involved no subtle tricks, just
straightforward bioengineering and the will to get the job
done. The transgenic rice he has developed will directly
improve the lives of millions of people. His work is rep-

 

 

Beans “Aspergillus fungus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Daffodil

 

 

 

 

Ferritin gene is
transferred into

tice from beans.

a

Ferritin protein
increases iron
content of tice.

410 Part V

Phytase gene is
transferred into
rice from a fungus.

Metallothionin gene
is transferred into
tice from wild rice.

 

Rice
‘om chromosome

 

Phytate, which
inhibits iron reabsorption,
is destroyed by the
phytase enzyme.

Metallothionin protein
supplies extra sulfur

Molecular Genetics

to increase iron uptake.

Enzymes for beta-carotene
synthesis are transferred
into rice from daffodils.

bBBE

Beta-cardtene, a
precursor to vitamin A,
is synthesized.

FIGURE 19.21

Transgenic rice. Developed
by Swiss bioengineer Ingo
Potrykus, transgenic rice
offers the promise of
improving the diets of
people in rice-consuming
developing countries, where
iron and vitamin A
deficiencies are a serious
problem.
