followed by 130 zeros—more than the number of atoms
known in the universe). This is an important property of
proteins because it permits such great diversity.

Secondary Structure. The amino acid side groups are
not the only portions of proteins that form hydrogen
bonds. The —COOH and —NH) groups of the main
chain also form quite good hydrogen bonds—so good that
their interactions with water might be expected to offset
the tendency of nonpolar sidegroups to be forced into the
protein interior. Inspection of the protein structures deter-
mined by X-ray diffraction reveals why they don’t—the
polar groups of the main chain form hydrogen bonds with
each other! Two patterns of H bonding occur. In one, hy-
drogen bonds form along a single chain, linking one amino
acid to another farther down the chain. This tends to pull
the chain into a coil called an alpha (@) helix. In the other
pattern, hydrogen bonds occur across two chains, linking
the amino acids in one chain to those in the other. Often,
many parallel chains are linked, forming a pleated, sheet-
like structure called a B-pleated sheet. The folding of the
amino acid chain by hydrogen bonding into these charac-
teristic coils and pleats is called a protein’s secondary
structure.

Motifs. The elements of secondary structure can combine
in proteins in characteristic ways called motifs, or some-
times “supersecondary structure.” One very common motif
is the B @ B motif, which creates a fold or crease; the so-
called “Rossmann fold” at the core of nucleotide binding
sites in a wide variety of proteins is a B. & B & B motif. A sec-
ond motif that occurs in many proteins is the B barrel, a B
sheet folded around to form a tube. A third type of motif,
the & turn & motif, is important because many proteins use

it to bind the DNA double helix.

Tertiary Structure. The final folded shape of a globular
protein, which positions the various motifs and folds non-
polar side groups into the interior, is called a protein’s ter-
tiary structure. A protein is driven into its tertiary structure
by hydrophobic interactions with water. The final folding
of a protein is determined by its primary structure—by the
chemical nature of its side groups. Many proteins can be
fully unfolded (“denatured”) and will spontaneously refold
back into their characteristic shape.

The stability of a protein, once it has folded into its 3-D
shape, is strongly influenced by how well its interior fits
together. When two nonpolar chains in the interior are in
very close proximity, they experience a form of molecular
attraction called van der Waal’s forces. Individually quite
weak, these forces can add up to a strong attraction when
many of them come into play, like the combined strength
of hundreds of hooks and loops on a strip of Velcro. They
are effective forces only over short distances, however;
there are no “holes” or cavities in the interior of proteins.
That is why there are so many different nonpolar amino
acids (alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine). Each has a dif

 

ferent-sized R group, allowing very precise fitting of non-
polar chains within the protein interior. Now you can un-
derstand why a mutation that converts one nonpolar ami-
no acid within the protein interior (alanine) into another
(leucine) very often disrupts the protein’s stability; leucine
is a lot bigger than alanine and disrupts the precise way the
chains fit together within the protein interior. A change in
even a single amino acid can have profound effects on pro-
tein shape and can result in loss or altered function of the
protein.

Domains. Many proteins in your body are encoded within
your genes in functional sections called exons (exons will be
discussed in detail in chapter 15). Each exon-encoded sec-
tion of a protein, typically 100 to 200 amino acids long,
folds into a structurally independent functional unit called a
domain. As the polypeptide chain folds, the domains fold
into their proper shape, each more-or-less independent of
the others. This can be demonstrated experimentally by ar-
tificially producing the fragment of polypeptide that forms
the domain in the intact protein, and showing that the frag-
ment folds to form the same structure as it does in the intact
protein.

A single polypeptide chain connects the domains of a
protein, like a rope tied into several adjacent knots. Often
the domains of a protein have quite separate functions—one
domain of an enzyme might bind a cofactor, for example,
and another the enzyme’s substrate.

Quaternary Structure. When two or more polypeptide
chains associate to form a functional protein, the individ-
ual chains are referred to as subunits of the protein. The
subunits need not be the same. Hemoglobin, for example,
is a protein composed of two a-chain subunits and two B-
chain subunits. A protein’s subunit arrangement is called
its quaternary structure. In proteins composed of sub-
units, the interfaces where the subunits contact one an-
other are often nonpolar, and play a key role in transmit-
ting information between the subunits about individual
subunit activities.

Achange in the identity of one of these amino acids can
have profound effects. Sickle cell hemoglobin is a mutation
that alters the identity of a single amino acid at the corner
of the B subunit from polar glutamate to nonpolar valine.
Putting a nonpolar amino acid on the surface creates a
“sticky patch” that causes one hemoglobin molecule to
stick to another, forming long nonfunctional chains and
leading to the cell sickling characteristic of this hereditary
disorder.

 

Protein structure can be viewed at six levels: 1. the
amino acid sequence, or primary structure; 2. coils and
sheets, called secondary structure; 3. folds or creases,
called motifs; 4. the three-dimensional shape, called
tertiary structure; 5. functional units, called domains;
and 6. individual polypeptide subunits associated in a
quaternary structure.

 

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 43
