 

 

   

1. DNAis extracted.

 

 

 

 

2.
gene is isolated.

Herpes simplex

 

 

    

Harmless vaccinia
(cowpox) virus

   
 

6. Antibodies directed
against herpes simplex 5. Harmless engineered virus
viral coat are made. 3 (the vaccine) with surface like
? herpes simplex is injected into
the human body.

 

 

FIGURE 19.18
Strategy for constructing a subunit vaccine for herpes simplex.

Piggyback Vaccines

Another area of potential significance involves the use of
genetic engineering to produce subunit vaccines against
viruses such as those that cause herpes and hepatitis. Genes
encoding part of the protein-polysaccharide coat of the
herpes simplex virus or hepatitis B virus are spliced into a
fragment of the vaccinia (cowpox) virus genome (figure
19.18). The vaccinia virus, which British physician Edward
Jenner used almost 200 years ago in his pioneering vaccina-
tions against smallpox, is now used as a vector to carry the
herpes or hepatitis viral coat gene into cultured mammalian
cells. These cells produce many copies of the recombinant
virus, which has the outside coat of a herpes or hepatitis
virus. When this recombinant virus is injected into a mouse
or rabbit, the immune system of the infected animal pro-
duces antibodies directed against the coat of the recombi-
nant virus. It therefore develops an immunity to herpes or
hepatitis virus. Vaccines produced in this way are harmless
because the vaccinia virus is benign and only a small frag-
ment of the DNA from the disease-causing virus is intro-
duced via the recombinant virus.

The great attraction of this approach is that it does not

   

Gene specifying

herpes simplex
surface protein

Or”*

3. Vaccinia DNA is
extracted and cleaved.

 

 

 

 

 

surface gene combines
with cleaved vaccinia DNA.

 

 

 

depend upon the nature of the viral disease. In the future,
similar recombinant viruses may be injected into humans to
confer resistance to a wide variety of viral diseases.

In 1995, the first clinical trials began of a novel new kind
of DNA vaccine, one that depends not on antibodies but
rather on the second arm of the body’s immune defense,
the so-called cellular immune response, in which blood
cells known as killer T cells attack infected cells. The in-
fected cells are attacked and destroyed when they stick
fragments of foreign proteins onto their outer surfaces that
the T cells detect (the discovery by Peter Doherty and Rolf
Zinkernagel that infected cells do so led to their receiving
the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1996). The
first DNA vaccines spliced an influenza virus gene encod-
ing an internal nucleoprotein into a plasmid, which was
then injected into mice. The mice developed strong cellular
immune responses to influenza. New and controversial, the
approach offers great promise.

 

Genetic engineering has produced commercially
valuable proteins, gene therapies, and, possibly, new
and powerful vaccines.

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 407
