Medical Applications
Pharmaceuticals

The first and perhaps most obvious commercial applica-
tion of genetic engineering was the introduction of genes
that encode clinically important proteins into bacteria.
Because bacterial cells can be grown cheaply in bulk (fer-
mented in giant vats, like the yeasts that make beer), bac-
teria that incorporate recombinant genes can synthesize
large amounts of the proteins those genes specify. This
method has been used to produce several forms of human
insulin and interferon, as well as other commercially
valuable proteins such as growth hormone (figure 19.17)
and erythropoietin, which stimulates red blood cell
production.

Among the medically important proteins now manufac-
tured by these approaches are atrial peptides, small pro-
teins that may provide a new way to treat high blood pres-
sure and kidney failure. Another is tissue plasminogen
activator, a human protein synthesized in minute amounts
that causes blood clots to dissolve and may be effective in
preventing and treating heart attacks and strokes.

A problem with this general approach has been the diffi-
culty of separating the desired protein from the others the
bacteria make. The purification of proteins from such com-
plex mixtures is both time-consuming and expensive, but it
is still easier than isolating the proteins from the tissues of
animals (for example, insulin from hog pancreases), which
is how such proteins used to be obtained. Recently, how-
ever, researchers have succeeded in producing RNA tran-
scripts of cloned genes; they can then use the transcripts to
produce only these proteins in a test tube containing the
transcribed RNA, ribosomes, cofactors, amino acids,

tRNA, and ATP.

Gene Therapy

In 1990, researchers first attempted to combat genetic de-
fects by the transfer of human genes. When a hereditary
disorder is the result of a single defective gene, an obvious
way to cure the disorder is to add a working copy of the
gene. This approach is being used in an attempt to combat
cystic fibrosis, and it offers potential for treating muscular
dystrophy and a variety of other disorders (table 19.2). One
of the first successful attempts was the transfer of a gene
encoding the enzyme adenosine deaminase into the bone
marrow of two girls suffering from a rare blood disorder
caused by the lack of this enzyme. However, while many
clinical trials are underway, no others have yet proven suc-
cessful. This extremely promising approach will require a
lot of additional effort.

406 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

 

FIGURE 19.17

Genetically engineered human growth hormone. These two
mice are genetically identical, but the large one has one extra
gene: the gene encoding human growth hormone. The gene was
added to the mouse’s genome by genetic engineers and is now a
stable part of the mouse’s genetic endowment.

Table 19.2 Diseases Being Treated
in Clinical Trials of Gene Therapy

Disease

 

Cancer (melanoma, renal cell, ovarian, neuroblastoma, brain,
head and neck, lung, liver, breast, colon, prostate,
mesothelioma, leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma)

SCID (evere combined immunodeficiency)
Cystic fibrosis

Gaucher’s disease

Familial hypercholesterolemia

Hemophilia

Purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency

Fanconi’s anemia

Hunter’s syndrome

Chronic granulomatous disease
Rheumatoid arthritis

Peripheral vascular disease

AIDS
