Stem Cells

Since the isolation of embryonic stem cells in 1998, labs all
over the world have been exploring the possibility of using
stem cells to restore damaged or lost tissue. Exciting results
are now starting to come in.

What is a stem cell? At the dawn of a human life, a
sperm fertilizes an egg to create a single cell destined to be-
come a child. As development commences, that cell begins
to divide, producing a small ball of a few dozen cells. At
this very early point, each of these cells is identical. We call
these cells embryonic stem cells. Each one of them is capable
by itself of developing into a healthy individual. In cattle
breeding, for example, these cells are frequently separated
by the breeder and used to produce multiple clones of valu-
able offspring.

The exciting promise of these embryonic stem cells is
that, because they can develop into any tissue, they may
give us the ability to restore damaged heart or spine tissue
(figure 19.24). Experiments have already been tried suc-
cessfully in mice. Heart muscle cells have been grown from
mouse embryonic stem cells and successfully integrated
with the heart tissue of a living mouse. This suggests that
the damaged heart muscle of heart attack victims might be
reparable with stem cells, and that injured spinal cords
might be repairable. These very promising experiments are
being pursued aggressively. They are, however, quite con-
troversial, as embryonic stem cells are typically isolated
from tissue of discarded or aborted embryos, raising serious
ethical issues.

Tissue-Specific Stem Cells

New results promise a neat way around the ethical maze
presented by stem cells derived from embryos. Go back for

o™

     
    

FIGURE 19.24
Using embryonic stem cells to restore
damaged tissue. Embyronic stem cells can

Inner cell
mass

Blastocyst

a moment to what we were saying about how a human
child develops. What happens next to the embryonic stem
cells? They start to take different developmental paths.
Some become destined to form nerve tissue and, after this
decision is taken, cannot ever produce any other kind of
cell. They are then called nerve stem cells. Others become
specialized to produce blood, still others muscle. Each
major tissue is represented by its own kind of tissue-specific
stem cell. Now here’s the key point: as development pro-
ceeds, these tissue-specific stem cells persist. Even in
adults. So why not use these adult cells, rather than embry-
onic stem cells?

Transplanted Tissue-Specific Stem Cells Cure
MS in Mice

In pathfinding 1999 laboratory experiments by Dr. Evan
Snyder of Harvard Medical School, tissue-specific stem
cells were able to restore lost brain tissue. He and his co-
workers injected neural stem cells (immediate descendants
of embryonic stem cells able to become any kind of neural
cell) into the brains of newborn mice with a disease resem-
bling multiple sclerosis (MS). These mice lacked the cells
that maintain the layers of myelin insulation around signal-
conducting nerves. The injected stem cells migrated all
over the brain, and were able to convert themselves into
the missing type of cell. The new cells then proceeded to
repair the ravages of the disease by replacing the lost insu-
lation of signal-conducting nerve cells. Many of the treated
mice fully recovered. In mice at least, tissue-specific stem
cells offer a treatment for MS.

The approach seems very straightforward, and should
apply to humans. Indeed, blood stem cells are already rou-
tinely used in humans to replenish the bone marrow of can-
cer patients after marrow-destroying therapy. The problem

Embryonic stem-cell
culture

 

develop into any body tissue. Methods for
growing the tissue and using it to repair
damaged tissue in adults, such as the brain
cells of multiple sclerosis patients, heart
muscle, and spinal nerves, are being

 

human embryo.

Once sperm cell and egg
cell have joined, cell cleavage
produces a blastocyst. The
inner cell mass of the
blastocyst develops into the

 

Biologists have cultured
embryonic stem cells from
both the inner cell mass and
embryonic germ cells, which
escape early differentiation.

 

 

 

 

developed.

414 Part V_ Molecular Genetics

 
