Calvin and Hobbes

by Bill Watterson

 

WHEN I GROW UP, TM GOING:
TO BE A SCIENTIST.

   

CALVIN AND HOBBES

©1995 Watterson. Dist. by
Universal Press Syndicate.
Reprinted with permission.

 

 

 

TUL DEDICATE MY CAREER TO
THE PROPOSITION THAT MAN,
CAN RESHAPE THE UNIVERSE
ACCORDING TO WIS OWN WHIMS

 

TUL PROBABLY @ INTO You WANT ) NOT EXACTLY
GENETIC ENGINEERING AND ]| To PLAY ] GOD NENER
RENE NEW LIFE FORMS Gop? _/ BOTHERED To
PATENT HIS STUFF.

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

All rights reserved.

On either score, then, the risk of bioengineering to the
environment seems to be very slight. Indeed, in some cases
it lessens the serious environmental damage produced by
cultivation and agricultural pesticides.

Should We Label Genetically Modified Foods?

While there seems little tangible risk in the genetic modifi-
cation of crops, public assurance that these risks are being
carefully assessed is important. Few issues manage to raise
the temperature of discussions about plant genetic engi-
neering more than labeling of genetically modified (GM)
crops. Agricultural producers have argued that there are no
demonstrable risks, so that a GM label can only have the
function of scaring off wary consumers. Consumer advo-
cates respond that consumers have every right to make that
decision, and to the information necessary to make it.

In considering this matter, it is important to separate
two quite different issues, the meed for a label, and the right
of the public to have one. Every serious scientific investi-
gation of the risks of GM foods has concluded that they are
safe—indeed, in the case of soybeans and many other crops
modified to improve cultivation, the foods themselves are
not altered in any detectable way, and no nutritional test
could distinguish them from "organic" varieties. So there
seems to be little if any health need for a GM label for ge-
netically engineered foods.

The right of the public to know what it is eating is a very
different issue. There is widespread fear of genetic manip-
ulation in Europe, because it is unfamiliar. People there
don't trust their regulatory agencies as we do here, because
their agencies have a poor track record of protecting them.
When they look at genetically modified foods, they are
haunted by past experiences of regulatory ineptitude. In
England they remember British regulators’ failure to pro-
tect consumers from meat infected with mad cow disease.

It does no good whatsoever to tell a fearful European
that there is no evidence to warrant fear, no trace of data
supporting danger from GM crops. A European consumer
will simply respond that the harm is not yet evident, that

we don't know enough to see the danger lurking around
the corner. "Slow down," the European consumers say.
"Give research a chance to look around all the corners.
Lets be sure." No one can argue against caution, but it is
difficult to imagine what else researchers can look into—
safety has been explored very thoroughly. The fear re-
mains, though, for the simple reason that no amount of in-
formation can remove it. Like a child scared of a monster
under the bed, looking under the bed again doesn't help—
the monster still might be there next time. And that means
we are going to have to have GM labels, for people have
every right to be informed about something they fear.

What should these labels be like? A label that only says
"GM FOOD" simply acts as a brand—like a POISON
label, it shouts a warning to the public of lurking danger.
Why not instead have a GM label that provides informa-
tion to the consumer, that tells the consumer what regula-
tors know about that product?

(For Bt corn): The production of this food was made
more efficient by the addition of genes that made plants
resistant to pests so that less pesticides were required to
grow the crop.

(For Roundup-ready soybeans): Genes have been added
to this crop to render it resistant to herbicides—this re-
duces soil erosion by lessening the need for weed-
removing cultivation.

(For high beta-carotene rice): Genes have been added to
this food to enhance its beta-carotene content and so
combat vitamin A deficiency.

GM food labels that in each instance actually tell con-
sumers what has been done to the gene-modified crop
would go a long way toward hastening public acceptance of
gene technology in the kitchen.

 

Genetic engineering affords great opportunities for
progress in medicine and food production, although
many are concerned about possible risks. On balance,
the risks appear slight, and the potential benefits
substantial.

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 417
