with extending the approach to other kinds of tissue-
specific stem cells is that it has not always been easy to find
the kind of tissue-specific stem cell you want.

Transplanted Stem Cells Reverse Juvenile
Diabetes in Mice

Very promising experiments carried out in 2000 by Dr.
Ammon Peck and a team of researchers at the University of
Florida concern a particularly vexing problem, that of
type 1 or juvenile diabetes. A person with juvenile diabetes
lacks insulin-producing pancreas cells, because their im-
mune system has mistakenly turned against them and de-
stroyed them. They are no longer able to produce enough
insulin to control their blood sugar levels and must take in-
sulin daily. Adding back new insulin-producing cells called
islet cells has been tried many times, but doesn’t work well.
Immune cells continue to destroy them.

Peck and his team reasoned, why not add instead the
stem cells that produce islet cells? They would be able to
produce a continuous supply of new islet cells, replacing
those lost to immune attack. Because there would always be
cells to make insulin, the diabetes would be cured.

No one knew just what such a stem cell looked like, but
the researchers knew they come from the epithelial cells
that line the pancreas ducts. Surely some must still lurk
there unseen. So the research team took a bunch of these
epithelial cells from mice and grew them in tissue culture
until they had lots of them.

Were the stem cells they sought present in the cell cul-
ture they had prepared? Yes. In laboratory dishes the cell
culture produced insulin in response to sugar, indicating
islet cells had developed in the growing culture, islet cells
that must have been produced from stem cells.

  
 

 

Embryonic
stem cell %

  
 

Tissue cells

Now on to juvenile diabetes. The scientists injected
their cell culture into the pancreas of mice specially bred to
develop juvenile diabetes. Unable to manufacture their own
insulin because they had no islet cells, these diabetic mice
could not survive without daily insulin. What happened?
The diabetes was reversed! The mice no longer required
insulin.

Impatient to see in more detail what had happened, the
researchers sacrificed the mice and examined the cells of
their pancreas. The mice appeared to have perfectly normal
islet cells.

One might have wished the researchers waited a little
longer before terminating the experiment. It is not clear
whether the cure was transitory or long term. Still, there is
no escaping the conclusion that injection of a culture of
adult stem cells cured their juvenile diabetes.

While certainly encouraging, a mouse is not a human,
and there is no guarantee the approach will work in hu-
mans. But there is every reason to believe it might. The ex-
periment is being repeated now with humans. People suf-
fering from juvenile diabetes are being treated with human
pancreatic duct cells obtained from people who have died
and donated their organs for research. No ethical issues
arise from using cells of adult organ donors, and initial re-
sults look promising.

 

Transplanted stem cells may allow us to replace
damaged or lost tissue, offering cures for many
disorders that cannot now be treated. Current work
focuses on tissue-specific stem cells, which do not
present the ethical problems that embryonic stem
cells do.

 

 

 

For use in therapy, the
embryonic stem cells are

 

The stem cells are grown to
produce whatever type of tissue
is needed by the patient.

 

 

 

The tissue cells are injected into

 

genetically engineered to match
the patient's immune system:
the stem cells’ self-recognition
genes are replaced with the
patient's self-recognition genes.

 

 

 

 

Patient's self-recognition genes

the patient where needed. Once
in place, the tissue cells
respond to local chemical
signals, adding to or replacing
damaged cells.

 

 

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 415
