 

Catching evolution in action

A hundred years ago Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution
by natural selection was taught as the foundation of biology
in public schools throughout the United States. Then
something happened. In the 1920s, conservative religious
groups began to argue against the teaching of evolution in
our nation's schools. Darwinism, they said, contradicted
the revealed word of God in the Bible and thus was a direct
attack on their religious beliefs. Many of you will have read
about the 1925 Scopes "monkey trial" or seen the move
about it, Inherit the Wind. In the backwash of this contro-
versy, evolution for the first time in this century disap-
peared from the schools. Textbook publishers and local
school boards, in a wish to avoid the dispute, simply chose
not to teach evolution. By 1959, 100 years after Darwin's
book, a famous American geneticist cried in anguish, "A
hundred years without Darwin is enough!" What he meant
was that the theory of evolution by natural selection has be-
come the central operating concept of the science of biol-
ogy, organic evolution being one of the most solidly vali-
dated facts of science. How could we continue to hide this
truth from our children, crippling their understanding of
science?

In the 1970s, Darwin reappeared in our nation's schools,
part of the wave of concern about science that followed
Sputnik. Not for long, however. Cries from creationists for
equal time in the classroom soon had evolution out of our
classrooms again. Only in recent years, amid considerable
uproar, have states like California succeeded in reforming
their school curriculums, focusing on evolution as the cen-
tral principle of biology. In other states, teaching Darwin
remains controversial.

While Darwin’s proposal that evolution occurs as the
result of natural selection remains controversial in many
local school boards, it is accepted by practically every biol-
ogist who has examined it seriously. In this section, we will
review the evidence supporting Darwin’s theory. Evolu-
tionary biology is unlike most other fields of biology in
which hypotheses are tested directly with experimental
methods. To study evolution, we need to investigate what
happened in the past, sometimes many millions of years
ago. In this way, evolutionary biology is similar to astron-

The evolution of protective coloration in guppies. In pools
below waterfalls where predation is high, guppies are drab
colored. In the absence of the highly predatory pike cichlid,
guppies in pools above waterfalls are much more colorful and
attractive to females. The evolution of these differences can be
experimentally tested.

omy and history, relying on observation and deduction
rather than experiment and induction to examine ideas
about past events.

Nonetheless, evolutionary biology is not entirely an ob-
servational science. Darwin was right about many things,
but one area in which he was mistaken concerns the pace
at which evolution occurs. Darwin thought that evolution
occurred at a very slow, almost imperceptible, pace. How-
ever, in recent years many case studies of natural popula-
tions have demonstrated that in some circumstances evolu-
tionary change can occur rapidly. In these instances, it is
possible to establish experimental studies to directly test
evolutionary hypotheses. Although laboratory studies on
fruit flies and other organisms have been common for
more than 50 years, it has only been in recent years that
scientists have started conducting experimental studies of
evolution in nature.

To conduct experimental tests of evolution, it is first nec-
essary to identify a population in nature upon which strong
selection might be operating (see above). Then, by manipu-
lating the strength of the selection, an investigator can pre-
dict what outcome selection might produce, then look and
see the actual effect on the population.

419
