 

Gene Variation Is the Raw Material
of Evolution

Evolution Is Descent with Modification

The word “evolution” is widely used in the natural and so-
cial sciences. It refers to how an entity—be it a social sys-
tem, a gas, or a planet—changes through time. Although
development of the modern concept of evolution in biology
can be traced to Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, the first
five editions of this book never actually used the term!
Rather, Darwin used the phrase “descent with modifica-
tion.” Although many more complicated definitions have
been proposed, Darwin’s phrase probably best captures the
essence of biological evolution: all species arise from other,
pre-existing species. However, through time, they accumu-
late differences such that ancestral and descendant species
are not identical.

Natural Selection Is an Important Mechanism of
Evolutionary Change

Darwin was not the first to propose a theory of evolution.
Rather, he followed a long line of earlier philosophers and
naturalists who deduced that the many kinds of organisms
around us were produced by a process of evolution. Un-
like his predecessors, however, Darwin proposed natural
selection as the mechanism of evolution. Natural selec-
tion produces evolutionary change when in a population
some individuals, which possess certain inherited charac-
teristics, produce more surviving offspring than individu-
als lacking these characteristics. As a result, the popula-
tion will gradually come to include more and more
individuals with the advantageous characteristics. In this
way, the population evolves and becomes better adapted
to its local circumstances.

Natural selection was by no means the only evolution-
ary mechanism proposed. A rival theory, championed by
the prominent biologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, was that
evolution occurred by the inheritance of acquired
characteristics. According to Lamarck, individuals
passed on to offspring body and behavior changes ac-
quired during their lives. Thus, Lamarck proposed that
ancestral giraffes with short necks tended to stretch their
necks to feed on tree leaves, and this extension of the
neck was passed on to subsequent generations, leading to
the long-necked giraffe (figure 20.2). In Darwin’s the-
ory, by contrast, the variation is not created by experi-
ence, but is the result of preexisting genetic differences
among individuals (figure 20.2).

Although the efficacy of natural selection is now widely
accepted, it is not the only process that can lead to changes

422 Part VI Evolution

vary in natural populations.

 

stretching
Stretching

Proposed ancestor The giraffe ancestor Loti

of giraffes has lengthened its neck by reproduction
characteristics of stretching to reach tree

modern-day okapi. leaves, then passed the

change to offspring.
(a) Lamarck's theory: variation is acquired. ri
VM

 

oecaion goiter owt
f 70 & S6u

mt

  

WEL
Individuals are
bom who nh
happen to gO”
have longer ‘0
necks. 4 |
ul reproduction
Over many generations,

longer-necked
individuals are more
successful and pass
the long-neck trait on
to their offspring.

(b) Darwin's theory: variation is inherited. Mt Mt ““]4 L

FIGURE 20.2
How did giraffes evolve a long neck?

in the genetic makeup of populations. Allele frequencies
can also change as the result of repeated mutations from
one allele to another and from migrants bringing alleles
into a population. In addition, when populations are small,
the frequencies of alleles can change randomly as the result
of chance events. Evolutionary biologists debate the rela-
tive strengths of these processes. Although no one denies
that natural selection is a powerful force leading to adaptive
change, the importance of other processes is less certain.

 

Darwin proposed that natural selection on variants
within populations leads to the evolution of different
species.

 
