 

Genes within Populations

Concept Outline

 

20.1 Genes vary in natural populations.

Gene Variation Is the Raw Material of Evolution.
Selection acts on the genetic variation present in
populations, favoring variants that increase the likelihood of
survival and reproduction.

Gene Variation in Nature. Natural populations contain
considerable amounts of variation, present at the DNA
level and expressed in proteins.

20.2 Why do allele frequencies change in populations?

‘The Hardy-Weinberg Principle. The proportion of
homozygotes and heterozygotes in a population is not
altered by meiosis or sexual reproduction.

Five Agents of Evolutionary Change. The frequency of
alleles in a population can be changed by evolutionary
forces like gene flow and selection.

Identifying the Evolutionary Forces Maintaining
Polymorphism. A number of processes can influence
allele frequencies in natural populations, but it is difficult to
ascertain their relative importance.

Heterozygote Advantage.—In some cases, heterozygotes
are superior to either type of homozygote. The gene for
sickle cell anemia is one particularly well-understood
example.

20.3 Selection can act on traits affected by many
genes.

Forms of Selection. Selection can act on traits like
height or weight to stabilize or change the level at which
the trait is expressed.

Limits to What Selection Can Accomplish. Selection
cannot act on traits with little or no genetic variation.

 

FIGURE 20.1

Genetic variation. The range of genetic material in a population
is expressed in a variety of ways—including color.

© other human being is exactly like you (unless you

have an identical twin). Often the particular charac-
teristics of an individual have an important bearing on its
survival, on its chances to reproduce, and on the success of
its offspring. Evolution is driven by such consequences.
Genetic variation that influences these characteristics pro-
vides the raw material for natural selection, and natural
populations contain a wealth of such variation. In plants
(figure 20.1), insects, and vertebrates, practically every gene
exhibits some level of variation. In this chapter, we will ex-
plore genetic variation in natural populations and consider
the evolutionary forces that cause allele frequencies in nat-
ural populations to change. These deceptively simple mat-
ters lie at the core of evolutionary biology.

421
