Wilmut’s Lamb

Wilmut then set out to attempt the key breakthrough, the
experiment that had eluded researchers since Spemann
proposed it 59 years before: to transfer the nucleus from an
adult differentiated cell into an enucleated egg, and allow
the resulting embryo to grow and develop in a surrogate
mother, hopefully producing a healthy animal.

Wilmut removed mammary cells from the udder of a
six-year-old sheep (figure 19.23). The origin of these cells,
gave the clone its name, “Dolly” after the country singer
Dolly Parton. The cells were grown in tissue culture, and
some frozen so that in the future it would be possible with
genetic fingerprinting to prove that a clone was indeed ge-
netically identical with the six-year-old sheep.

In preparation for cloning, Wilmut’s team reduced for
five days the concentration of serum on which the sheep
mammary cells were subsisting. In parallel preparation,
eggs obtained from a ewe were enucleated, the nucleus of
each egg carefully removed with a micropipette.

Mammary cells and egg cells were then surgically com-
bined in January of 1996, the mammary cells inserted in-
side the covering around the egg cell. Wilmut then applied
a brief electrical shock. A neat trick, this causes the plasma
membranes surrounding the two cells to become leaky, so
that the contents of the mammary cell passes into the egg
cell. The shock also kick-starts the cell cycle, causing the
cell to begin to divide.

After six days, in 30 of 277 tries, the dividing embryo
reached the hollow-ball “blastula” stage, and 29 of these
were transplanted into surrogate mother sheep. A little
over five months later, on July 5, 1997, one sheep gave
birth to a lamb. This lamb, “Dolly,” was the first successful
clone generated from a differentiated animal cell.

The Future of Cloning

Wilmut’s successful cloning of fully differentiated sheep
cells is a milestone event in gene technology. Even though
his procedure proved inefficient (only one of 277 trials suc-
ceeded), it established the point beyond all doubt that
cloning of adult animal cells can be done. In the following
four years researchers succeeded in greatly improving the
efficiency of cloning. Seizing upon the key idea in
Wilmut’s experiment, to clone a resting-stage cell, they
have returned to the nuclear transplant procedure pio-
neered by Briggs and King. It works well. Many different
mammals have been successfully cloned including mice,
pigs, and cattle.

Transgenic cloning can be expected to have a major im-
pact on medicine as well as agriculture. Animals with
human genes can be used to produce rare hormones. For
example, sheep that have recently been genetically engi-
neered to secrete a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin (help-
ful in relieving the symptoms of cystic fibrosis) into their
milk may be cloned, greatly cheapening the production of
this expensive drug.

It is impossible not to speculate on the possibility of
cloning a human. There is no reason to believe such an ex-
periment would not work, but many reasons to question
whether it should be done. Because much of Western
thought is based on the concept of human individuality, we
can expect the possibility of human cloning to engender
considerable controversy.

 

Recent experiments have demonstrated the possibility
of cloning differentiated mammalian tissue, opening the
door for the first time to practical transgenic cloning of
farm animals.

 

\\!

 

 

 

 

 

After a five-month
pregancy, a lamb
jenetically identical
the sheep from
which the mammary
cell was extracted is

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Embryo begins to } born.
develop in vito. —
Embryo is implanted
into surrogate mother.
Development Implantation Birth of clone Growth to adulthood

 

 

 

Chapter 19 Gene Technology 413
