Ethics and Regulation

The advantages afforded by genetic engineering are revolu-
tionizing our lives. But what are the disadvantages, the po-
tential costs and dangers of genetic engineering? Many
people, including influential activists and members of the
scientific community, have expressed concern that genetic
engineers are “playing God” by tampering with genetic
material. For instance, what would happen if one frag-
mented the DNA of a cancer cell, and then incorporated
the fragments at random into vectors that were propagated
within bacterial cells? Might there not be a danger that
some of the resulting bacteria would transmit an infective
form of cancer? Could genetically engineered products ad-
ministered to plants or animals turn out to be dangerous
for consumers after several generations? What kind of un-
foreseen impact on the ecosystem might “improved” crops
have? Is it ethical to create “genetically superior” organ-
isms, including humans?

How Do We Measure the Potential Risks of
Genetically Modified Crops?

While the promise of genetic engineering is very much in
evidence, this same genetic engineering has this summer
been the cause of outright war between researchers and
protesters in England. In June 1999, British protesters at-
tacked an experimental plot of genetically modified (GM)
sugar beets; the following August they destroyed a test field
of GM canola (used for cooking oil and animal feed). The
contrast could not be more marked between American ac-
ceptance of genetically modified crops on the one hand,
and European distrust of genetically modified foods, on the
other. The intense feelings generated by this dispute point
to the need to understand how we measure the risks asso-
ciated with the genetic engineering of plants.

Two sets of risks need to be considered. The first stems
from eating genetically modified foods, the other concerns
potential ecological effects.

Is Eating Genetically Modified Food Dangerous? Pro-
testers worry that genetically modified food may have been
rendered somehow dangerous. To sort this out, it is useful
to bear in mind that bioengineers modify crops in two quite
different ways. One class of gene modification makes the
crop easier to grow; a second class of modification is in-
tended to improve the food itself.

The introduction of Roundup-resistant soybeans to Eu-
rope is an example of the first class of modification. This
modification has been very popular with farmers in the
United States, who planted half their crop with these soy-
beans in 1999. They like GM soybeans because the beans
can be raised without intense cultivation (weeds are killed
with Roundup herbicide instead), which both saves money
and lessens soil erosion. But is the soybean that results nu-
tritionally different? No. The gene that confers Roundup
resistance in soybeans does so by protecting the plant's

416 = Part V_ Molecular Genetics

ability to manufacture so-called "aromatic" amino acids. In
unprotected weeds, by contrast, Roundup blocks this man-
ufacturing process, killing the weed. Because humans don't
make any aromatic amino acids anyway (we get them in our
diets), Roundup doesn't hurt us. The GM soybean we eat is
nutritionally the same as an "organic" one, just cheaper to
produce.

In the second class of modification, where a gene is
added to improve the nutritional character of some food,
the food will be nutritionally different. In each of these in-
stances, it is necessary to examine the possibility that con-
sumers may prove allergic to the product of the intro-
duced gene. In one instance, for example, addition of a
methionine-enhancing gene from Brazil nut into soybeans
(which are deficient in this amino acid) was discontinued
when six of eight individuals allergic to Brazil nuts pro-
duced antibodies to the GM soybeans, suggesting the pos-
sibility of a reverse reaction. Instead, methionine levels in
GM crops are being increased with genes from sunflowers.
Screening for allergy problems is now routine.

On both scores, then, the risk of bioengineering to the
food supply seems to be very slight. GM foods to date
seem completely safe.

Are GM Crops Harmful to the Environment? What
are we to make of the much-publicized report that
Monarch butterflies might be killed by eating pollen blow-
ing out of fields planted with GM corn? First, it should
come as no surprise. The GM corn (so-called Bt corn) was
engineered to contain an insect-killing toxin (harmless to
people) in order to combat corn borer pests. Of course it
will kill any butterflies or other insects in the immediate
vicinity of the field. However, focus on the fact that the
GM corn fields do not need to be sprayed with pesticide to
control the corn borer. An estimated $9 billion in damage
is caused annually by the application of pesticides in the
United States, and billions of insects and other animals, in-
cluding an estimated 67 million birds, are killed each year.
This pesticide-induced murder of wildlife is far more dam-
aging ecologically than any possible effects of GM crops on
butterflies.

Will pests become resistant to the GM toxin? Not
nearly as fast as they now become resistant to the far higher
levels of chemical pesticide we spray on crops.

How about the possibility that introduced genes will
pass from GM crops to their wild or weedy relatives? This
sort of gene flow happens naturally all the time, and so this
is a legitimate question. But so what if genes for resistance
to Roundup herbicide spread from cultivated sugar beets to
wild populations of sugar beets in Europe? Why would that
be a problem? Besides, there is almost never a potential rel-
ative around to receive the modified gene from the GM
crop. There are no wild relatives of soybeans in Europe, for
example. Thus, there can be no gene escape from GM soy-
beans in Europe, any more than genes can flow from you to
other kinds of animals.
