 

 

 

 

 

 

Evolutionary change in spot number. Populations transported to the low-predation environment quickly increased in number of spots,
whereas selection in more dangerous environments, like the predator-filled pool above right, led to less conspicuous fish.

The Experiment

Guppies offer an excellent experimental opportunity. The
guppy, Poecilia reticulata, is found in small streams in north-
eastern South America and the nearby island of Trinidad.
In Trinidad, guppies are found in many mountain streams.
One interesting feature of several streams is that they have
waterfalls. Amazingly, guppies are capable of colonizing
portions of the stream above the waterfall. During flood
seasons, rivers sometimes overflow their banks, creating
secondary channels that move through the forest. During
these occasions, guppies may be able to move upstream and
invade pools above waterfalls. By contrast, not all species
are capable of such dispersal and thus are only found in
these streams below the first waterfall. One species whose
distribution is restricted by waterfalls is the pike cichlid,
Crenicichla alta, a voracious predator that feeds on other
fish, including guppies.

Because of these barriers to dispersal, guppies can be
found in two very different environments. In pools just
below the waterfalls, predation is a substantial risk and rates
of survival are relatively low. By contrast, in similar pools
just above the waterfall, few predators prey on guppies. As
a result, guppy populations above and below waterfalls have
evolved many differences. In the high-predation pools,
guppies exhibit drab coloration. Moreover, they tend to re-
produce at a younger age.

The differences suggest the action of natural selection.
Perhaps as a result of shunting energy to reproduction
rather than growth, the fish in high-predation pools attain
relatively smaller adult sizes. By contrast, male fish above
the waterfall display gaudy colors that they use to court fe-
males. Adults there mature later and grow to larger sizes.

Although the differences between guppies living above
and below the waterfalls are consistent with the hypothesis
that they represent evolutionary responses to differences in
the strength of predation, alternative explanations are pos-
sible. Perhaps, for example, only very large fish are capable
of moving past the waterfall to colonize pools. If this were

420 Part VI Evolution

the case, then a founder effect would occur in which the
new population was established solely by individuals with
genes for large size.

The only way to rule out such alternative possibilities is
to conduct a controlled experiment. The first experiments
were conducted in large pools in laboratory greenhouses.
At the start of the experiment, a group of 2000 guppies
were divided equally among 10 large pools. Six months
later, pike cichlids were added to four of the pools and killi-
fish (which rarely prey on guppies) to another four, with
the remaining pools left as “no predator” controls.

The Results

Fourteen months later (which corresponds to 10 guppy
generations), the scientists compared the populations. The
guppies in the killifish and control pools were indistin-
guishable, brightly colored and large. In contrast, the gup-
pies in the pike cichlid pools were smaller and drab in col-
oration. These results established that predation can lead to
rapid evolutionary change, but does this laboratory experi-
ments reflect what occurs in nature?

To find out, scientists located two streams that had gup-
pies in pools below a waterfall, but not above it. As in other
Trinidadian streams, the pike cichlid was present in the
lower pools, but only the killifish was found above the wa-
terfalls. The scientists then transplanted guppies to the
upper pools and returned at several-year intervals to moni-
tor the populations. Despite originating from populations
in which predation levels were high, the transplanted popu-
lations rapidly evolved the traits characteristic of low-pre-
dation guppies: they matured late, attained greater size and
brighter colors. Control populations in the lower pools, by
contrast, continued to mature early and at smaller size.
These results demonstrate that substantial evolutionary
change can occur in less than 12 years.

To explore this concept further go to our interactive lab
at www.mhhe.com/raven6e
