How Proteins Fold Into
Their Functional Shape

Unfolded
protein

How does a protein fold into a specific
shape? Nonpolar amino acids play a key
role. Until recently, investigators
thought that newly made proteins fold
spontaneously as hydrophobic interac-
tions with water shove nonpolar amino
acids into the protein interior. We now
know this is too simple a view. Protein
chains can fold in so many different
ways that trial and error would simply
take too long. In addition, as the open
chain folds its way toward its final form,
nonpolar “sticky” interior portions are
exposed during intermediate stages. If
these intermediate forms are placed in a
test tube in the same protein environ-
ment that occurs in a cell, they stick to
other unwanted protein partners, form-
ing a gluey mess.

Correctly
folded protein

 

 

Chaperonins

How do cells avoid this? A vital clue
came in studies of unusual mutations

 

==> Chaperone proteins present
mm Chaperone proteins absent

 

 

. oe See Enzyme
that prevented viruses from replicating nore ced C (> ecradston
in E. coli bacterial cells—it turned out Meno eT
the virus proteins could not fold prop-
erly! Further study revealed that nor-

‘i 5 FIGURE 3.8

mal cells contain special proteins called
chaperonins that help new proteins
fold correctly (figure 3.8). When the E.
coli gene encoding its chaperone pro-
tein is disabled by mutation, the bacte-
ria die, clogged with lumps of incor-
rectly folded proteins. Fully 30% of the
bacteria’s proteins fail to fold to the
right shape.

Molecular biologists have now identified more than 17
kinds of proteins that act as molecular chaperones. Many
are heat shock proteins, produced in greatly elevated
amounts if a cell is exposed to elevated temperature; high
temperatures cause proteins to unfold, and heat shock
chaperonins help the cell’s proteins refold.

There is considerable controversy about how chaper-
onins work. It was first thought that they provided a pro-
tected environment within which folding could take place
unhindered by other proteins, but it now seems more like-
ly that chaperonins rescue proteins that are caught in a
wrongly folded state, giving them another chance to fold
correctly. When investigators “fed” a deliberately mis-
folded protein called malate dehydrogenase to chaper-
onins, the protein was rescued, refolding to its active
shape.

44 Part The Origin of Living Things

A current model of protein folding. A newly synthesized protein rapidly folds into
characteristic motifs composed of « helices and 8 sheets, but these elements of structure are
only roughly aligned in an open conformation. Subsequent folding occurs more slowly, by
trial and error. This process is aided by chaperone proteins, which appear to recognize
improperly folded proteins and unfold them, giving them another chance to fold properly.
Eventually, if proper folding is not achieved, the misfolded protein is degraded by
proteolytic enzymes.

Protein Folding and Disease

There are tantalizing suggestions that chaperone protein
deficiencies may play a role in certain diseases by failing to
facilitate the intricate folding of key proteins. Cystic fibrosis
is a hereditary disorder in which a mutation disables a pro-
tein that plays a vital part in moving ions across cell mem-
branes. In at least some cases, the vital membrane protein
appears to have the correct amino acid sequence, but fails to
fold to its final form. It has also been speculated that chaper-
one deficiency may be a cause of the protein clumping in
brain cells that produces the amyloid plaques characteristic
of Alzheimer’s disease.

 

Proteins called chaperones aid newly produced proteins
to fold properly.

 
