 

Population genetics is the study of the properties of genes
in populations. Genetic variation within natural popula-
tions was a puzzle to Darwin and his contemporaries. The
way in which meiosis produces genetic segregation among
the progeny of a hybrid had not yet been discovered. Selec-
tion, scientists then thought, should always favor an opti-
mal form, and so tend to eliminate variation. Moreover, the
theory of blending inheritance—in which offspring were
expected to be phenotypically intermediate relative to their
parents—was widely accepted. If blending inheritance were
correct, then the effect of any new genetic variant would
quickly be diluted to the point of disappearance in subse-
quent generations.

The Hardy-Weinberg Principle

Following the rediscovery of Mendel’s research, two people
in 1908 independently solved the puzzle of why genetic
variation persists—G. H. Hardy, an English mathemati-
cian, and G. Weinberg, a German physician. They pointed
out that the original proportions of the genotypes in a pop-
ulation will remain constant from generation to generation,
as long as the following assumptions are met:

1. The population size is very large.

2. Random mating is occurring.

3. No mutation takes place.

4. No genes are input from other sources (no immigra-
tion takes place).

5. No selection occurs.

Dominant alleles do not, in fact, replace recessive ones.
Because their proportions do not change, the genotypes are
said to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.

do allele frequencies change in populations?

In algebraic terms, the Hardy-Weinberg principle is
written as an equation. Consider a population of 100 cats,
with 84 black and 16 white cats. In statistics, frequency
is defined as the proportion of individuals falling within a
certain category in relation to the total number of indi-
viduals under consideration. In this case, the respective
frequencies would be 0.84 (or 84%) and 0.16 (or 16%).
Based on these phenotypic frequencies, can we deduce
the underlying frequency of genotypes? If we assume that
the white cats are homozygous recessive for an allele we
designate b, and the black cats are therefore cither ho-
mozygous dominant BB or heterozygous Bb, we can cal-
culate the allele frequencies of the two alleles in the
population from the proportion of black and white indi-
viduals. Let the letter p designate the frequency of one al-
lele and the letter g the frequency of the alternative al-
lele. Because there are only two alleles, p plus ¢ must
always equal 1.

The Hardy-Weinberg equation can now be expressed in
the form of what is known as a binomial expansion:

o+y= Pp + 2pq + ¢
(Individuals (Individuals (Individuals
homozygous _ heterozygous homozygous
for allele B) with alleles B+b) ——_forallele b)

If @ = 0.16 (the frequency of white cats), then g = 0.4.
Therefore, p, the frequency of allele B, would be 0.6 (1.0 —
0.4 = 0.6). We can now easily calculate the genotype fre-
quencies: there are p? = (0.6)? X 100 (the number of cats in
the total population), or 36 homozygous dominant BB indi-
viduals. The heterozygous individuals have the Bb geno-
type, and there would be 2pq, or (2 X 0.6 X 0.4) X 100, or
48 heterozygous Bh individuals.

 

 

 

 

Sperm Eggs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b
4
NN
Phenotypes
Genotypes BB Bb bb
lore One 0.36 0.48 0.16
genotype in population
Frequency of gametes 0.36 +0.24 = 068 0.24 +0.16 = 0.4b
FIGURE 20.4

The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In the absence of factors that alter them, the frequencies of gametes, genotypes, and phenotypes

remain constant generation after generation.

424 Part VI Evolution
