Identifying the Evolutionary Forces
Maintaining Polymorphism
The Adaptive Selection Theory

As evidence began to accumulate in the 1970s that natural
populations exhibit a great deal of genetic polymorphism
(that is, many alleles of a gene exist in the population), the
question arose: What evolutionary force is maintaining the
polymorphism? As we have seen, there are in principle five
processes that act on allele frequencies: mutation, migra-
tion, nonrandom mating, genetic drift, and selection. Be-
cause migration and nonrandom mating are not major in-
fluences in most natural populations, attention focused on
the other three forces.

The first suggestion, advanced by R. C. Lewontin (one
of the discovers of enzyme polymorphism) and many oth-
ers, was that selection was the force acting to maintain the
polymorphism. Natural environments are often quite het-
erogeneous, so selection might reasonably be expected to
pull gene frequencies in different directions within differ-
ent microhabitats, generating a condition in which many
alleles persist. This proposal is called the adaptive selec-
tion theory.

The Neutral Theory

A second possibility, championed by the great Japanese
geneticist Moto Kimura, was that a balance between mu-
tation and genetic drift is responsible for maintaining
polymorphism. Kimura used elegant mathematics to
demonstrate that, even in the absence of selection, nat-
ural populations could be expected to contain consider-
able polymorphism if mutation rates (generating the vari-
ation) were high enough and population sizes (promoting
genetic drift) were small enough. In this proposal, selec-
tion is not acting, differences between alleles being “neu-
tral to selection.” The proposal is thus called the neutral
theory.

Kimura’s theory, while complex, can be stated simply:

A= 1/(4N, +1)

 

H, the mean heterozygosity, is the likelihood that a
randomly selected member of the population will be het-
erozygous at a randomly selected locus. In a population
without selection, this value is influenced by two vari-
ables, the effective population size (N,) and the mutation
rate (#1).

The peculiar difficulty of the neutral theory is that the
level of polymorphism, as measured by H, is determined
by the product of a very large number, N,, and a very
small number, #, both very difficult to measure with pre-
cision. As a result, the theory can account for almost any
value of H, making it very difficult to prove or disprove.
As you might expect, a great deal of controversy has
resulted.

430 = Part VI Evolution

Testing the Neutral Theory

Choosing between the adaptive selection theory and the
neutral theory is not simple, for they both appear to ac-
count for much of the data on gene polymorphism in nat-
ural populations. A few well-characterized instances where
selection acts on enzyme alleles do not settle the more gen-
eral issue. An attempt to test the neutral theory by examin-
ing large-scale patterns of polymorphism sheds light on the
difficulty of choosing between the two theorie:

 

Population size: According to the neutral theory,
polymorphism as measured by H should be proportional
to the effective population size N,, assuming the muta-
tion rate among neutral alleles 77 is constant. Thus, H
should be much greater for insects than humans, as
there are far more individuals in an insect population
than in a human one. When DNA sequence variation is
examined, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster indeed
exhibits sixfold higher levels of variation, as the theory
predicts; but when enzyme polymorphisms are exam-
ined, levels of variation in fruit flies and humans are
similar. If the level of DNA variation correctly mirrors
the predictions of the neutral theory, then something
(selection?) is increasing variation at the enzyme level in
humans. These sorts of patterns argue for rejection of
the neutral theory.

The nearly neutral model: One way to rescue the
neutral theory from these sorts of difficulties is to retreat
from the assumption of strict neutrality, modifying the
theory to assume that many of the variants are slightly
deleterious rather than strictly neutral to selection. With
this adjustment, it is possible to explain many of the
population-size-dependent large-scale patterns. How-
ever, little evidence exists that the wealth of enzyme
polymorphism in natural populations is in fact slightly
deleterious.

As increasing amounts of DNA sequence data become
available, a detailed picture of variation at the DNA level is
emerging. It seems clear that most nucleotide substitutions
that change amino acids are disadvantageous and are elimi-
nated by selection. But what about the many protein alleles
that are seen in natural populations? Are they nearly neu-
tral or advantageous? No simple answer is yet available, al-
though the question is being actively investigated. Levels of
polymorphism at enzyme-encoding genes may depend on
both the action of selection on the gene (the adaptive selec-
tion theory) and on the population dynamics of the species
(the nearly neutral theory), with the relative contribution
varying from one gene to the next.

Adaptive selection clearly maintains some enzyme poly-
morphisms in natural populations. Genetic drift seems to
play a major role in producing the variation we see at the
DNA level. For most enzyme-level polymorphism, investi-
gators cannot yet choose between the selection theory and
the nearly neutral theory.
