4. Genetic Drift

In small populations, frequencies of particular alleles may
change drastically by chance alone. Such changes in allele
frequencies occur randomly, as if the frequencies were
drifting, and are thus known as genetic drift. For this rea-
son, a population must be large to be in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium. If the gametes of only a few individuals form
the next generation, the alleles they carry may by chance
not be representative of the parent population from which
they were drawn, as illustrated in figure 20.6, where a small
number of individuals are removed from a bottle contain-
ing many. By chance, most of the individuals removed are
blue, so the new population has a much higher population
of blue individuals than the parent one had.

A set of small populations that are isolated from one an-
other may come to differ strongly as a result of genetic drift
even if the forces of natural selection do not differ between
the populations. Indeed, because of genetic drift, harmful
alleles may increase in frequency in small populations, de-
spite selective disadvantage, and favorable alleles may be
lost even though selectively advantageous. It is interesting
to realize that humans have lived in small groups for much
of the course of their evolution; consequently, genetic drift
may have been a particularly important factor in the evolu-
tion of our species.

Even large populations may feel the effect of genetic
drift. Large populations may have been much smaller in the
past, and genetic drift may have greatly altered allele fre-
quencies at that time. Imagine a population containing only
two alleles of a gene, B and J, in equal frequency (that is, p
= q = 0.5). In a large Hardy-Weinberg population, the
genotype frequencies are expected to be 0.25 BB, 0.50 Bb,
and 0.25 bb. If only a small sample produces the next gener-
ation, large deviations in these genotype frequencies can
occur by chance. Imagine, for example, that four individu-
als form the next generation, and that by chance they are
two Bb heterozygotes and two BB homozygotes—the allele
frequencies in the next generation are p = 0.75 and q = 0.25!
If you were to replicate this experiment 1000 times, each
time randomly drawing four individuals from the parental
population, one of the two alleles would be missing entirely
from about 8 of the 1000 populations. This leads to an im-
portant conclusion: genetic drift leads to the loss of alleles
in isolated populations. Two related causes of decreases in
a population’s size are founder effects and bottlenecks.

Founder Effects. Sometimes one or a few individuals
disperse and become the founders of a new, isolated popu-
lation at some distance from their place of origin. These pi-
oneers are not likely to have all the alleles present in the
source population. Thus, some alleles may be lost from the
new population and others may change drastically in fre-
quency. In some cases, previously rare alleles in the source
population may be a significant fraction of the new popula-
tion’s genetic endowment. This phenomenon is called the
founder effect. Founder effects are not rare in nature.

    

— —- —
OW
Parent Bottleneck Surviving Next
population (drastic reduction _ individuals generation
in population)
FIGURE 20.6

Genetic drift: The bottleneck effect. The parent population
contains roughly equal numbers of blue and yellow individuals. By
chance, the few remaining individuals that comprise the next
generation are mostly blue. The bottleneck occurs because so few
individuals form the next generation, as might happen after an
epidemic or catastrophic storm.

Many self-pollinating plants start new populations from a
single seed.

Founder effects have been particularly important in the
evolution of organisms on distant oceanic islands, such as
the Hawaiian Islands and the Galapagos Islands visited by
Darwin. Most of the organisms in such areas probably de-
rive from one or a few initial “founders.” In a similar way,
isolated human populations are often dominated by genetic
features characteristic of their particular founders.

The Bottleneck Effect. Even if organisms do not move
from place to place, occasionally their populations may be
drastically reduced in size. This may result from flooding,
drought, epidemic disease, and other natural forces, or
from progressive changes in the environment. The few sur-
viving individuals may constitute a random genetic sample
of the original population (unless some individuals survive
specifically because of their genetic makeup). The resultant
alterations and loss of genetic variability has been termed
the bottleneck effect.

Some living species appear to be severely depleted ge-
netically and have probably suffered from a bottleneck ef-
fect in the past. For example, the northern elephant seal,
which breeds on the western coast of North America and
nearby islands, was nearly hunted to extinction in the nine-
teenth century and was reduced to a single population con-
taining perhaps no more than 20 individuals on the island
of Guadalupe off the coast of Baja, California. As a result of
this bottleneck, even though the seal populations have re-
bounded and now number in the tens of thousands, this
species has lost almost all of its genetic variation.

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 427
