Gene Variation in Nature

Evolution within a species may result from any process that
causes a change in the genetic composition of a population.
In considering this theory of population genetics, it is best
to start by looking at the genetic variation present among
individuals within a species. This is the raw material avail-
able for the selective process.

Measuring Levels of Genetic Variation

As we saw in chapter 13, a natural population can contain a
great deal of genetic variation. This is true not only of hu-
mans, but of all organisms. How much variation usually oc-
curs? Biologists have looked at many different genes in an
effort to answer this question:

1. Blood groups. Chemical analysis has revealed the ex-
istence of more than 30 blood group genes in humans,
in addition to the ABO locus. At least a third of these
genes are routinely found in several alternative allelic
forms in human populations. In addition to these, there
are more than 45 variable genes encoding other pro-
teins in human blood cells and plasma which are not
considered blood groups. Thus, there are more than 75
genetically variable genes in this one system alone.

2. Enzymes. Alternative alleles of genes specifying
particular enzymes are easy to distinguish by measur-
ing how fast the alternative proteins migrate in an
electric field (a process called electrophoresis). A
great deal of variation exists at enzyme-specifying
loci. About 5% of the enzyme loci of a typical human
are heterozygous: if you picked an individual at
random, and in turn selected one of the enzyme-
encoding genes of that individual at random, the
chances are 1 in 20 (5%) that the gene you selected
would be heterozygous in that individual.

Considering the entire human genome, it is fair to say
that almost all people are different from one another. This
is also true of other organisms, except for those that repro-
duce asexually. In nature, genetic variation is the rule.

Enzyme Polymorphism

Many loci in a given population have more than one allele
at frequencies significantly greater than would occur from
mutation alone. Researchers refer to a locus with more
variation than can be explained by mutation as polymor-
phic (poly, “many,” morphic, “forms”) (figure 20.3). The ex-
tent of such variation within natural populations was not
even suspected a few decades ago, until modern techniques
such as gel electrophoresis made it possible to examine en-
zymes and other proteins directly. We now know that most
populations of insects and plants are polymorphic (that is,
have more than one allele occurring at a frequency greater

 

FIGURE 20.3

Polymorphic variation. These Australian snails, all of the species
Bankivia fasciata, exhibit considerable variation in pattern and
color. Individual variations are heritable and passed on to
offspring.

than 5%) at more than half of their enzyme-encoding loci,
although vertebrates are somewhat less polymorphic. Het-
erozygosity (that is, the probability that a randomly se-
lected gene will be heterozygous for a randomly selected
individual) is about 15% in Drosophila and other inverte-
brates, between 5% and 8% in vertebrates, and around 8%
in outcrossing plants. These high levels of genetic variabil-
ity provide ample supplies of raw material for evolution.

DNA Sequence Polymorphism

With the advent of gene technology, it has become possible
to assess genetic variation even more directly by sequenc-
ing the DNA itself. In a pioneering study in 1989, Martin
Kreitman sequenced ADH genes isolated from 11 individu-
als of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. He found 43 vari-
able sites, only one of which had been detected by protein
electrophoresis! In the following decade, numerous other
studies of variation at the DNA level have confirmed these
findings: abundant variation exists in both the coding re-
gions of genes and in their nontranslated introns—consid-
erably more variation than we can detect examining en-
zymes with electrophoresis.

 

Natural populations contain considerable amounts of
genetic variation—more than can be accounted for by
mutation alone.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 423
