How Proteins Unfold

Ifa protein’s environment is altered, the protein
may change its shape or even unfold. This pro-
cess is called denaturation. Proteins can be de-
natured when the pH, temperature, or ionic
concentration of the surrounding solution is
changed. When proteins are denatured, they are
usually rendered biologically inactive. This is
particularly significant in the case of enzymes.
Because practically every chemical reaction ina

living organism is catalyzed by a specific en- |» —N—C—
zyme, it is vital that a cell’s enzymes remain CH,
functional. That is the rationale behind tradi- ;

5 <—§ Disulfide

tional methods of salt-curing and pickling: prior
to the ready availability of refrigerators and
freezers, the only practical way to keep microor-
ganisms from growing in food was to keep the
food in a solution containing high salt or vine- Ou
gar concentrations, which denatured the en-
zymes of microorganisms and kept them from
growing on the food.

Most enzymes function within a very narrow
range of physical parameters. Blood-borne en-
zymes that course through a human body at a
pH of about 7.4 would rapidly become dena-
tured in the highly acidic environment of the
stomach. On the other hand, the protein-
degrading enzymes that function at a pH of 2 or
less in the stomach would be denatured in the
basic pH of the blood. Similarly, organisms that live near
oceanic hydrothermal vents have enzymes that work well at
the temperature of this extreme environment (over 100°C).
They cannot survive in cooler waters, because their en-
zymes would denature at lower temperatures. Any given
organism usually has a “tolerance range” of pH, tempera-
ture, and salt concentration. Within that range, its enzymes
maintain the proper shape to carry out their biological
functions.

When a protein’s normal environment is reestablished
after denaturation, a small protein may spontancously re-
fold into its natural shape, driven by the interactions be-
tween its nonpolar amino acids and water (figure 3.9).
Larger proteins can rarely refold spontaneously because
of the complex nature of their final shape. It is important
to distinguish denaturation from dissociation. The four
subunits of hemoglobin (figure 3.10) may dissociate into
four individual molecules (two a-globin and two B-
globin) without denaturation of the folded globin pro-
teins, and will readily reassume their four-subunit quater-
nary structure.

 

Every globular protein has a narrow range of conditions
in which it folds properly; outside that range, proteins
tend to unfold.

 

gh
1

Native
ribonuclease

Reduced
ribonuclease

Reducin
———>
‘agent
Cooling or Heating or
removal of addition of
urea urea

Unfolded
ribonuclease

H

FIGURE 3.9

Primary structure determines tertiary structure. When the protein
ribonuclease is treated with reducing agents to break the covalent disulfide bonds
that cross-link its chains, and then placed in urea or heated, the protein denatures
(unfolds) and loses its enzymatic activity. Upon cooling or removal of urea, it
refolds and regains its enzymatic activity. This demonstrates that no information
but the amino acid sequence of the protein is required for proper folding: the
primary structure of the protein determines its tertiary structure.

Beta chains

Heme group

  

FIGURE 3.10
‘The four subunits of hemoglobin. The hemoglobin molecule is
made of four globin protein subunits, informally referred to as
polypeptide chains. The two lower ot chains, identical globin
proteins, are shaded pink; the two upper B chains, identical B-
globin proteins, are shaded blue.

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 45
