Using the Hardy-Weinberg Equation

The Hardy-Weinberg equation is a simple extension of the
Punnett square described in chapter 13, with two alleles as-
signed frequencies p and q. Figure 20.4 allows you to trace
genetic reassortment during sexual reproduction and see
how it affects the frequencies of the B and b alleles during
the next generation. In constructing this diagram, we have
assumed that the union of sperm and egg in these cats is
random, so that all combinations of } and B alleles occur.
For this reason, the alleles are mixed randomly and repre-
sented in the next generation in proportion to their original
representation. Each individual egg or sperm in each gen-
eration has a 0.6 chance of receiving a B allele (p = 0.6) and
a 0.4 chance of receiving aD allele (q = 0.4).

In the next generation, therefore, the chance of combin-
ing two B alleles is p?, or 0.36 (that is, 0.6 X 0.6), and ap-
proximately 36% of the individuals in the population will
continue to have the BB genotype. The frequency of bb in-
dividuals is 2 (0.4 X 0.4) and so will continue to be about
16%, and the frequency of Bb individuals will be 2pq (2
0.6 X 0.4), or approximately 48%. Phenotypically, if the
population size remains at 100 cats, we will still see approx-
imately 84 black individuals (with either BB or Bb geno-
types) and 16 white individuals (with the bb genotype) in
the population. Allele, genotype, and phenotype frequen-
cies have remained unchanged from one generation to the
next.

This simple relationship has proved extraordinarily
useful in assessing actual situations. Consider the recessive
allele responsible for the serious human disease cystic fi-
brosis. This allele is present in North Americans of Cau-
casian descent at a frequency q of about 22 per 1000 indi-
viduals, or 0.022. What proportion of North American
Caucasians, therefore, is expected to express this trait?
The frequency of double recessive individuals (q?) is ex-
pected to be 0.022 x 0.022, or 1 in every 2000 individu-
als. What proportion is expected to be heterozygous car-
riers? If the frequency of the recessive allele q is 0.022,
then the frequency of the dominant allele p must be 1 —
0.022, or 0.978. The frequency of heterozygous individu-
als (2pq) is thus expected to be 2 X 0.978 X 0.022, or 43
in every 1000 individuals.

How valid are these calculated predictions? For many
genes, they prove to be very accurate. As we will see, for
some genes the calculated predictions do not match the ac-
tual values. The reasons they do not tell us a great deal
about evolution.

Why Do Allele Frequencies Change?

According to the Hardy-Weinberg principle, both the al-
lele and genotype frequencies in a large, random-mating
population will remain constant from generation to gen-
eration if no mutation, no gene flow, and no selection
occur. The stipulations tacked onto the end of the state-

Table 20.1 Agents of Evolutionary Change

Factor Description

Mutation ‘The ultimate source of variation. Individual
mutations occur so rarely that mutation
alone does not change allele frequency
much.

Gene flow Avery potent agent of change. Populations
exchange members.

Nonrandom _ Inbreeding is the most common form. It

mating does not alter allele frequency but
decreases the proportion of
heterozygotes.

Genetic drift Statistical accidents. Usually occurs only in
very small populations.

Selection The only form that produces adaptive

evolutionary changes.

ment are important. In fact, they are the key to the im-
portance of the Hardy-Weinberg principle, because indi-
vidual allele frequencies often change in natural popula-
tions, with some alleles becoming more common and
others decreasing in frequency. The Hardy-Weinberg
principle establishes a convenient baseline against which
to measure such changes. By looking at how various fac-
tors alter the proportions of homozygotes and heterozy-
gotes, we can identify the forces affecting particular situa-
tions we observe.

Many factors can alter allele frequencies. Only five,
however, alter the proportions of homozygotes and het-
erozygotes enough to produce significant deviations from
the proportions predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg princi-
ple: mutation, gene flow (including both immigration into
and emigration out of a given population), nonrandom
mating, genetic drift (random change in allele frequencies,
which is more likely in small populations), and selection
(table 20.1). Of these, only selection produces adaptive evo-
lutionary change because only in selection does the result
depend on the nature of the environment. The other fac-
tors operate relatively independently of the environment,
so the changes they produce are not shaped by environ-
mental demands.

 

The Hardy-Weinberg principle states that in a large
population mating at random and in the absence of
other forces that would change the proportions of the
different alleles at a given locus, the process of sexual
reproduction (meiosis and fertilization) alone will not
change these proportions.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 425
