Heterozygote Advantage

In the previous pages, natural selection has been discussed
as a process that removes variation from a population by fa-
voring one allele over others at a genetic locus. However, if
heterozygotes are favored over homozygotes, then natural
selection actually will tend to maintain variation in the
population. The reason is simple. Instead of tending to re-
move less successful alleles from a population, such het-
erozygote advantage will favor individuals with copies of
both alleles, and thus will work to maintain both alleles in
the population. Some evolutionary biologists believe that
heterozygote advantage is pervasive and can explain the
high levels of polymorphism observed in natural popula-
tions. Others, however, believe that it is relatively rare.

Sickle Cell Anemia

The best documented example of heterozygote advantage
is sickle cell anemia, a hereditary disease affecting hemo-
globin in humans. Individuals with sickle cell anemia ex-
hibit symptoms of severe anemia and contain abnormal
red blood cells which are irregular in shape, with a great
number of long and sickle-shaped cells. The disease is
particularly common among African Americans. In chap-
ter 13, we noted that this disorder, which affects roughly
3 African Americans out of every 1000, is associated with
a particular recessive allele. Using the Hardy-Weinberg
equation, you can calculate the frequency of the sickle cell
allele in the African-American population; this frequency
is the square root of 0.003, or approximately 0.054. In
contrast, the frequency of the allele among white Ameri-
cans is only about 0.001.

Sickle cell anemia is often fatal. Until therapies were
developed to more effectively treat its symptoms, almost
all affected individuals died as children. Even today, 31%
of patients in the United States die by the age of 15. The
disease occurs because of a single amino acid change, re-
peated in the two beta chains of the hemoglobin molecule.
In this change, a valine replaces the usual glutamic acid at
a location on the surface of the protein near the oxygen-
binding site. Unlike glutamic acid, valine is nonpolar (hy-
drophobic). Its presence on the surface of the molecule
creates a “sticky” patch that attempts to escape from the
polar water environment by binding to another similar
patch. As long as oxygen is bound to the hemoglobin mol-
ecule there is no problem, because the hemoglobin atoms
shield the critical area of the surface. When oxygen levels
fall, such as after exercise or when an individual is stressed,
oxygen is not so readily bound to hemoglobin and the ex-
posed sticky patch binds to similar patches on other hemo-
globin molecules, eventually producing long, fibrous
clumps (figure 20.11). The result is a deformed, “sickle-
shaped” red blood cell.

Individuals who are heterozygous or homozygous for
the valine-specifying allele (designated allele S) are said to
possess the sickle cell trait. Heterozygotes produce some
sickle-shaped red blood cells, but only 2% of the number
seen in homozygous individuals. The reason is that in het-
erozygotes, one-half of the molecules do not contain va-
line at the critical location. Consequently, when a mole-
cule produced by the non-sickle cell allele is added to the
chain, there is no further “sticky” patch available to add
additional molecules and chain elongation stops. Hence,
most chains in heterozygotes are too short to produce

sickling of the cell.

 

 

 

FIGURE 20.11

Why the sickle cell mutation causes
hemoglobin to clump. The sickle cell
mutation changes the sixth amino acid
in the hemoglobin B chain (position B6)
from glutamic acid (very polar) to valine
(nonpolar). The unhappy result is that
the nonpolar valine at position B6,
protruding from a corner of the
hemoglobin molecule, fits into a
nonpolar pocket on the opposite side of
another hemoglobin molecule, causing
the two molecules to clump together. As
each molecule has both a B6 valine and
an opposite nonpolar pocket, long
chains form. When polar glutamic acid
(the normal allele) occurs at position

B6, it is not attracted to the nonpolar
pocket, and no clumping occurs.
Copyright © Irving Geis.

 

432 = Part VI Evolution
