Interactions among Evolutionary
Forces

When alleles are not selectively neu-
tral, levels of variation retained in a
population may be determined by the
relative strength of different evolution-
ary processes. In theory, for example, if
allele B mutates to allele b at a high
enough rate, allele b could be main-
tained in the population even if natural
selection strongly favored allele B. In
nature, however, mutation rates are
rarely high enough to counter the ef-
fects of natural selection.

The effect of natural selection also
may be countered by genetic drift.
Both processes may act to remove vari-

     
   
  
    
 
  

Bent grass
(Agrostis tenuis)

\

 

Non-mine

   

& 8

Index of copper tolerance
8

  

20 40 60 80 100
Distance in meters

     

120 140 160

 

 

 

FIGURE 20.10
Degree of copper tolerance in grass plants on and near ancient mine sites. Prevailing
winds blow pollen containing nontolerant alleles onto the mine site and tolerant alleles

ation from a population. However,
whereas selection is a deterministic
process that operates to increase the
representation of alleles that enhance
survival and reproductive success, drift
is a random process. Thus, in some cases, drift may lead to
a decrease in the frequency of an allele that is favored by
selection. In some extreme cases, drift may even lead to the
loss of a favored allele from a population. Remember, how-
ever, that the magnitude of drift is negatively related to
population size; consequently, natural selection is expected
to overwhelm drift except when populations are very small.

Gene Flow versus Natural Selection

Gene flow can be either a constructive or a constraining
force. On one hand, gene flow can increase the adaptedness
of a species by spreading a beneficial mutation that arises in
one population to other populations within a species. On
the other hand, gene flow can act to impede adaptation
within a population by continually importing inferior alle-
les from other populations. Consider two populations of a
species that live in different environments. In this situation,
natural selection might favor different alleles—B and b—in
the different populations. In the absence of gene flow and
other evolutionary processes, the frequency of B would be
expected to reach 100% in one population and 0% in the
other. However, if gene flow were going on between the
two populations, then the less favored allele would continu-
ally be reintroduced into each population. As a result, the
frequency of the two alleles in each population would re-
flect a balance between the rate at which gene flow brings
the inferior allele into a population versus the rate at which
natural selection removes it.

A classic example of gene flow opposing natural selec-
tion occurs on abandoned mine sites in Great Britain. Al-
though mining activities ceased hundreds of years ago, the
concentration of metal ions in the soil is still much greater

beyond the site’s borders.

than in surrounding areas. Heavy metal concentrations are
generally toxic to plants, but alleles at certain genes confer
resistance. The ability to tolerate heavy metals comes at a
price, however; individuals with the resistance allele exhibit
lower growth rates on non-polluted soil. Consequently, we
would expect the resistance allele to occur with a frequency
of 100% on mine sites and 0% elsewhere. Heavy metal tol-
erance has been studied particularly intensively in the slen-
der bent grass, Agrostis tenuis, in which researchers have
found that the resistance allele occurs at intermediate levels
in many areas (figure 20.10). The explanation relates to the
reproductive system of this grass in which pollen, the male
gamete (that is, the floral equivalent of sperm), is dispersed
by the wind. As a result, pollen—and the alleles it carries—
can be blown for great distances, leading to levels of gene
flow between mine sites and unpolluted areas high enough
to counteract the effects of natural selection.

In general, the extent to which gene flow can hinder the
effects of natural selection should depend on the relative
strengths of the two processes. In species in which gene
flow is generally strong, such as birds and wind-pollinated
plants, the frequency of the less favored allele may be rela-
tively high, whereas in more sedentary species which ex-
hibit low levels of gene flow, such as salamanders, the fa-
vored allele should occur at a frequency near 100%.

 

Evolutionary processes may act to either remove or
maintain genetic variation within a population. Allele
frequency sometimes may reflect a balance between
opposed processes, such as gene flow and natural
selection. In such cases, observed frequencies will
depend on the relative strength of the processes.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 431
