 

DNA

UV light

Five Agents of
Evolutionary Change

   

1. Mutation

Mutation from one allele to an-
other can obviously change the
proportions of particular alleles
in a population. Mutation rates
are generally so low that they

have little effect on the (a) Mutation

Self- ¥
fertilization,

 

 

 

 

Hardy-Weinberg proportions of
common alleles. A single gene

 

may mutate about | to 10 times
per 100,000 cell divisions (al-
though some genes mutate much
more frequently than that). Be-
cause most environments are
constantly changing, it is rare for
a population to be stable enough
to accumulate changes in allele
frequency produced by a process
this slow. Nonetheless, mutation

u

 

 

is the ultimate source of genetic | (d) Genetic drift

is
(b) Gene flow (c) Nonrandom mating
FIGURE 20.5
Five agents of
evolutionary change.

(a) Mutation, (b) gene flow,
(©) nonrandom mating,

@ genetic drift, and

(e) selection.

 

 

 

 

variation and thus makes evolu-
tion possible. It is important to
remember, however, that the likelihood of a particular mu-
tation occurring is not affected by natural selection; that is,
mutations do not occur more frequently in situations in
which they would be favored by natural selection.

2. Gene Flow

Gene flow is the movement of alleles from one population
to another. It can be a powerful agent of change because
members of two different populations may exchange ge-
netic material. Sometimes gene flow is obvious, as when an
animal moves from one place to another. If the characteris-
tics of the newly arrived animal differ from those of the an-
imals already there, and if the newcomer is adapted well
enough to the new area to survive and mate successfully,
the genetic composition of the receiving population may be
altered. Other important kinds of gene flow are not as ob-
vious. These subtler movements include the drifting of ga-
metes or immature stages of plants or marine animals from
one place to another (figure 20.5). Male gametes of flower-
ing plants are often carried great distances by insects and
other animals that visit their flowers. Seeds may also blow
in the wind or be carried by animals or other agents to new
populations far from their place of origin. In addition, gene
flow may also result from the mating of individuals belong-
ing to adjacent populations.

However it occurs, gene flow can alter the genetic char-
acteristics of populations and prevent them from maintain-
ing Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In addition, even low
levels of gene flow tend to homogenize allele frequencies

426 Part VI_ Evolution

among populations and thus keep the populations from di-
verging genetically. In some situations, gene flow can
counter the effect of natural selection by bringing an allele
into a population at a rate greater than that at which the al-
lele is removed by selection.

3. Nonrandom Mating

Individuals with certain genotypes sometimes mate with
one another more commonly than would be expected on a
random basis, a phenomenon known as nonrandom mat-
ing. Inbreeding (mating with relatives) is a type of nonran-
dom mating that causes the frequencies of particular geno-
types to differ greatly from those predicted by the
Hardy-Weinberg principle. Inbreeding does not change
the frequency of the alleles, but rather increases the pro-
portion of homozygous individuals because relatives are
likely be genetically similar and thus produce offspring
with two copies of the same allele. This is why populations
of self-fertilizing plants consist primarily of homozygous
individuals, whereas outcrossing plants, which interbreed
with individuals different from themselves, have a higher
proportion of heterozygous individuals.

By increasing homozygosity in a population, inbreeding
increases the expression of recessive alleles. It is for this
reason that marriage between close relatives is discouraged
and to some degree outlawed—it increases the possibility
of producing children homozygous for an allele associated
with one or more of the recessive genetic disorders dis-
cussed in chapter 13.
