5. Selection

As Darwin pointed out, some individuals leave behind
more progeny than others, and the rate at which they do so
is affected by phenotype and behavior. We describe the re-
sults of this process as selection and speak of both artifi-
cial selection and natural selection. In artificial selection,
the breeder selects for the desired characteristics. In natural
selection, environmental conditions determine which indi-
viduals in a population produce the most offspring. For
natural selection to occur and result in evolutionary
change, three conditions must be met:

1. Variation must exist among individuals in a popu-
lation. Natural selection works by favoring individ-
uals with some traits over individuals with alternative
traits. If no variation exists, natural selection cannot
operate.

2. Variation among individuals results in differences
in number of offspring surviving in the next gen-
eration. This is the essence of natural selection. Be-
cause of their phenotype or behavior, some indi
als are more successful than others in producing
offspring and thus passing their genes on to the next
generation.

3. Variation must be genetically inherited. For
natural selection to result in evolutionary change,
the selected differences must have a genetic basis.
However, not all variation has a genetic basis—even
genetically identical individuals may be phenotypi-
cally quite distinctive if they grow up in different
environments. Such environmental effects are com-
mon in nature. In many turtles, for example, indi-
viduals that hatch from eggs laid in moist soil are
heavier, with longer and wider shells, than individu-
als from nests in drier areas. As a result of these en-
vironmental effects, variation within a population
does not always indicate the existence of underlying
genetic variation. When phenotypically different
individuals do not differ genetically, then differ-
ences in the number of their offspring will not alter
the genetic composition of the population in the
next generation and, thus, no evolutionary change
will have occurred.

 

lu-

It is important to remember that natural selection and
evolution are not the same—the two concepts often are
incorrectly equated. Natural selection is a process,
whereas evolution is the historical record of change
through time. Evolution is an outcome, not a process.
Natural selection (the process) can lead to evolution (the
outcome), but natural selection is only one of several
processes that can produce evolutionary change. More-
over, natural selection can occur without producing evo-
lutionary change; only if variation is genetically based will
natural selection lead to evolution.

428 Part VI Evolution

Selection to Avoid Predators. Many of the most dra-
matic documented instances of adaptation involve genetic
changes which decrease the probability of capture by a
predator. The caterpillar larvae of the common sulphur
butterfly Colias eurytheme usually exhibit a dull Kelly green
color, providing excellent camouflage on the alfalfa plants
on which they feed. An alternative bright blue color morph
is kept at very low frequency because this color renders the
larvae highly visible on the food plant, making it easier for
bird predators to see them. In a similar fashion, the way the
shell markings in the land snail Cepaea nemoralis match its
background habitat reflects the same pattern of avoiding
predation by camouflage.

One of the most dramatic examples of background
matching involves ancient lava flows in the middle of
deserts in the American southwest. In these areas, the black
rock formations produced when the lava cooled contrasts
starkly to the surrounding bright glare of the desert sand.
Populations of many species of animals—including lizards,
rodents, and a variety of insects—occurring on these rocks
are dark in color, whereas sand-dwelling populations in
surrounding areas are much lighter (figure 20.7). Predation
is the likely cause selecting for these differences in color.
Laboratory studies have confirmed that predatory birds are
adept at picking out individuals occurring on backgrounds
to which they are not adapted.

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

 

FIGURE 20.7
Pocket mice from the Tularosa Basin of New Mexico whose
color matches their background. (a) The rock pocket mouse
lives on lava, (#) while the Apache pocket mouse lives on white
sand.
