Selection to Match Climatic Conditions. Many
studies of selection have focused on genes encoding en-
zymes because in such cases the investigator can directly
assess the consequences to the organism of changes in the
frequency of alternative enzyme alleles. Often investiga-
tors find that enzyme allele frequencies vary latitudinally,
with one allele more common in northern populations but
progressively less common at more southern locations. A
superb example is seen in studies of a fish, the mummi-
chog, Fundulus heteroclitus, which ranges along the eastern
coast of North America. In this fish, allele frequencies of
the gene that produces the enzyme lactase dehydrogenase,
which catalyzes the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, vary
geographically (figure 20.8). Biochemical studies show
that the enzymes formed by these alleles function differ-
ently at different temperatures, thus explaining their geo-
graphic distributions. For example, the form of the en-
zyme that is more frequent in the north is a better catalyst
at low temperatures than the enzyme from the south.
Moreover, functional studies indicate that at low tempera-
tures, individuals with the northern allele swim faster, and
presumably survive better, than individuals with the alter-
native allele.

Selection for Pesticide Resistance. A particularly clear
example of selection in action in natural populations is pro-
vided by studies of pesticide resistance in insects. The
widespread use of insecticides has led to the rapid evolution
of resistance in more than 400 pest species. For example,
the resistance allele at the pen gene decreases the uptake of
insecticide, whereas alleles at the kdr and did-r genes de-
crease the number of target sites, thus decreasing the bind-
ing ability of the insecticide (figure 20.9). Other alleles en-
hance the ability of the insects’ enzymes to identify and
detoxify insecticide molecules.

Single genes are also responsible for resistance in other
organisms. The pigweed, Amaranthus hybridus, is one of
about 28 agricultural weeds that have evolved resistance
to the herbicide Triazine. Triazine inhibits photosynthe-
sis by binding to a protein in the chloroplast membrane.
Single amino acid substitutions in the gene encoding the
protein diminish the ability of Triazine to decrease the
plant’s photosynthetic capabilities. Similarly, Norway rats
are normally susceptible to the pesticide Warfarin, which
diminishes the clotting ability of the rat’s blood and leads
to fatal hemorrhaging. However, a resistance allele at a
single gene alters a metabolic pathway and renders War-
farin ineffective.

 

Five factors can bring about a deviation from the
proportions of homozygotes and heterozygotes
predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg principle. Only
selection regularly produces adaptive evolutionary
change, but the genetic constitution of individual
populations, and thus the course of evolution, can also
be affected by mutation, gene flow, nonrandom
mating, and genetic drift.

 

 

 

1.0-

0.8-

0.6

Frequency of cold-adapted allele

 

 

 

 

Latitude (Degrees North)

 

 

 

FIGURE 20.8

Selection to match climatic conditions. Frequency of the cold-
adapted allele for lactase dehydrogenase in the mummichog
(Fundulus heteroclitus) decreases at lower latitudes, which are
warmer.

 

Pesticide.
molecule

        

Target site ©

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 20.9

Selection for pesticide resistance. Resistance alleles at genes
like pen and kdr allow insects to be more resistant to pesticides.
Insects that possess these resistance alleles have become more
common through selection.

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 429
