 

Forms of Selection

In nature many traits, perhaps most, are affected by more
than one gene. The interactions between genes are typi-
cally complex, as you saw in chapter 13. For example, alle-
les of many different genes play a role in determining
human height (see figure 13.18). In such cases, selection
operates on all the genes, influencing most strongly those
that make the greatest contribution to the phenotype. How
selection changes the population depends on which geno-
types are favored.

Disruptive Selection

In some situations, selection acts to eliminate rather than to
favor intermediate types. A clear example is the different

on traits affected by many genes.

beak sizes of the African fire-bellied seedcracker finch Py-
ronestes ostrinus. Populations of these birds contain individ-
uals with large and small beaks, but very few individuals
with intermediate-sized beaks. As their name implies, these
birds feed on seeds, and the available seeds fall into two size
categories: large and small. Only large-beaked birds can
open the tough shells of large seeds, whereas birds with the
smallest beaks are most adept at handling small seeds. Birds
with intermediate-sized beaks are at a disadvantage with
both seed types: unable to open large seeds and too clumsy
to efficiently process small seeds. Consequently, selection
acts to eliminate the intermediate phenotypes, in effect par-
titioning the population into two phenotypically distinct
groups. This form of selection is called disruptive selec-
tion (figure 20.132).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) Disruptive selection (b) Directional selection (c) Stabilizing selection
2
§
2
2
£
2
3
a
5
c=
o 2 50 75 100 125 Oo 25 50 75 100 125 oO 2 50 75 100 125
Selection for small and large individuals Selection for larger individuals Selection for midsized individuals
gq A | Two peaks form _ Peak shifts Peak gets narrower
7I\.
3 fi\
2 4 %
2 Y \
3 / / ;
g / f \
£ / / \
Zz F yo Ze \
Oo 25 50 75 100 125 Oo 2 50 75 100 125
FIGURE 20.13

Three kinds of natural selection. The top panels show the populations before selection has occurred, with the forms that will be selected
against shaded red and the forms that will be favored shaded blue. The bottom panels indicate what the populations will look like after
selection has occurred. (a) In disruptive selection, individuals in the middle of the range of phenotypes of a certain trait are selected against
(red), and the extreme forms of the trait are favored (b/ue). (b) In directional selection, individuals concentrated toward one extreme of the
array of phenotypes are favored. (c) In stabilizing selection, individuals with midrange phenotypes are favored, with selection acting against

both ends of the range of phenotypes.

434 = Part VI Evolution
