 

Selection against Rare Alleles

A second factor limits what selection can
accomplish: selection acts only on pheno-
types. For this reason, selection does not
operate efficiently on rare recessive alle-
les, simply because there is no way to se-
lect against them unless they come to-
gether as homozygotes. For example,
when a recessive allele @ is present at a
frequency q equal to 0.2, only four out of
a hundred individuals (g’) will be double
recessive and display the phenotype asso-
ciated with this allele (figure 20.18). For
lower allele frequencies, the effect is even
more dramatic: if the frequency in the
population of the recessive allele g = 0.01,
the frequency of recessive homozygotes in
that population will be only 1 in 10,000.
The fact that selection acts on pheno-
types rather than genotypes means that
selection against undesirable genetic
traits in humans or domesticated animals
is difficult unless the heterozygotes can
also be detected. For example, if a par-
ticular recessive allele r (gq = 0.01) was
considered undesirable, and none of the
homozygotes for this allele were allowed
to breed, it would take 1000 generations, —~AA
or about 25,000 years in humans, to. | — aq
lower the allele frequency by half to —aa
0.005. At this point, after 25,000 years of

Genotype frequency

 

 

 

 

 

02 04 06 08 1.0

Frequency of a

 

 

work, the frequency of homozygotes

FIGURE 20.18

would still be 1 in 40,000, or 25% of The relationship between allele frequency and genotype frequency. If allele a is

what it was initially.

present at a frequency of 0.2, the double recessive genotype aa is only present at a

frequency of 0.04. In other words, only 4 in 100 individuals will have a homozygous

Selection in Laboratory
Environments

One way to assess the action of selection is to carry out
artificial selection in the laboratory. Strains that are ge-
netically identical except for the gene subject to selection
can be crossed so that the possibility of linkage disequilib-
rium does not confound the analysis. Populations of bac-
teria provide a particularly powerful tool for studying se-
lection in the laboratory because bacteria have a short
generation time (less than an hour) and can be grown in
huge numbers in growth vats called chemostats. In pio-
neering studies, Dan Hartl and coworkers backcrossed
bacteria with different alleles of the enzyme 6-PGD into a
homogeneous genetic background, and then compared
the growth of the different strains when they were fed
only gluconate, the enzyme’s substrate. Hartl found that
all of the alleles grew at the same rate! The different alle-

recessive genotype, while 64 in 100 will have a homozygous dominant genotype.

les were thus selectively neutral in a normal genetic back-
ground. However, when Hartl disabled an alternative bio-
chemical pathway for the metabolism of gluconate, so that
only 6-PGD mediated the utilization of this sole source of
carbon, he obtained very different results: several alleles
were markedly superior to others. Selection was clearly
able to operate on these alleles, but only under certain
conditions.

 

The ability of selection to produce evolutionary change
is hindered by a variety of factors, including multiple
effects of single genes, gene interactions, and lack of
genetic variation. Moreover, selection can only
eliminate rare recessive alleles very slowly.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 437
