 

Limits to What Selection
130

 

Can Accomplish

Although selection is perhaps the most
powerful of the five principal agents of ge-
netic change, there are limits to what it can
accomplish. These limits arise because al-
ternative alleles may interact in different
ways with other genes and because alleles
often affect multiple aspects of the pheno-
type (the phenomena of epistasis and
pleiotropy discussed in chapter 13). These
interactions tend to set limits on how much
a phenotype can be altered. For example,
selecting for large clutch size in barnyard
chickens eventually leads to eggs with thin-

125 ;—

120

(seconds)

115

Kentucky Derby winning speed

 

110

 

 

ner shells that break more easily. For this
reason, we do not have gigantic cattle that
yield twice as much meat as our leading
strains, chickens that lay twice as many
eggs as the best layers do now, or corn with

1900

 

 

 

an ear at the base of every leaf, instead of

just at the base of a few leaves. FIGURE 20.16

Selection for increased speed in racehorses is no longer effective. Kentucky

Evolution Requires Genetic
Variation

Over 80% of the gene pool of the thor-

oughbred horses racing today goes back to 31 known an-
cestors from the late eighteenth century. Despite intense
directional selection on thoroughbreds, their perfor-
mance times have not improved for the last 50 years (fig-
ure 20.16). Years of intense selection presumably have re-
moved variation from the population at a rate greater
than it could be replenished by mutation such that now
no genetic variation remains and evolutionary change is
not possible.

In some cases, phenotypic variation for a trait may
never have had a genetic basis. The compound eyes of in-
sects are made up of hundreds of visual units, termed om-
matidia. In some individuals, the left eye contains more
ommatidia than the right eye. However, despite intense
selection in the laboratory, scientists have never been
able to produce a line of fruit flies that consistently have
more ommatidia in the left eye than in the right. The
reason is that separate genes do not exist for the left and
right eyes. Rather, the same genes affect both eyes, and
differences in the number of ommatidia result from dif-
ferences that occur as the eyes are formed in the develop-
ment process (figure 20.17). Thus, despite the existence
of phenotypic variation, no genetic variation is available
for selection to favor.

436 = Part VI_ Evolution

Derby winning speeds have not improved significantly since 1950.

Right

 

FIGURE 20.17

Phenotypic variation in insect ommatidia. In some individuals,
the number of ommatidia in the left eye is greater than the
number in the right eye. However, this difference is not
genetically based; developmental processes cause the difference.
