 

 
    
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15+ Selected population
44. _ that tends to fly 20 r 100
toward light
2 3 - 70
= c
2 12 Ss
2 B15 + 508
S11 3 3
5 10 g + 308
2 ey Sg
24 £ L 29%
2
€

57 310 103
5 5 a
BE 8 +7 =
£5 é
2 41 Selected population oa ps

3. that tends not to es

fly toward light
ab y 2 _ L_ Lo
SSS So EEE |
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Number of generations a a
Birth weight in pounds
FIGURE 20.14 FIGURE 20.15

Directional selection for phototropism in Drosophila. In
generation after generation, individuals of the fly Drosophila were
selectively bred to obtain two populations. When flies with a
strong tendency to fly toward light (positive phototropism) were
used as parents for the next generation, their offspring had a
greater tendency to fly toward light (top curve). When flies that
tended or to fly toward light were used as parents for the next
generation, their offspring had an even greater tendency not to fly
toward light (bottom curve).

Directional Selection

When selection acts to eliminate one extreme from an
array of phenotypes (figure 20.130), the genes promoting
this extreme become less frequent in the population. Thus,
in the Drosophila population illustrated in figure 20.14, the
elimination of flies that move toward light causes the popu-
lation to contain fewer individuals with alleles promoting
such behavior. If you were to pick an individual at random
from the new fly population, there is a smaller chance it
would spontaneously move toward light than if you had se-
lected a fly from the old population. Selection has changed
the population in the direction of lower light attraction.
This form of selection is called directional selection.

Stabilizing Selection

When selection acts to eliminate both extremes from an
array of phenotypes (figure 20.13¢), the result is to increase
the frequency of the already common intermediate type. In
effect, selection is operating to prevent change away from
this middle range of values. Selection does not change the
most common phenotype of the population, but rather
makes it even more common by eliminating extremes.

Stabilizing selection for birth weight in human beings. The

death rate among babies (red curve; right y-axis) is lowest at an

intermediate birth weight; both smaller and larger babies have a
greater tendency to die than those around the optimum weight

(blue area; left y-axis) of between 7 and 8 pounds.

Many examples are known. In humans, infants with inter-
mediate weight at birth have the highest survival rate (fig-
ure 20.15). In ducks and chickens, eggs of intermediate
weight have the highest hatching success. This form of se-
lection is called stabilizing selection.

Components of Fitness

Natural selection occurs when individuals with one pheno-
type leave more surviving offspring in the next generation
than individuals with an alternative phenotype. Evolution-
ary biologists quantify reproductive success as fitness, the
number of surviving offspring left in the next generation.
Although selection is often characterized as “survival of the
fittest,” differences in survival are only one component of
fitness. Even if no differences in survival occur, selection
may operate if some individuals are more successful than
others in attracting mates. In many territorial animal
species, large males mate with many females and small
mates rarely get to mate. In addition, the number of off-
spring produced per mating is also important. Large female
frogs and fish lay more eggs than smaller females and thus
may leave more offspring in the next generation.

 

Selection on traits affected by many genes can favor
both extremes of the trait, or intermediate values, or
only one extreme.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 435
