21

The Evidence for
Evolution

Concept Outline

21.1 Fossil evidence indicates that evolution has
occurred.

‘The Fossil Record. When fossils are arranged in the
order of their age, a continual series of change is seen, new
changes being added at each stage.

‘The Evolution of Horses. The record of horse evolution
is particularly well-documented and instructive.

21.2 Natural selection can produce evolutionary
change.

The Beaks of Darwin’s Finches. Natural selection
favors stouter bills in dry years, when large tough-to-crush
seeds are the only food available to finches.

Peppered Moths and Industrial Melanism. Natural
selection favors dark-colored moths in areas of heavy
pollution, while light-colored moths survive better in
unpolluted areas.

Artificial Selection. Artificial selection practiced in
laboratory studies, agriculture, and domestication
demonstrate that selection can produce substantial
evolutionary change.

21.3 Evidence for evolution can be found in other
fields of biology.

The Anatomical Record. When anatomical features of
living animals are examined, evidence of shared ancestry is
often apparent.

The Molecular Record. When gene or protein
sequences from organisms are arranged, species thought to
be closely related based on fossil evidence are seen to be
more similar than species thought to be distantly related.
Convergent and Divergent Evolution. Evolution favors
similar forms under similar circumstances.

21.4 The theory of evolution has proven controversial.

Darwin's Critics. Critics have raised seven objections to
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection.

 

FIGURE 21.1

A window into the past. The fossil remains of the now-
extinct reptile Mesosaurus found in Permian sediments in
Africa and South America provided one of the earliest clues
to a former connection between the two continents.
Mesosaurus was a freshwater species and so clearly incapable
of a transatlantic swim. Therefore, it must have lived in the
lakes and rivers of a formerly contiguous landmass that
later became divided as Africa and South America drifted

apart in the Cretaceous.

f all the major ideas of biology, the theory that to-

day’s organisms evolved from now-extinct ancestors
(figure 21.1) is perhaps the best known to the general pub-
lic. This is not because the average person truly under-
stands the basic facts of evolution, but rather because many
people mistakenly believe that it represents a challenge to
their religious beliefs. Similar highly publicized criticisms
of evolution have occurred ever since Darwin’s time. For
this reason, it is important that, during the course of your
study of biology, you address the issue squarely: Just what
is the evidence for evolution?

439
