The Evolution of Horses

One of the best-studied cases in the fossil record concerns
the evolution of horses. Modern-day members of the
Equidae include horses, zebras, donkeys and asses, all of
which are large, long-legged, fast-running animals adapted
to living on open grasslands. These species, all classified in
the genus Equus, are the last living descendants of a long
lineage that has produced 34 genera since its origin in the
Eocene Period, approximately 55 million years ago. Exam-
ination of these fossils has provided a particularly well-
documented case of how evolution has proceeded by adap-
tation to changing environments.

The First Horse

The earliest known members of the horse family, species in
the genus Hyracotherium, didn’t look much like horses at
all. Small, with short legs and broad feet (figure 21.5), these
species occurred in wooded habitats, where they probably
browsed on leaves and herbs and escaped predators by
dodging through openings in the forest vegetation. The
evolutionary path from these diminutive creatures to the
workhorses of today has involved changes in a variety of
traits, including:

Size. The first horses were no bigger than dogs, with
some considerably smaller. By contrast, modern equids
can weigh more than a half ton. Examination of the fos-
sil record reveals that horses changed little in size for
their first 30 million years, but since then, a number of
different lineages exhibited rapid and substantial in-
creases. However, trends toward decreased size were
also exhibited among some branches of the equid evolu-
tionary tree (figure 21.6).

Toe reduction. The feet of modern horses have a sin-
gle toe, enclosed in a tough, bony hoof. By contrast,
Hyracotherium had four toes on its front feet and three
on its hindfeet. Rather than hooves, these toes were en-
cased in fleshy pads. Examination of the fossils clearly
shows the transition through time: increase in length of
the central toe, development of the bony hoof, and re-
duction and loss of the other toes (figure 21.7). As with
body size, these trends occurred concurrently on several
different branches of the horse evolutionary tree. At the
same time as these developments, horses were evolving
changes in the length and skeletal structure of the limbs,
leading to animals capable of running long distances at
high speeds.

Tooth size and shape. The teeth of Hyracotherium
were small and relatively simple in shape. Through time,
horse teeth have increased greatly in length and have de-
veloped a complex pattern of ridges on their molars and
premolars (figure 21.7). The effect of these changes is to
produce teeth better capable of chewing tough and
gritty vegetation, such as grass, which tends to wear

442 Part VI_ Evolution

 

FIGURE 21.5
Hyracotherium sandrae, one of the earliest horses, was the
size of a housecat.

 

   
 

Body size (kg)

Merychippus

Mesohippus

MAE sracotherum 4 et

  

\Nannippus

Toe aaa a aap cunt eeelaeee eet amen oaeetae aaa

60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 O
Millions of years ago

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 21.6

Evolutionary change in body size of horses. Lines show the
broad outline of evolutionary relationships. Although most
change involved increases in size, some decreases also
occurred,

teeth down. Accompanying these changes have been al-
terations in the shape of the skull that strengthened the
skull to withstand the stresses imposed by continual
chewing. As with body size, evolutionary change has not
been constant through time. Rather, much of the change
in tooth shape has occurred within the past 20 million
years.

All of these changes may be understood as adaptations to
changing global climates. In particular, during the late
