3.3 Nucleic acids store and transfer genetic information.

Information Molecules

The biochemical activity of a cell depends on production of
a large number of proteins, each with a specific sequence.
The ability to produce the correct proteins is passed be-
tween generations of organisms, even though the protein
molecules themselves are not.

Nucleic acids are the information storage devices of
cells, just as disks or tapes store the information that com-
puters use, blueprints store the information that builders
use, and road maps store the information that tourists use.
There are two varieties of nucleic acids: deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA; figure 3.11) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). The
way in which DNA encodes the information used to as-
semble proteins is similar to the way in which the letters
on a page encode information (see chapter 14). Unique
among macromolecules, nucleic acids are able to serve as
templates to produce precise copies of themselves, so that
the information that specifies what an organism is can be
copied and passed down to its descendants. For this rea-
son, DNA is often referred to as the hereditary material.
Cells use the alternative form of nucleic acid, RNA, to
read the cell’s DNA-encoded information and direct the
synthesis of proteins. RNA is similar to DNA in structure
and is made as a transcripted copy of portions of the
DNA. This transcript passes out into the rest of the cell,
where it serves as a blueprint specifying a protein’s amino
acid sequence. This process will be described in detail in
chapter 15.

“Seeing” DNA

DNA molecules cannot be seen with an optical micro-
scope, which is incapable of resolving anything smaller
than 1000 atoms across. An electron microscope can
image structures as small as a few dozen atoms across, but
still cannot resolve the individual atoms of a DNA strand.
This limitation was finally overcome in the last decade
with the introduction of the scanning-tunneling micro-
scope (figure 3.12).

How do these microscopes work? Imagine you are in a
dark room with a chair. To determine the shape of the
chair, you could shine a flashlight on it, so that the light
bounces off the chair and forms an image on your eye.
That’s what optical and electron microscopes do; in the lat-
ter, the “flashlight” emits a beam of electrons instead of
light. You could, however, also reach out and feel the
chair’s surface with your hand. In effect, you would be put-
ting a probe (your hand) near the chair and measuring how
far away the surface is. In a scanning-tunneling microscope,
computers advance a probe over the surface of a molecule
in steps smaller than the diameter of an atom.

46 Part The Origin of Living Things

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 3.11

The first photograph of a DNA molecule. This micrograph,
with sketch below, shows a section of DNA magnified a million
times! The molecule is so slender that it would take 50,000 of
them to equal the diameter of a human hair.

 

FIGURE 3.12

A scanning tunneling micrograph of DNA (false color;
2,000,000x). The micrograph shows approximately three turns of
the DNA double helix (see figure 3.15).
