21.1

At its core, the case for evolution is built upon two pillars:
first, evidence that natural selection can produce evolution-
ary change and, second, evidence from the fossil record
that evolution has occurred. In addition, information from
many different areas of biology—including fields as differ-
ent as embryology, anatomy, molecular biology, and bio-
geography (the study of the geographic distribution of
species)—can only be interpreted sensibly as the outcome
of evolution.

The Fossil Record

The most direct evidence that evolution has occurred is
found in the fossil record. Today we have a far more com-
plete understanding of this record than was available in
Darwin’s time. Fossils are the preserved remains of once-
living organisms. Fossils are created when three events
occur. First, the organism must become buried in sedi-
ment; then, the calcium in bone or other hard tissue must
mineralize; and, finally, the surrounding sediment must
eventually harden to form rock. The process of fossilization
probably occurs rarely. Usually, animal or plant remains
will decay or be scavenged before the process can begin. In
addition, many fossils occur in rocks that are inaccessible to
scientists. When they do become available, they are often
destroyed by erosion and other natural processes before
they can be collected. As a result, only a fraction of the
species that have ever existed (estimated by some to be as
many as 500 million) are known from fossils. Nonetheless,
the fossils that have been discovered are sufficient to pro-
vide detailed information on the course of evolution
through time.

 

 

 

Fossil evidence indicates that evolution has occurred.

Dating Fossils

By dating the rocks in which fossils occur, we can get an ac-
curate idea of how old the fossils are. In Darwin’s day,
rocks were dated by their position with respect to one an-
other (relative dating); rocks in deeper strata are generally
older. Knowing the relative positions of sedimentary rocks
and the rates of erosion of different kinds of sedimentary
rocks in different environments, geologists of the nine-
teenth century derived a fairly accurate idea of the relative
ages of rocks.

Today, rocks are dated by measuring the degree of
decay of certain radioisotopes contained in the rock (ab-
solute dating); the older the rock, the more its isotopes have
decayed. Because radioactive isotopes decay at a constant
rate unaltered by temperature or pressure, the isotopes in a
rock act as an internal clock, measuring the time since the
rock was formed. This is a more accurate way of dating
rocks and provides dates stated in millions of years, rather
than relative dates.

A History of Evolutionary Change

When fossils are arrayed according to their age, from
oldest to youngest, they often provide evidence of succes-
sive evolutionary change. At the largest scale, the fossil
record documents the progression of life through time,
from the origin of eukaryotic organisms, through the
evolution of fishes, the rise of land-living organisms, the
reign of the dinosaurs, and on to the origin of humans

(figure 21.2).

      

: Mammals =
Reptiles @ and a” irst
ge he ids
— dinosaurs ™ a
Vertebrates . Flowering plants
and first birds
Eukaryotes Amphibians ) ;
— Extinction
q ‘aly Colonization of the
i of land dinosaurs
|
600 500 300 200 100
=| | |
Millions of years ago
FIGURE 21.2

Timeline of the history of life as revealed by the fossil record.

440) Part VI Evolution
