 

 

 

 

 

(a) Normal red blood cells

    
 

Sickle cell
allele in Africa

Gi-5%
[is-10%

(b) [10-20%

9

FIGURE 20.12

 

 

 

 

Sickled red blood cells

    

Pfaleiparum
malaria in Africa

[Balaria

Frequency of sickle cell allele and distribution of Plasmodium falciparum malaria. (a)The red blood cells of people homozygous for the
sickle cell allele collapse into sickled shapes when the oxygen level in the blood is low. (J) The distribution of the sickle cell allele in Africa

coincides closely with that of P. falciparum malaria.

Malaria and Heterozygote Advantage

The average incidence of the S allele in the Central African
population is about 0.12, far higher than that found among
African Americans. From the Hardy-Weinberg principle,
you can calculate that 1 in 5 Central African individuals are
heterozygous at the S allele, and 1 in 100 develops the fatal
form of the disorder. People who are homozygous for the
sickle cell allele almost never reproduce because they usu-
ally die before they reach reproductive age. Why is the S
allele not eliminated from the Central African population
by selection, rather than being maintained at such high lev-
els? People who are heterozygous for the sickle cell allele
are much less susceptible to malaria—one of the leading
causes of illness and death in Central Africa, especially
among young children—in the areas where the allele is
common. The reason is that when the parasite that causes
malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, enters a red blood cell, it
causes extremely low oxygen tension in the cell, which
leads to cell sickling even in heterozygotes. Such cells are
quickly filtered out of the bloodstream by the spleen, thus
eliminating the parasite (the spleen’s filtering effect is what
leads to anemia in homozygotes as large numbers of red
blood cells are removed).

Consequently, even though most homozygous recessive
individuals die before they have children, the sickle cell al-
lele is maintained at high levels in these populations (it is se-
lected for) because of its association with resistance to
malaria in heterozygotes and also, for reasons not yet fully
understood, with increased fertility in female heterozygotes.

For people living in areas where malaria is common,
having the sickle cell allele in the heterozygous condition
has adaptive value (figure 20.12). Among African Ameri-
cans, however, many of whose ancestors have lived for
some 15 generations in a country where malaria has been
relatively rare and is now essentially absent, the environ-
ment does not place a premium on resistance to malaria.
Consequently, no adaptive value counterbalances the ill ef-
fects of the disease; in this nonmalarial environment, selec-
tion is acting to eliminate the S allele. Only 1 in 375
African Americans develop sickle cell anemia, far less than
in Central Africa.

 

The hemoglobin allele S, responsible for sickle cell
anemia in homozygotes, is maintained by heterozygote
advantage in Central Africa, where heterozygotes for
the S allele are resistant to malaria.

 

Chapter 20 Genes within Populations 433
