21.2 Natural selection can produce evolutionary change.

As we saw in chapter 20, a variety of different processes can
result in evolutionary change. Nonetheless, in agreement
with Darwin, most evolutionary biologists would agree that
natural selection is the process responsible for most of the
major evolutionary changes that have occurred through
time. Although we cannot travel back through time, a vari-
ety of modern-day evidence confirms the power of natural
selection as an agent of evolutionary change. These data
come from both the field and the laboratory and from nat-
ural and human-altered situations.

The Beaks of Darwin’s Finches

Darwin’s finches are a classic example of evolution by nat-
ural selection. Darwin collected 31 specimens of finch from
three islands when he visited the Galapagos Islands off the
coast of Ecuador in 1835. Darwin, not an expert on birds,
had trouble identifying the specimens, believing by examin-
ing their bills that his collection contained wrens, “gross-
beaks,” and blackbirds. You can see Darwin’s sketches of
four of these birds in figure 21.8.

The Importance of the Beak

Upon Darwin’s return to England, ornithologist John
Gould examined the finches. Gould recognized that Dar-
win’s collection was in fact a closely related group of dis-
tinct species, all similar to one another except for their
bills. In all, there were 13 species. The two ground finches

 

444 Part VI Evolution

with the larger bills in figure 21.8 feed on seeds that they
crush in their beaks, whereas the two with narrower bills
eat insects. One species is a fruit eater, another a cactus
eater, yet another a “vampire” that creeps up on seabirds
and uses its sharp beak to drink their blood. Perhaps most
remarkable are the tool users, woodpecker finches that pick
up a twig, cactus thorn, or leaf stalk, trim it into shape with
their bills, and then poke it into dead branches to pry out
grubs.

The correspondence between the beaks of the 13 finch
species and their food source immediately suggested to
Darwin that evolution had shaped them:

“Seeing this gradation and diversity of structure in one
small, intimately related group of birds, one might really
fancy that from an original paucity of birds in this archi-
pelago, one species has been taken and modified for dif-
ferent ends.”

Was Darwin Wrong?

If Darwin’s suggestion that the beak of an ancestral finch
had been “modified for different ends” is correct, then it
ought to be possible to see the different species of finches
acting out their evolutionary roles, each using their bills to
acquire their particular food specialty. The four species
that crush seeds within their bills, for example, should feed
on different seeds, those with stouter beaks specializing on
harder-to-crush seeds.

FIGURE 21.8

Darwin’s own sketches of Galépagos
finches. From Darwin’s Journal of
Researches: (1) large ground finch Geospiza
magnirostris; (2) medium ground finch
Geospiza fortis; (3) small tree finch
Camarbynchus parvulus; (4) warbler finch
Certhidea olivacea.
