 

Dozens of other species of moths have
changed in the same way as the peppered
moth in industrialized areas throughout
Eurasia and North America, with dark
forms becoming more common from the
mid-nineteenth century onward as indus-
trialization spread.

Selection against Melanism

In the second half of the twentieth cen-
tury, with the widespread implementa-
tion of pollution controls, these trends
are reversing, not only for the peppered
moth in many areas in England, but also
for many other species of moths

Percentage of melanic moths

 

 

 

 

63

67 71 75 79

Year

83

 

 

throughout the northern continents. %
These examples provide some of the best

documented instances of changes in al-

Ielic frequencies of natural populations as FIGURE 21.11

a result of natural selection due to specific
factors in the environment.

In England, the pollution promoting
industrial melanism began to reverse
following enactment of Clean Air legis-
lation in 1956. Beginning in 1959, the
Biston population at Caldy Common
outside Liverpool has been sampled
each year. The frequency of the melanic
(dark) form has dropped from a high of
94% in 1960 to its current (1994) low of 19% (figure
21.11). Similar reversals have been documented at
numerous other locations throughout England. The drop
correlates well with a drop in air pollution, particularly
with tree-darkening sulfur dioxide and suspended
particulates.

Interestingly, the same reversal of industrial melanism
appears to have occurred in America during the same time
that it was happening in England. Industrial melanism in
the American subspecies of the peppered moth was not as
widespread as in England, but it has been well-documented
at a rural field station near Detroit. Of 576 peppered moths
collected there from 1959 to 1961, 515 were melanic, a fre-
quency of 89%. The American Clean Air Act, passed in
1963, led to significant reductions in air pollution. Resam-
pled in 1994, the Detroit field station peppered moth pop-
ulation had only 15% melanic moths (see figure 21.11)!
The moths in Liverpool and Detroit, both part of the same
natural experiment, exhibit strong evidence of natural se-
lection.

1994 to 1995.

Reconsidering the Target of Natural Selection

Tutt’s hypothesis, widely accepted in the light of Ket-
tlewell’s studies, is currently being reevaluated. The prob-
lem is that the recent selection against melanism does not

Selection against melanism. The circles indicate the frequency of melanic Biston
moths at Caldy Common in England, sampled continuously from 1959 to
1995. Diamonds indicate frequencies in Michigan from 1959 to 1962 and from

Source: Data from Grant, et al., “Parallel Rise and Fall of Melanic Peppered
Moths” in Journal of Heredity, vol. 87, 1996, Oxford University Press.

appear to correlate with changes in tree lichens. At Caldy
Common, the light form of the peppered moth began its
increase in frequency long before lichens began to reappear
on the trees. At the Detroit field station, the lichens never
changed significantly as the dark moths first became domi-
nant and then declined over the last 30 years. In fact, inves-
tigators have not been able to find peppered moths on De-
troit trees at all, whether covered with lichens or not.
Wherever the moths rest during the day, it does not appear
to be on tree bark. Some evidence suggests they rest on
leaves on the treetops, but no one is sure.

The action of selection may depend less on the presence
of lichens and more on other differences in the environ-
ment resulting from industrial pollution. Pollution tends to
cover all objects in the environment with a fine layer of
particulate dust, which tends to decrease how much light
surfaces reflect. In addition, pollution has a particularly se-
vere effect on birch trees, which are light in color. Both ef-
fects would tend to make the environment darker and thus
would favor darker color in moths.

 

Natural selection has favored the dark form of the
peppered moth in areas subject to severe air pollution,
perhaps because on darkened trees they are less easily
seen by moth-eating birds. Selection has in turn favored
the light form as pollution has abated.

 

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 447
