The Structure of Nucleic Acids

Nucleic acids are long polymers of repeating subunits called
nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of three components:
a five-carbon sugar (ribose in RNA and deoxyribose in
DNA); a phosphate (—POs) group; and an organic nitrogen-
containing base (figure 3.13). When a nucleic acid polymer
forms, the phosphate group of one nucleotide binds to the
hydroxyl group of another, releasing water and forming a
phosphodiester bond. A nucleic acid, then, is simply a
chain of five-carbon sugars linked together by phosphodi-
ester bonds with an organic base protruding from each
sugar (figure 3.14).

Two types of organic bases occur in nucleotides. The
first type, purines, are large, double-ring molecules found in
both DNA and RNA; they are adenine (A) and guanine
(G). The second type, pyrimidines, are smaller, single-ring
molecules; they include cytosine (C, in both DNA and
RNA), thymine (T, in DNA only), and uracil (U, in RNA
only).

_ Phosphate group

 

Nitrogenous base

 

3 2
OH R
Sugar

OH in RNA

H in DNA

FIGURE 3.13

Structure of a nucleotide. The nucleotide subunits of DNA and
RNA are made up of three elements: a five-carbon sugar, an
organic nitrogenous base, anda phosphate group.

 

    

 

 

 

NH, Adenine NH, Cytosine
| | (both DNA
nZo>o-Ny nZ&>c—H and RNA)
I | C—H I Il
Hi Ho Cxy-Oon” ie O=C\ CH
—— I
~ Phosphodiester re H i H
bond | |
( N t Guanine M a Thymine
DNA onl
iS H—N~oSc-Ny, Db] won-ec—cH ( ly)
I o-H 1 VG Me
HAN Cxy-Oon N| O=C\, 6-H
E
H 5 i
_- 8-catbon sugar (b) ° Uracil
I (RNA only)
Nitrogenous base re we 04
O= eye
H

 

(a)

FIGURE 3.14

 

 

 

 

‘The structure of a nucleic acid and the organic nitrogen-containing bases. (a) In a nucleic acid, nucleotides are linked to one another
via phosphodiester bonds, with organic bases protruding from the chain. (6) The organic nitrogenous bases can be either purines or

pyrimidines. In DNA, thymine replaces the uracil found in RNA.

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 47
