21.3 Evidence for evolution can be found in other fields of biology.

The Anatomical
Record

Much of the power of the theory of
evolution is its ability to provide a
sensible framework for understanding
the diversity of life. Many observa-
tions from a wide variety of fields of
biology simply cannot be understood
in any meaningful way except as a re-
sult of evolution.

Homology

As vertebrates evolved, the same
bones were sometimes put to differ-
ent uses. Yet the bones are still seen,
their presence betraying their evolu-
tionary past. For example, the fore-
limbs of vertebrates are all homolo-
gous structures, that is, structures
with different appearances and func-
tions that all derived from the same
body part in a common ancestor. You
can see in figure 21.15 how the bones
of the forelimb have been modified
in different ways for different verter-
bates. Why should these very differ-
ent structures be composed of the
same bones? If evolution had not oc-
curred, this would indeed be a riddle.
But when we consider that all of
these animals are descended from a
common ancestor, it is easy to under-
stand that natural selection has modi-
fied the same initial starting blocks to
serve very different purposes.

Development

Some of the strongest anatomical evi-
dence supporting evolution comes
from comparisons of how organisms
develop. In many cases, the evolu-
tionary history of an organism can be
seen to unfold during its develop-
ment, with the embryo exhibiting
characteristics of the embryos of its
ancestors (figure 21.16). For example,

Ta,

  

Human Cat Bat Porpoise = Horse

FIGURE 21.15

Homology among the bones of the forelimb. Although these structures show
considerable differences in form and function, the same basic bones are present in
the forelimbs of humans, cats, bats, porpoises, and horses.

Gill slits Gill slits

    

Tail Tail
Ye yp
Fish Reptile Bird Human
FIGURE 21.16

Our embryos show our evolutionary history. The embryos of various groups of
vertebrate animals show the features they all share early in development, such as
gill slits (in purple) and a tail.

early in their development, human embryos possess gill possess a fine fur (called Janugo) during the fifth month of
slits, like a fish; at a later stage, every human embryo has a development. These relict developmental forms suggest
long bony tail, the vestige of which we carry to adulthood strongly that our development has evolved, with new in-
as the coccyx at the end of our spine. Human fetuses even structions layered on top of old ones.

450 = Part VI_ Evolution
