 

The Molecular Record

Traces of our evolutionary past are
also evident at the molecular level. If
you think about it, the fact that organ-
isms have evolved successively from ’
relatively simple ancestors implies that J
a record of evolutionary change is pre-
sent in the cells of each of us, in our
DNA. When an ancestral species gives
rise to two or more descendants, those
descendants will initially exhibit fairly
high overall similarity in their DNA.
However, as the descendants evolve in-
dependently, they will accumulate
more and more differences in their
DNA. Consequently, organisms that
are more distantly related would be ex-
pected to accumulate a greater number
of evolutionary differences, whereas
two species that are more closely re-
lated should share a greater portion of
their DNA.

 

   

Time
&

 

125

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
Number of amino acid differences between this hemoglobin polypeptide and a human one

 

 

To examine this hypothesis, we
need an estimate of evolutionary rela-
tionships that has been developed
from data other than DNA (it would
be a circular argument to use DNA to
estimate relationships and then con-
clude that closely related species are
more similar in their DNA than are
distantly related species). Such an hypothesis of evolu-
tionary relationships is provided by the fossil record,
which indicates when particular types of organisms
evolved. In addition, by examining the anatomical struc-
tures of fossils and of modern species, we can infer how
closely species are related to each other.

When degree of genetic similarity is compared with
our ideas of evolutionary relationships based on fossils, a
close match is evident. For example, when the human he-
moglobin polypeptide is compared to the corresponding
molecule in other species, closely related species are
found to be more similar. Chimpanzees, gorillas, orang-
utans, and macaques, vertebrates thought to be more
closely related to humans, have fewer differences from
humans in the 146-amino-acid hemoglobin B chain than
do more distantly related mammals, like dogs. Nonmam-
malian vertebrates differ even more, and nonvertebrate
hemoglobins are the most different of all (figure 21.18).
Similar patterns are also evident when the DNA itself is
compared. For example, chimps and humans, which are
thought to have descended from a common ancestor that
lived approximately 6 million years ago, exhibit few differ-
ences in their DNA.

FIGURE 21.18

452 = Part VI_ Evolution

Molecules reflect evolutionary divergence. You can see that the greater the
evolutionary distance from humans (white cladogram), the greater the number of
amino acid differences in the vertebrate hemoglobin polypeptide.

Why should closely related species be similar in DNA?
Because DNA is the genetic code that produces the struc-
ture of living organisms, one might expect species that are
similar in overall appearance and structure, such as humans
and chimpanzees, to be more similar in DNA than are
more dissimilar species, such as humans and frogs. This ex-
pectation would hold true even if evolution had not oc-
curred. However, there are some noncoding stretches of
DNA (sometimes called “junk DNA”) that have no func-
tion and appear to serve no purpose. If evolution had not
occurred, there would be no reason to expect similar-
appearing species to be similar in their junk DNA. How-
ever, comparisons of such stretches of DNA provide the
same results as for other parts of the genome: more closely
related species are more similar, an observation that only
makes sense if evolution has occurred.

 

Comparison of the DNA of different species provides
strong evidence for evolution. Species deduced from
the fossil record to be closely related are more similar
in their DNA than are species thought to be more
distantly related.

 
