Domestication

Artificial selection has also been responsible
for the great variety of breeds of cats, dogs
(figure 21.14), pigeons, cattle and other do-
mestic animals. In some cases, breeds have
been developed for particular purposes. Grey-
hound dogs, for example, were bred by select-
ing for maximal running abilities, with the end
result being an animal with long legs and tail
(the latter used as a rudder), an arched back (to
increase the length of its stride), and great
muscle mass. By contrast, the odd proportions
of the ungainly basset hound resulted from se-
lection for dogs that could enter narrow holes
in pursuit of rabbits and other small game. In
other cases, breeds have been developed pri-
marily for their appearance, such as the many
colorful and ornamented varieties of pigeons
or the breeds of cats.

Domestication also has led to unintentional
selection for some traits. In recent years, as
part of an attempt to domesticate the silver
fox, Russian scientists each generation have
chosen the most docile animals and allowed
them to reproduce. Within 40 years, the vast
majority of foxes born were exceptionally
docile, not only allowing themselves to be pet-
ted, but also whimpering to get attention and
sniffing and licking their caretakers. In many
respects, they had become no different than
domestic dogs! However, it was not only be-
havior that changed. These foxes also began to exhibit dif-
ferent color patterns, floppy ears, curled tails, and shorter
legs and tails. Presumably, the genes responsible for docile
behavior have other effects as well (the phenomenon of
pleiotropy discussed in the last chapter); as selection has fa-
vored docile animals, it has also led to the evolution of
these other traits.

Can Selection Produce Major Evolutionary
Changes?

Given that we can observe the results of selection operating
over relatively short periods of time, most scientists believe
that natural selection is the process responsible for the evo-
lutionary changes documented in the fossil record. Some
critics of evolution accept that selection can lead to changes
within a species, but contend that such changes are rela-
tively minor in scope and not equivalent to the substantial
changes documented in the fossil record. In other words, it
is one thing to change the number of bristles on a fruit fly
or the size of a corn stalk, and quite another to produce an
entirely new species.

This argument does not fully appreciate the extent of
change produced by artificial selection. Consider, for ex-

FIGURE 21.14
Breeds of dogs. The differences between these dogs are greater than the
differences displayed between any wild species of canids.

   
 

Greyhound

Mastiff

Dachshund

Chihuahua

ample, the breeds of dogs, all of which have been pro-
duced since wolves were first domesticated, perhaps
10,000 years ago. If the various dog breeds did not exist
and a paleontologist found fossils of animals similar to
dachshunds, greyhounds, mastiffs, Chihuahuas, and
pomeranians, there is no question that they would be con-
sidered different species. Indeed, these breeds are so dif-
ferent that they would probably be classified in different
genera. In fact, the diversity exhibited by dog breeds far
outstrips the differences observed among wild members of
the family Canidae—such as coyotes, jackals, foxes, and
wolves. Consequently, the claim that artificial selection
produces only minor changes is clearly incorrect. Indeed,
if selection operating over a period of only 10,000 years
can produce such substantial differences, then it would
seem powerful enough, over the course of many millions
of years, to produce the diversity of life we see around us
today.

 

Artificial selection often leads to rapid and substantial
results over short periods of time, thus demonstrating
the power of selection to produce major evolutionary
change.

 

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 449
