Artificial Selection

Humans have imposed selection upon plants and animals
since the dawn of civilization. Just as in natural selection,
artificial selection operates by favoring individuals with cer-
tain phenotypic traits, allowing them to reproduce and pass
their genes into the next generation. Assuming that pheno-
typic differences are genetically determined, such selection
should lead to evolutionary change and, indeed, it has. Arti-
ficial selection, imposed in laboratory experiments, agricul-
ture, and the domestication process, has produced substan-
tial change in almost every case in which it has been
applied. This success is strong proof that selection is an ef-
fective evolutionary process.

Laboratory Experiments

With the rise of genetics as a field of science in the 1920s
and 1930s, researchers began conducting experiments to
test the hypothesis that selection can produce evolutionary
change. A favorite subject was the now-famous laboratory
fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Geneticists have imposed
selection on just about every conceivable aspect of the fruit
fly—including body size, eye color, growth rate, life span,
and exploratory behavior—with a consistent result: selec-
tion for a trait leads to strong and predictable evolutionary
response.

In one classic experiment, scientists selected for fruit
flies with many bristles (stiff, hairlike structures) on their
abdomen. At the start of the experiment, the average num-
ber of bristles was 9.5. Each generation, scientists picked
out the 20% of the population with the greatest number of
bristles and allowed them to reproduce, thus establishing
the next generation. After 86 generations of such selection,
the average number of bristles had quadrupled, to nearly
40. In a similar experiment, fruit flies were selected for ei-
ther the most or the fewest numbers of bristles. Within 35
generations, the populations did not overlap at all in range
of variation (figure 21.12).

Similar experiments have been conducted on a wide va-
riety of other laboratory organisms. For example, by select-
ing for rats that were resistant to tooth decay, scientists
were able to increase in less than 20 generations the aver-
age time for onset of decay from barely over 100 days to
greater than 500 days.

Agriculture

Similar methods have been practiced in agriculture for
many centuries. Familiar livestock, such as cattle and pigs,
and crops, like corn and strawberries, are greatly different
from their wild ancestors (figure 21.13). These differences
have resulted from generations of selection for desirable
traits like milk production and corn stalk size.

An experimental study with corn demonstrates the abil-
ity of artificial selection to rapidly produce major change in

448 = Part VI Evolution

 

 

\e/_
Initial ™ o
population :
‘nes fw
@ | Population /
4 \
2
High
= population
6
3
3
5 |
5
Zz i=
8 g
= AN, ha

 

 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110
Bristle number in Drosophila

 

 

 

FIGURE 21.12

Artificial selection in the laboratory. In this experiment, one
population of Drosophila was selected for low numbers of
bristles and the other for high numbers. Note that not only
did the means of the populations change greatly in 35
generations, but also that all individuals in both experimental
populations lie outside the range of the initial population.

 

 

  

39

Teosinte Intermediates Modern corn

FIGURE 21.13

Corn looks very different from its ancestor. The tassels and
seeds of a wild grass, such as teosinte, evolved into the male
tassels and female ears of modern corn.

crop plants. In 1896, agricultural scientists began selecting
on oil content of corn kernels, which initially was 4.5%. As
in the fruit fly experiments, the top 20% of all individuals
were allowed to reproduce. In addition, a parallel experi-
ment selected for the individuals with the lowest oil con-
tent. By 1986, at which time 90 generations had passed, av-
erage oil content had increased approximately 450% in the
high-content experiment; by contrast, oil content in the
low experiment had decreased to about 0.5%, a level at
which it is difficult to get accurate readings.
