Peppered Moths and Industrial
Melanism

When the environment changes, natural selection often
may favor new traits in a species. The example of the Dar-
win’s finches clearly indicates how natural variation can
lead to evolutionary change. Humans are greatly altering
the environment in many ways; we should not be surprised
to see organisms attempting to adapt to these new condi-
tions. One classic example concerns the peppered moth,
Biston betularia. Until the mid-nineteenth century, almost
every individual of this species captured in Great Britain
had light-colored wings with black specklings (hence the
name “peppered” moth). From that time on, individuals
with dark-colored wings increased in frequency in the
moth populations near industrialized centers until they
made up almost 100% of these populations. Black individu-
als had a dominant allele that was present but very rare in
populations before 1850. Biologists soon noticed that in in-
dustrialized regions where the dark moths were common,
the tree trunks were darkened almost black by the soot of
pollution. Dark moths were much less conspicuous resting
on them than were light moths. In addition, the air pollu-
tion that was spreading in the industrialized regions had
killed many of the light-colored lichens on tree trunks,
making the trunks darker.

Selection for Melanism

Can Darwin’s theory explain the increase in the frequency
of the dark allele? Why did dark moths gain a survival ad-
vantage around 1850? An amateur moth collector named
J. W. Tutt proposed what became the most commonly
accepted hypothesis explaining the decline of the light-
colored moths. He suggested that peppered forms were
more visible to predators on sooty trees that have lost
their lichens. Consequently, birds ate the peppered moths
resting on the trunks of trees during the day. The black
forms, in contrast, were at an advantage because they
were camouflaged (figure 21.10). Although Tutt initially
had no evidence, British ecologist Bernard Kettlewell
tested the hypothesis in the 1950s by rearing populations
of peppered moths with equal numbers of dark and light
individuals. Kettlewell then released these populations
into two sets of woods: one, near heavily polluted Birm-
ingham, the other, in unpolluted Dorset. Kettlewell set up
rings of traps around the woods to see how many of both
kinds of moths survived. To evaluate his results, he had
marked the released moths with a dot of paint on the un-
derside of their wings, where birds could not see it.

In the polluted area near Birmingham, Kettlewell
trapped 19% of the light moths, but 40% of the dark ones.
This indicated that dark moths had a far better chance of
surviving in these polluted woods, where the tree trunks
were dark. In the relatively unpolluted Dorset woods, Ket-
tlewell recovered 12.5% of the light moths but only 6% of

446 = Part VI Evolution

 

FIGURE 21.10

Tutt’s hypothesis explaining industrial melanism. These
photographs show color variants of the peppered moth,
Biston betularia. Tutt proposed that the dark moth is more
visible to predators on unpolluted trees (top), while the light
moth is more visible to predators on bark blackened by
industrial pollution (bottom).

the dark ones. This indicated that where the tree trunks
were still light-colored, light moths had a much better
chance of survival. Kettlewell later solidified his argument
by placing hidden blinds in the woods and actually filming
birds eating the moths. Sometimes the birds Kettlewell ob-
served actually passed right over a moth that was the same
color as its background.

Industrial Melanism

Industrial melanism is a term used to describe the evolu-
tionary process in which darker individuals come to pre-
dominate over lighter individuals since the industrial revo-
lution as a result of natural selection. The process is widely
believed to have taken place because the dark organisms are
better concealed from their predators in habitats that have
been darkened by soot and other forms of industrial pollu-
tion, as suggested by Kettlewell’s research.
