Miocene and early Oligocene (approximately 20 to 25 mil-
lion years ago), grasslands became widespread in North
America, where much of horse evolution occurred. As
horses adapted to these habitats, long-distance and high-
speed locomotion probably became more important to es-
cape predators and travel great distances. By contrast, the
greater flexibility provided by multiple toes and shorter
limbs, which was advantageous for ducking through com-
plex forest vegetation, was no longer beneficial. At the
same time, horses were eating grasses and other vegetation
that contained more grit and other hard substances, thus
favoring teeth and skulls better suited for withstanding
such materials.

Evolutionary Trends

For many years, horse evolution was held up as an example
of constant evolutionary change through time. Some even
saw in the record of horse evolution evidence for a progres-
sive, guiding force, consistently pushing evolution to move
in a single direction. We now know that such views are
misguided; evolutionary change over millions of years is
rarely so simple.

Rather, the fossils demonstrate that, although there have
been overall trends evident in a variety of characteristics,
evolutionary change has been far from constant and uni-
form through time. Instead, rates of evolution have varied
widely, with long periods of little change and some periods
of great change. Moreover, when changes happen, they
often occur simultaneously in different lineages of the
horse evolutionary tree. Finally, even when a trend exists,
exceptions, such as the evolutionary decrease in body size
exhibited by some lineages, are not uncommon. These pat-
terns, evident in our knowledge of horse evolution, are usu-
ally discovered for any group of plants and animals for
which we have an extensive fossil record, as we shall see
when we discuss human evolution in chapter 23.

Horse Diversity

One reason that horse evolution was originally conceived
of as linear through time may be that modern horse diver-
sity is relatively limited. Thus, it is easy to mentally pic-
ture a straight line from Hyracotherium to modern-day
Equus. However, today’s limited horse diversity—only
one surviving genus—is unusual. Indeed, at the peak of
horse diversity in the Miocene, as many as 13 genera of
horses could be found in North America alone. These
species differed in body size and in a wide variety of other
characteristics. Presumably, they lived in different habi-
tats and exhibited different dietary preferences. Had this
diversity existed to modern times, early workers presum-
ably would have had a different outlook on horse evolu-
tion, a situation that is again paralleled by the evolution of
humans.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pliohippus

 

 

 

 

 

Merychippus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hyracotherium

 

 

FIGURE 21.7
Evolutionary changes in horses through time.

 

The extensive fossil record for horses provides a
detailed view of the evolutionary diversification of this
group from small forest dwellers to the large and fast
modern grassland species.

 

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution

443
