Many biologists visited the Galapagos after Darwin,
but it was 100 years before any tried this key test of his
hypothesis. When the great naturalist David Lack finally
set out to do this in 1938, observing the birds closely for
a full five months, his observations seemed to contradict
Darwin’s proposal! Lack often observed many different
species of finch feeding together on the same seeds. His
data indicated that the stout-beaked species and the
slender-beaked species were feeding on the very same
array of seeds.

We now know that it was Lack’s misfortune to study the
birds during a wet year, when food was plentiful. The
finch’s beak is of little importance in such flush times; small
seeds are so abundant that birds of all species are able to
get enough to eat. Later work has revealed a very different
picture during leaner, dry years, when few seeds are avail-
able and the difference between survival and starvation de-
pends on being able to efficiently gather enough to eat. In
such times, having beaks designed to be maximally effective
for a particular type of food becomes critical and the
species diverge in their diet, each focusing on the type of
food to which it is specialized.

A Closer Look

The key to successfully testing Darwin’s proposal that the
beaks of Galépagos finches are adaptations to different food
sources proved to be patience. Starting in 1973, Peter and
Rosemary Grant of Princeton University and generations
of their students have studied the medium ground finch
Geospiza fortis on a tiny island in the center of the Galapa-
gos called Daphne Major. These finches feed preferentially
on small tender seeds, produced in abundance by plants in
wet years. The birds resort to larger, drier seeds, which are
harder to crush, only when small seeds become depleted
during long periods of dry weather, when plants produce
few seeds.

The Grants quantified beak shape among the medium
ground finches of Daphne Major by carefully measuring
beak depth (width of beak, from top to bottom, at its base)
on individual birds. Measuring many birds every year, they
were able to assemble for the first time a detailed portrait
of evolution in action. The Grants found that beak depth
changed from one year to the next in a predictable fashion.
During droughts, plants produced few seeds and all avail-
able small seeds quickly were eaten, leaving large seeds as
the major remaining source of food. As a result, birds with
large beaks survived better, because they were better able
to break open these large seeds. Consequently, the average
beak depth of birds in the population increased the next
year, only to decrease again when wet seasons returned
(figure 21.9).

Could these changes in beak dimension reflect the ac-
tion of natural selection? An alternative possibility might
be that the changes in beak depth do not reflect changes in

 

Wet year

 

1977 1980 1982 1984

 

 

FIGURE 21.9
Evidence that natural selection alters beak size in Geospiza
(fortis. In dry years, when only large, tough seeds are available, the
mean beak size increases. In wet years, when many small seeds are
available, smaller beaks become more common.

gene frequencies, but rather are simply a response to diet—
perhaps during lean times the birds become malnourished
and then grow stouter beaks, for example. To rule out this
possibility, the Grants measured the relation of parent bill
size to offspring bill size, examining many broods over sev-
eral years. The depth of the bill was passed down faithfully
from one generation to the next, regardless of environmen-
tal conditions, suggesting that the differences in bill size in-
deed reflected genetic differences.

Darwin Was Right After All

Tf the year-to-year changes in beak depth indeed reflect ge-
netic changes, as now seems likely, and these changes can
be predicted by the pattern of dry years, then Darwin was
right after all—natural selection does seem to be operating
to adjust the beak to its food supply. Birds with stout beaks
have an advantage during dry periods, for they can break
the large, dry seeds that are the only food available. When
small seeds become plentiful once again with the return of
wet weather, a smaller beak proves a more efficient tool for
harvesting the more abundant smaller seeds.

 

Among Darwin’s finches, natural selection adjusts the
shape of the beak in response to the nature of the
available food supply, adjustments that can be seen to
be occurring even today.

 

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 445
