The observation that seemingly
different organisms may exhibit
similar embryological forms pro-
vides indirect but convincing evi-
dence of a past evolutionary rela-
tionship. Slugs and giant ocean
squids, for example, do not bear
much superficial resemblance to
each other, but the similarity of
their embryological forms pro-
vides convincing evidence that
they are both mollusks.

Vestigial Structures

Many organisms possess vestigial
structures that have no apparent
function, but that resemble struc-
tures their presumed ancestors
had. Humans, for example, possess
a complete set of muscles for wig-
gling their ears, just as a coyote
does (table 21.1). Boa constrictors
have hip bones and rudimentary hind legs. Manatees (a
type of aquatic mammal often referred to as “sea cows”)
have fingernails on their fins (which evolved from legs).
Figure 21.17 illustrates the skeleton of a baleen whale,
which contains pelvic bones, as other mammal skeletons
do, even though such bones serve no known function in the
whale. The human vermiform appendix is apparently vesti-
gial; it represents the degenerate terminal part of the
cecum, the blind pouch or sac in which the large intestine
begins. In other mammals such as mice, the cecum is the
largest part of the large intestine and functions in storage—
usually of bulk cellulose in herbivores. Although some sug-
gestions have been made, it is difficult to assign any current
function to the vermiform appendix. In many respects, it is
a dangerous organ: quite often it becomes infected, leading
to an inflammation called appendicitis; without surgical re-

FIGURE 21.17

no apparent function.

 

Vestigial features. The skeleton of a baleen whale, a representative of the group of
mammals that contains the largest living species, contains pelvic bones. These bones
resemble those of other mammals, but are only weakly developed in the whale and have

moval, the appendix may burst, allowing the contents of
the gut to come in contact with the lining of the body cav-
ity, a potentially fatal event. It is difficult to understand ves-
tigial structures such as these as anything other than evolu-
tionary relicts, holdovers from the evolutionary past. They
argue strongly for the common ancestry of the members of
the groups that share them, regardless of how different
they have subsequently become.

 

Comparisons of the anatomy of different living animals
often reveal evidence of shared ancestry. In some
instances, the same organ has evolved to carry out
different functions, in others, an organ loses its function
altogether. Sometimes, different organs evolve in
similar ways when exposed to the same selective
pressures.

 

Table 21.1 Some Vestigial Traits in Humans

Trait Description

Far-wiggling muscles

‘Three small muscles around each ear that are large and important in some mammals, such as dogs, turning

the ears toward a source of sound. Few people can wiggle their ears, and none can turn them toward

sound.

Tail Present in human and all vertebrate embryos. In humans, the tail is reduced; most adults only have three
to five tiny tail bones and, occasionally, a trace of a tail-extending muscle.

Appendix

Structure which presumably had a digestive function in some of our ancestors, like the cecum of some

herbivores. In humans, it varies in length from 5—15 cm, and some people are born without one.

Wisdom teeth
wisdom teeth.

‘Molars that are often useless and sometimes even trapped in the jawbone. Some people never develop

Based on a suggestion by Dr. Leslie Dendy, Department of Science and Technology, University of New Mexico, Los Alamos.

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 451
