The Origin of Species

 

Concept Outline

22.1 Species are the basic units of evolution.

‘The Nature of Species. Species are groups of actually or
potentially interbreeding natural populations which are
reproductively isolated from other such groups and that
maintain connectedness over geographic distances.

22.2 Species maintain their genetic distinctiveness
through barriers to reproduction.

Prezygotic Isolating Mechanisms. Some breeding
barriers prevent the formation of zygotes.

Postzygotic Isolating Mechanisms. Other breeding
barriers prevent the proper development or reproduction of
the zygote after it forms.

22.3 We have learned a great deal about how species
form.

Reproductive Isolation May Evolve as a By-Product of
Evolutionary Change. Speciation can occur in the
absence of natural selection, but reproductive isolation
generally occurs more quickly when populations are
adapting to different environments.

The Geography of Speciation. Speciation occurs most
readily when populations are geographically isolated.
Sympatric speciation can occur by polyploidy and, perhaps,
by other means.

22.4 Clusters of species reflect rapid evolution.

Darwin’s Finches. Thirteen species of finches, all
descendants of one ancestral finch, occupy diverse niches.
Hawaiian Drosophila. More than a quarter of the world’s
fruit fly species are found on the Hawaiian Islands.

Lake Victoria Cichlid Fishes. Isolation has led to
extensive species formation among these small fishes.

New Zealand Alpine Buttercups. Repeated glaciations
have fostered waves of species formation in alpine plants.
Diversity of Life through Time. The number of species
has increased through time, despite a number of mass
extinction events.

The Pace of Evolution. The idea that evolution occurs
in spurts is controversial.

Problems with the Biological Species Concept. This
concept is not as universal as previously thought.

 

FIGURE 22.1

A group of Galapagos iguanas bask in the sun on their
isolated island. How does geographic isolation contribute to the
formation of new species?

A Ithough Darwin titled his book On the Origin of Species,

© never actually discussed what he referred to as that
“mystery of mysteries” of how one species gives rise to an-
other. Rather, his argument concerned evolution by natural
selection; that is, how one species evolves through time to
adapt to its changing environment. Although of fundamen-
tal importance to evolutionary biology, the process of adap-
tation does not explain how one species becomes another
(figure 22.1); much less can it explain how one species can
give rise to many descendant species. As we shall see, adap-
tation may be involved in this process of speciation, but it
need not be.

457
