Postzygotic Isolating Mechanisms

All of the factors we have discussed up to this point tend to
prevent hybridization. If hybrid matings do occur and zy-
gotes are produced, many factors may still prevent those
zygotes from developing into normally functioning, fertile
individuals. Development in any species is a complex
process. In hybrids, the genetic complements of two species
may be so different that they cannot function together nor-
mally in embryonic development. For example, hybridiza-
tion between sheep and goats usually produces embryos
that die in the earliest developmental stages.

Leopard frogs (Rana pipiens complex) of the eastern
United States are a group of similar species, assumed for a
long time to constitute a single species (figure 22.6). How-
ever, careful examination revealed that although the frogs
appear similar, successful mating between them is rare be-
cause of problems that occur as the fertilized eggs develop.
Many of the hybrid combinations cannot be produced even
in the laboratory.

Examples of this kind, in which similar species have
been recognized only as a result of hybridization experi-

ments, are common in plants. Sometimes the hybrid em-
bryos can be removed at an early stage and grown in an ar-
tificial medium. When these hybrids are supplied with
extra nutrients or other supplements that compensate for
their weakness or inviability, they may complete their de-
velopment normally.

Even if hybrids survive the embryo stage, however,
they may not develop normally. If the hybrids are weaker
than their parents, they will almost certainly be elimi-
nated in nature. Even if they are vigorous and strong, as
in the case of the mule, a hybrid between a horse and a
donkey, they may still be sterile and thus incapable of
contributing to succeeding generations. Sterility may re-
sult in hybrids because the development of sex organs
may be abnormal, the chromosomes derived from the re-
spective parents may not pair properly, or from a variety
of other causes.

 

Postzygotic isolating mechanisms are those in which
hybrid zygotes fail to develop or develop abnormally, or
in which hybrids cannot become established in nature.

 

 

FIGURE 22.6

Postzygotic isolation in leopard frogs. Numbers indicate the following species in the geographical ranges shown:

(1) Rana pipiens; (2) Rana blairi; (3) Rana utricularia; (4) Rana berlandieri. These four species resemble one another closely in their external
features. Their status as separate species was first suspected when hybrids between them produced defective embryos in some
combinations. Subsequent research revealed that the mating calls of the four species differ substantially, indicating that the species have

both pre- and postzygotic isolating mechanisms.

462 = Part VI_ Evolution
