21.4 The theory of evolution has proven controversial.

Darwin’s Critics

In the century since he proposed it, Darwin's theory of
evolution by natural selection has become nearly univer-

sally

accepted by biologists, but has proven controversial

among the general public. Darwin's critics raise seven prin-

cipal
1.

objections to teaching evolution:

Evolution is not solidly demonstrated. “Evolution
is just a theory,” Darwin's critics point out, as if theory
meant lack of knowledge, some kind of guess. Scien-
tists, however, use the word theory in a very different
sense than the general public does. Theories are the
solid ground of science, that of which we are most
certain. Few of us doubt the theory of gravity because
itis "just a theory."

There are no fossil intermediates. “No one ever
saw a fin on the way to becoming a leg,” critics claim,
pointing to the many gaps in the fossil record in Dar-
win's day. Since then, however, most fossil intermedi-
ates in vertebrate evolution have indeed been found.
A clear line of fossils now traces the transition be-
tween whales and hoofed mammals, between reptiles
and mammals, between dinosaurs and birds, between
apes and humans. The fossil evidence of evolution
between major forms is compelling.

The intelligent design argument. “The organs of
living creatures are too complex for a random process to
have produced—the existence of a clock is evidence of the
existence of a clockmaker.” Biologists do not agree.
The intermediates in the evolution of the mam-
malian ear can be seen in fossils, and many interme-
diate “eyes” are known in various invertebrates.
These intermediate forms arose because they have
value—being able to detect light a little is better
than not being able to detect it at all. Complex
structures like eyes evolved as a progression of slight
improvements.

Evolution violates the Second Law of Thermody-
namics. “A jumble of soda cans doesn't by itself jump
neatly into a stack—things become more disorganized due
to random events, not more organized.” Biologists point
out that this argument ignores what the second law
really says: disorder increases in a closed system,
which the earth most certainly is not. Energy contin-
ually enters the biosphere from the sun, fueling life
and all the processes that organize it.

Proteins are too improbable. “Hemoglobin has 141
amino acids. The probability that the first one would be
Jeucine is 1/20, and that all 141 would be the ones they are
by chance is (1/20)'*!, an impossibly rare event.” This is
statistical foolishness—you cannot use probability to
argue backwards. The probability that a student in a
classroom has a particular birthday is 1/365; arguing

 

this way, the probability that everyone in a class of 50
would have the birthdays they do is (1/365), and yet
there the class sits.

6. Natural selection does not imply evolution. “No
scientist has come up with an experiment where fish evolve
into frogs and leap away from predators.” Is microevolu-
tion (evolution within a species) the mechanism that
has produced macroevolution (evolution among
species)? Most biologists that have studied the prob-
lem think so. Some kinds of animals produced by ar-
tificial selection are remarkably distinctive, such as
Chihuahuas, dachshunds, and greyhounds. While all
dogs are in fact the same species and can interbreed,
laboratory selection experiments easily create forms
that cannot interbreed and thus would in nature be
considered different species. Thus, production of rad-
ically different forms has indeed been observed, re-
peatedly. To object that evolution still does not ex-
plain really major differences, like between fish and
amphibians, simply takes us back to point 2—these
changes take millions of years, and are seen clearly in
the fossil record.

7. The irreducible complexity argument. The in-
tricate molecular machinery of the cell cannot be ex-
plained by evolution from simpler stages. Because each
part of a complex cellular process like blood clotting is es-
sential to the overall process, how can natural selection
fashion any one part? What's wrong with this argu-
ment is that each part of a complex molecular ma-
chine evolves as part of the system. Natural selection
can act on a complex system because at every stage
of its evolution, the system functions. Parts that im-
prove function are added, and, because of later
changes, become essential. The mammalian blood
clotting system, for example, has evolved from much
simpler systems. The core clotting system evolved at
the dawn of the vertebrates 600 million years ago,
and is found today in lampreys, the most primitive
fish. One hundred million years later, as vertebrates
evolved, proteins were added to the clotting system
making it sensitive to substances released from dam-
aged tissues. Fifty million years later, a third compo-
nent was added, triggering clotting by contact with
the jagged surfaces produced by injury. At each
stage as the clotting system evolved to become more
complex, its overall performance came to depend on
the added elements. Thus, blood clotting has be-
come "irreducibly complex"—as the result of Dar-
winian evolution.

 

Darwin’s theory of evolution has proven controversial
among the general public, although the commonly
raised objections are without scientific merit.

 

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 455
