22.2 Species maintain their genetic distinctiveness through barriers to

reproduction.

Prezygotic Isolating Mechanisms

How do species keep their separate identities? Reproduc-
tive isolating mechanisms fall into two categories: prezy-
gotic isolating mechanisms, which prevent the formation
of zygotes; and postzygotic isolating mechanisms, which
prevent the proper functioning of zygotes after they form.
In the following sections we will discuss various isolating
mechanisms in these two categories and offer examples that
illustrate how the isolating mechanisms operate to help
species retain their identities.

Ecological Isolation

Even if two species occur in the same area, they may utilize
different portions of the environment and thus not hy-
bridize because they do not encounter each other. For ex-
ample, in India, the ranges of lions and tigers overlapped
until about 150 years ago. Even when they did, however,
there were no records of natural hybrids. Lions stayed
mainly in the open grassland and hunted in groups called
prides; tigers tended to be solitary creatures of the forest
(figure 22.4). Because of their ecological and behavioral dif-
ferences, lions and tigers rarely came into direct contact
with each other, even though their ranges overlapped over
thousands of square kilometers.

In another example, the ranges of two toads, Bufo wood-
housei and B. americanus, overlap in some areas. Although
these two species can produce viable hybrids, they usually
do not interbreed because they utilize different portions
of the habitat for breeding. Whereas B. woodhousei prefers
to breed in streams, B. americanus breeds in rainwater
puddles. Similarly, the ranges of two species of dragon-
flies overlap in Florida. However, the dragonfly Progom-
phus obscurus lives near rivers and streams, and P. alachue-
nis lives near lakes.

Similar situations occur among plants. Two species of
oaks occur widely in California: the valley oak, Quercus lo-
bata, and the scrub oak, Q. dumosa. The valley oak, a
graceful deciduous tree that can be as tall as 35 meters,
occurs in the fertile soils of open grassland on gentle
slopes and valley floors. In contrast, the scrub oak is an
evergreen shrub, usually only 1 to 3 meters tall, which
often forms the kind of dense scrub known as chaparral.
The scrub oak is found on steep slopes in less fertile soils.
Hybrids between these different oaks do occur and are
fully fertile, but they are rare. The sharply distinct habi-
tats of their parents limit their occurrence together, and
there is no intermediate habitat where the hybrids might
flourish.

460 = Part VI Evolution

 

FIGURE 22.4

Lions and tigers are ecologically isolated. The ranges of lions
and tigers used to overlap in India. However, lions and tigers do
not hybridize in the wild because they utilize different portions of
the habitat. (a) Lions live in open grassland. (6) Tigers are solitary
animals that live in the forest. (¢) Hybrids, such as this tiglon, have
been successfully produced in captivity, but hybridization does

not occur in the wild.
