| 22.1 Species are the basic units of evolution.

The Nature of Species

Before we can discuss how one species gives rise to another,
we need to understand exactly what a species is. Even
though definition of what constitutes a species is of funda-
mental importance to evolutionary biology, this issue has
still not been completely settled and is currently the subject
of considerable research and debate. However, any concept
of a species must account for two phenomena: the distinc-
tiveness of species that occur together at a single locality,
and the connection that exists among populations of the
same species that are geographically separated.

The Distinctiveness of Sympatric Species

Put out a birdfeeder on your balcony or back porch and
you will attract a wide variety of different types of birds (es-
pecially if you put out a variety of different kinds of foods).
In the midwestern United States, for example, you might
routinely see cardinals, blue jays, downy woodpeckers,
house finches—even hummingbirds in the summer (figure
22.2). Although it might take a few days of careful observa-
tion, you would soon be able to readily distinguish the
many different species. The reason is that species that
occur together (termed sympatric from the Greek sym for
“same” and patria for “species”) are distinctive entities that
are phenotypically different, utilize different parts of the
habitat, and behave separately. This observation is gener-
ally true not only for birds, but also for most other types of
organisms in most places.

 

Blue jay

 

Downy woodpecker

FIGURE 22.2

Occasionally, two species occur together that appear to
be nearly identical, and are thus called sibling species. In
most cases, however, our inability to distinguish the two re-
flects our own reliance on vision as our primary sense.
When the mating calls or chemicals exuded by such species
are examined, they usually reveal great differences. In other
words, even though we have trouble separating them, the
animals themselves have no such difficulties!

Geographic Variation within Species

Within the units classified as species, populations that occur
in different areas may be more or less distinct from one an-
other. Such groups of distinctive individuals may be classi-
fied taxonomically as subspecies or varieties (the vague
term “race” has a similar connotation, but is no longer com-
monly used). In areas where these populations approach one
another, individuals often exhibit combinations of features
characteristic of both populations. In other words, even
though geographically distant populations may appear dis-
tinct, they usually are connected by intervening populations
that are intermediate in their characteristics (figure 22.3).

  

The Biological Species Concept

What can account both for the distinctiveness of sympatric
species and the connectedness of geographic populations of
the same species? One obvious possibility is that each
species exchanges genetic material only with other mem-
bers of its species. If sympatric species commonly ex-

 

Ruby-throated
hummingbird

Northern cardinal

House finch

Common birds in the midwestern United States. No one would doubt that these birds are distinct species. Each can be distinguished

from the others by many ecological, behavioral, and phenotypic traits.

458 = Part VI Evolution
