DNA

Organisms encode the information
specifying the amino acid sequences
of their proteins as sequences of nu-
cleotides in the DNA. This method
of encoding information is very sim-
ilar to that by which the sequences
of letters encode information in a
sentence. While a sentence written
in English consists of a combination
of the 26 different letters of the al-
phabet in a specific order, the code
of a DNA molecule consists of dif-
ferent combinations of the four
types of nucleotides in specific se-
quences such as CGCTTACG. The
information encoded in DNA is used
in the everyday metabolism of the
organism and is passed on to the or-
ganism’s descendants.

DNA molecules in organisms ex-
ist not as single chains folded into
complex shapes, like proteins, but
rather as double chains. Two DNA
polymers wind around each other
like the outside and inside rails of a
circular staircase. Such a winding
shape is called a helix, and a helix
composed of two chains winding
about one another, as in DNA, is
called a double helix. Each step of
DNaA’s helical staircase is a base-
pair, consisting of a base in one
chain attracted by hydrogen bonds
to a base opposite it on the other
chain. These hydrogen bonds hold
the two chains together as a duplex
(figure 3.15). The base-pairing rules
are rigid: adenine can pair only with
thymine (in DNA) or with uracil (in
RNA), and cytosine can pair only
with guanine. The bases that partici-
pate in base-pairing are said to be
complementary to each other. Addi-
tional details of the structure of
DNA and how it interacts with RNA
in the production of proteins are
presented in chapters 14 and 15.

FIGURE 3.15

RNA

RNA is similar to DNA, but with two major chemical
differences. First, RNA molecules contain ribose sugars
in which the number 2 carbon is bonded to a hydroxyl
group. In DNA, this hydroxyl group is replaced by a hy-
drogen atom. Second, RNA molecules utilize uracil in

48 Part The Origin of Living Things

 

Sugar-phosphate "backbone"

Hydrogen bonds between
nitrogenous bases

‘The structure of DNA. Hydrogen bond formation (dashed lines) between the organic
bases, called base-pairing, causes the two chains of a DNA duplex to bind to each other
and form a double helix.

place of thymine. Uracil has the same structure as thy-
mine, except that one of its carbons lacks a methyl (—
CHs) group.

Transcribing the DNA message into a chemically differ-
ent molecule such as RNA allows the cell to tell which is
the original information storage molecule and which is the
transcript. DNA molecules are always double-stranded (ex-
cept for a few single-stranded DNA viruses that will be dis-
cussed in chapter 33), while the RNA molecules tran-
scribed from DNA are typically single-stranded (figure
