     
  

Red milk snake
(Lampropettis triangulum syspila)

 

“Intergrade” form a

FIGURE 22.3

Eastern milk snake
(Lampropeltis triangulum
triangulum)

Scarlet kingsnake
(Lampropettis triangulum
elapsoides)

Geographic variation in the milk snake, Lampropeltis triangulum. Although each subspecies appears phenotypically quite distinctive
from the others, they are connected by populations that are phenotypically intermediate.

changed genes, we might expect such species to rapidly lose
their distinctions as the gene pools of the different species
became homogenized. Conversely, the ability of geographi-
cally distant populations to share genes through the process
of gene flow may keep these populations integrated as
members of the same species. Based on these ideas, the
evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr coined the biological
species concept which defines species as:

. groups of actually or potentially interbreeding
natural populations which are reproductively isolated from
other such groups.”

In other words, the biological species concept says that a
species is all individuals that are capable of interbreeding
and producing fertile offspring. Conversely, individuals
that cannot produce fertile offspring are said to be repro-
ductively isolated and, thus, members of different species.

Occasionally, members of different species will inter-
breed, a process termed hybridization. If the species are
reproductively isolated, either no offspring will result, or if
offspring are produced, they will be either unhealthy or
sterile. In this way, genes from one species generally will
not be able to enter the gene pool of another species.

 

Problems with Applying the Biological Species
Concept

The biological species concept has proven to be an effec-
tive way of understanding the existence of species in nature.
Nonetheless, the concept has some practical difficulties.

For example, it can be difficult to apply the concept to pop-
ulations that do not occur together in nature (and are thus
said to be allopatric). Because individuals of these popula-
tions do not encounter each other, it is not possible to ob-
serve whether they would interbreed naturally. Although
experiments can determine whether fertile hybrids can be
produced, this information is not enough. The reason is
that many species that will coexist without interbreeding in
nature will readily hybridize in the artificial settings of the
laboratory or zoo. Consequently, evaluating whether al-
lopatric populations constitute different species is ulti-
mately a judgment call.

In addition, the concept is more limited than its name
would imply. Many organisms are asexual and reproduce
without mating; reproductive isolation has no meaning for
such organisms.

Moreover, despite its name, the concept is really a zoo-
logical species concept and applies less readily to plants.
Even among animals, the biological species concept ap-
pears to apply more successfully to some groups than to
others. As we will see in section 22.4, biologists are cur-
rently reevaluating this and other approaches to the study
of species.

 

Species are groups of organisms that are distinct from
other co-occurring species and that are interconnected
geographically. The ability to exchange genes appears
to be a hallmark of such species.

 

Chapter 22. The Origin of Species 459
