 
  

WC

http://www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

21.1 Fossil evidence indicates that evolution has occurred.

Chapter 21

Summary

 

http://www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

1. Why do gaps exist in the fossil
record? What lessons can be
learned from the fossil record of
horse evolution?

* Fossils of many extinct species have never been
discovered. Nonetheless, the fossil record is complete
enough to allow a detailed understanding of the
evolution of life through time. The evolution of the

major vertebrate groups is quite well known. 2. How did scientists date fossils

in Darwin’s day? Why are
scientists today able to date
rocks more accurately?

* Although evolution of groups like horses may appear
to be a straight-line progression, in fact there have
been many examples of parallel evolution, and even
reversals from overall trends.

21.2 Natural selection can produce evolutionary change.

* On Science Article:
featherd Dinosaurs
Book Reviews:
* In Search of Deep Time

by Gee
* Digging Dinosaurs by
Horner

 

* Natural populations provide clear evidence of 3. Why did the average beak size

* Activity: Evolution of

 

evolutionary change. of the medium ground finch Fish
© Darwin’s finches have different-sized beaks, which increase after a particularly dry
are adaptations to eating different kinds of seeds. In yer’
particularly dry years, natural selection favors birds 4. Why did the frequency of
with stout beaks within one species, Geospiza fortis. As light-colored moths decrease
as 2 and that of dark-colored moths
a result, the average bill size becomes larger in the Secs aah dhe adecncut
next generation. industrialism? What is industrial
© The British populations of the peppered moth, Biston melanism?
betularia, consisted mostly of light-colored individuals 5. What can artificial selection
before the Industrial Revolution. Over the last two tell us about evolution? Is
centuries, populations that occur in heavily polluted artificial selection a good
areas, where the tree trunks are darkened with soot, analogy for the selection that
have come to consist mainly of dark-colored occurs in nature?
(melanic) individuals—a result of rapid natural
selection.
21.3 Evidence for evolution can be found in other fields of biology.
¢ Several indirect lines of evidence argue that 6. What is homology? How does * Exploration:
macroevolution has occurred, including successive it support evolutionary theory? Frolution of the

changes in homologous structures, developmental
patterns, vestigial structures, parallel patterns of
evolution, and patterns of distribution.

7. What is convergent
evolution? Give examples.

8. How did Darwin’s studies of
island populations provide

* When differences in genes or proteins are examined, ;
evidence for evolution?

species that are thought to be closely related based on
the fossil record may be more similar than species
thought to be distantly related.

21.4 The theory of evolution has proven controversial.

 

Molecular Clock

Activity: Divergence

Student Research:

Evolution of Insect

Diets

On Science Articles:

* Darwinism at the
Cellular Level

* Was Darwin Wrong?

Be

 

9. Is “Darwinism” really science?

* The objections raised by Darwin’s critics are easily
Explain.

answered.

456 = Part VI_ Evolution

* On Science Article:
Answering
Evolution’s Critics

* Bioethics Case Study:
Creationism

Book Reviews:

© Mr. Darwin’s Shooter
by McDonald

Cy
