Behavioral Isolation

In chapter 27, we will consider the often elaborate
courtship and mating rituals of some groups of animals.
Related species of organisms such as birds often differ in
their courtship rituals, which tends to keep these species
distinct in nature even if they inhabit the same places (fig-
ure 22.5). For example, mallard and pintail ducks are per-
haps the two most common freshwater ducks in North
America. In captivity, they produce completely fertile off-
spring, but in nature they nest side-by-side and only rarely
hybridize.

More than 500 species of flies of the genus Drosophila
live in the Hawaiian Islands. This is one of the most re-
markable concentrations of species in a single animal
genus found anywhere. The genus occurs throughout the
world, but nowhere are the flies more diverse in external
appearance or behavior than in Hawaii. Many of these
flies differ greatly from other species of Drosophila, ex-
hibiting characteristics that can only be described as
bizarre.

The Hawaiian species of Drosophila are long-lived and
often very large compared with their relatives on the main-
land. The females are more uniform than the males, which
are often bizarrely distinctive. The males display complex
territorial behavior and elaborate courtship rituals.

The mating behavior patterns among Hawaiian species
of Drosophila are of great importance in maintaining the
distinctiveness of the individual species. For example, de-
spite the great differences between them, D. heteroneura
and D. silvestris are very closely related. Hybrids between
them are fully fertile. The two species occur together
over a wide area on the island of Hawaii, yet hybridiza-
tion has been observed at only one locality. The very dif-
ferent and complex behavioral characteristics of these
flies obviously play a major role in maintaining their dis-
tinctiveness.

Other Prezygotic Isolating Mechanisms

Temporal Isolation. Lactuca graminifolia and L.
canadensis, two species of wild lettuce, grow together
along roadsides throughout the southeastern United
States. Hybrids between these two species are easily
made experimentally and are completely fertile. But such
hybrids are rare in nature because L. graminifolia flowers
in early spring and L. canadensis flowers in summer.
When their blooming periods overlap, as they do occa-
sionally, the two species do form hybrids, which may be-
come locally abundant.

Many species of closely related amphibians have differ-
ent breeding seasons that prevent hybridization between
the species. For example, five species of frogs of the genus
Rana occur together in most of the eastern United States,
but hybrids are rare because the peak breeding time is dif-
ferent for each of them.

 

FIGURE 22.5

Differences in courtship rituals can isolate related bird
species. These Galipagos blue-footed boobies select their mates
only after an elaborate courtship display. This male is lifting his
feet in a ritualized high-step that shows off his bright blue feet.
The display behavior of other species of boobies, some of which
also occur in the Galdpagos, is much different.

Mechanical Isolation. Structural differences prevent
mating between some related species of animals. Aside
from such obvious features as size, the structure of the male
and female copulatory organs may be incompatible. In
many insect and other arthropod groups, the sexual organs,
particularly those of the male, are so diverse that they are
used as a primary basis for classification.

Similarly, flowers of related species of plants often differ
significantly in their proportions and structures. Some of
these differences limit the transfer of pollen from one plant
species to another. For example, bees may pick up the
pollen of one species on a certain place on their bodies; if
this area does not come into contact with the receptive
structures of the flowers of another plant species, the
pollen is not transferred.

Prevention of Gamete Fusion. In animals that shed
their gametes directly into water, eggs and sperm derived
from different species may not attract one another. Many
land animals may not hybridize successfully because the
sperm of one species may function so poorly within the re-
productive tract of another that fertilization never takes
place. In plants, the growth of pollen tubes may be im-
peded in hybrids between different species. In both plants
and animals the operation of such isolating mechanisms
prevents the union of gametes even following successful
mating.

 

Prezygotic isolating mechanisms lead to reproductive
isolation by preventing the formation of hybrid zygotes.

 

Chapter 22 The Origin of Species 461
