 

Convergent and
Divergent Evolution

Niche

Placental Mammals Australian Marsupials

 

Different geographical areas some-
times exhibit groups of plants and an-
imals of strikingly similar appearance,

Burrower

Marsupial mole

 

Mole . _

 

even though the organisms may be
only distantly related. It is difficult to
explain so many similarities as the re-
sult of coincidence. Instead, natural
selection appears to have favored par-

Anteater

Lesser anteater

“WM,

  

 

allel evolutionary adaptations in simi-
lar environments. Because selection Mate
in these instances has tended to favor

changes that made the two groups

Marsupial
é mouse

 

 

more alike, their phenotypes have
converged. This form of evolutionary
change is referred to as convergent
evolution, or sometimes, parallel
evolution.

Climber

Spotted

 

The Marsupial-Placental

Glider
Convergence

In the best-known case of conver-

 

 

gent evolution, two major groups of
mammals, marsupials and placentals,
have evolved in a very similar way,
even though the two lineages have

Cat

  

Tasmanian “tiger cat"

 

been living independently on sepa-
rate continents. Australia separated
from the other continents more than
50 million years ago, after marsupi-
als had evolved but before the ap-
pearance of placental mammals. As a
result, the only mammals in Aus-

Wolf

 

 

 

  
  

®

Tasmanian |
wolf 1

 

 

tralia (other than bats and a few col-
onizing rodents) have been marsupi-
als, members of a group in which the
young are born in a very immature
condition and held in a pouch until
they are ready to emerge into the
outside world. Thus, even though
placental mammals are the dominant mammalian group
throughout most of the world, marsupials retained su-
premacy in Australia.

What are the Australian marsupials like? To an aston-
ishing degree, they resemble the placental mammals living
today on the other continents (figure 21.19). The similarity
between some individual members of these two sets of
mammals argues strongly that they are the result of conver-
gent evolution, similar forms having evolved in different,
isolated areas because of similar selective pressures in simi-
lar environments.

FIGURE 21.19

continents.

Convergent evolution. Marsupials in Australia resemble placental mammals in the
rest of the world. They evolved in isolation after Australia separated from other

Homology versus Analogy

How do we know when two similar characters are homolo-
gous and when they are analogous? As we have seen, adap-
tation favoring different functions can obscure homologies,
while convergent evolution can create analogues that ap-
pear as similar as homologues. There is no hard-and-fast
answer to this question; the determination of homologues
is often a thorny issue in biological classification. As we
have seen in comparing vertebrate embryos, and again in
comparing slugs and squids, studies of embryonic develop-
ment often reveal features not apparent when studying
adult organisms. In general, the more complex two struc-
tures are, the less likely they evolved independently.

Chapter 21 The Evidence for Evolution 453
