 

FIGURE 21.20

A Galipagos tortoise most closely resembles South American tortoises. Isolated on these remote islands, the Galapagos tortoise
has evolved distinctive forms. This natural experiment is being terminated, however. Since Darwin’s time, much of the
natural habitat of the larger islands has been destroyed by human intrusion. Goats introduced by settlers, for example, have

drastically altered the vegetation.

Darwin and Patterns of Recent Divergence

Darwin was the first to present evidence that animals and
plants living on oceanic islands resemble most closely the
forms on the nearest continent—a relationship that only
makes sense as reflecting common ancestry. The Galépagos
turtle in figure 21.20 is more similar to South American
turtles than to those of any other continent. This kind of
relationship strongly suggests that the island forms evolved
from individuals that came from the adjacent mainland at
some time in the past. Thus, the Galapagos finches of fig-
ure 21.8 have different beaks than their South American
relatives. In the absence of evolution, there seems to be no
logical explanation of why individual kinds of island plants
and animals would be clearly related to others on the near-
est mainland, but still have some divergent features. As
Darwin pointed out, this relationship provides strong evi-
dence that macroevolution has occurred.

A similar resemblance to mainland birds can be seen in
an island finch Darwin never saw—a solitary finch species
living on Cocos Island, a tiny, remote volcanic island lo-
cated 630 kilometers to the northeast of the Galapagos.
This finch does not resemble the finches of Europe, Aus-
tralia, Africa, or North America. Instead, it resembles the
finches of Costa Rica, 500 kilometers to the east.

Of course, because of adaptation to localized habitats, is-
land forms are not identical to those on the nearby conti-
nents. The turtles have evolved different shell shapes, for
example; those living in moist habitats have dome-shaped

454 = Part VI_ Evolution

shells while others living in dry places have low, saddle-
backed shells with the front of the shell bent up to expose
the head and neck. Similarly, the Galdpagos finches have
evolved from a single presumptive ancestor into 13 species,
each specialized in a different way. These Galapagos turtles
and finches have evolved in concert with the continental
forms, from the same ancestors, but the two lineages have
diverged rather than converged.

It is fair to ask how Darwin knew that the Galdpagos
tortoises and finches do not represent the convergence of
unrelated island and continental forms (analogues) rather
than the divergence of recently isolated groups (homo-
logues). While cither hypothesis would argue for natural
selection, Darwin chose divergence of homologues as by far
the simplest explanation, because the turtles and finches
differ by only a few traits, and are similar in many.

In sum total, the evidence for macroevolution is over-
whelming. In the next chapter, we will consider Darwin’s
proposal that microevolutionary changes have led directly
to macroevolutionary changes, the key argument in his the-
ory that evolution occurs by natural selection.

Evolution favors similar forms under similar
circumstances. Convergence is the evolution of similar
forms in different lineages when exposed to the same
selective pressures. Divergence is the evolution of
different forms in the same lineage when exposed to
different selective pressures.
