New Zealand Alpine Buttercups

Adaptive radiations as we have described in Galdpagos
finches, Hawaiian Drosophila, and cichlid fishes seem to be
favored by periodic isolation. Finches and Drosophila invade
new islands, local species evolve, and they in turn reinvade
the home island, in a cycle of expanding diversity. Simi-
larly, cichlids become isolated by falling water levels, evolv-
ing separate species in isolated populations that later are
merged when the lake’s water level rises again.

A clear example of the role periodic isolation plays in
species formation can be seen in the alpine buttercups
(genus Ranunculus) which grow among the glaciers of New
Zealand (figure 22.14). More species of alpine buttercup
grow on the two islands of New Zealand than in all of
North and South America combined. Detailed studies by
the Canadian taxonomist Fulton Fisher revealed that the
evolutionary mechanism responsible for inducing this di-
versity is recurrent isolation associated with the recession
of glaciers. The 14 species of alpine Ranunculus occupy five
distinctive habitats within glacial areas: snowfields (rocky
crevices among outcrops in permanent snowfields at 7000
to 9000 feet elevation); snowline fringe (rocks at lower mar-
gin of snowfields between 4000 and 7000 ft); stony debris
(scree slopes of exposed loose rocks at 2000 to 6000 ft);
sheltered situations (shaded by rock or shrubs at 1000 to 6000
ft); and boggy habitats (sheltered slopes and hollows, poorly
drained tussocks at elevations between 2500 and 5000 ft).

Ranunculus speciation and diversification has been pro-
moted by repeated cycles of glacial advance and retreat. As
the glaciers retreat, populations become isolated on moun-
tain peaks, permitting speciation (figure 22.15). In the next
advance, these new species can expand throughout the
mountain range, coming into contact with their close rela-
tives. In this way, one initial species could give rise to many

 

FIGURE 22.14

A New Zealand alpine buttercup. Fourteen species of alpine
Ranunculus grow among the glaciers and mountains of New
Zealand, including this R. /yallii, the giant buttercup.

descendants. Moreover, on isolated mountaintops during
glacial retreats, species have convergently evolved to oc-
cupy similar habitats; these distantly related but ecologi-
cally similar species have then been brought back into con-
tact in subsequent glacial advances.

 

Recurrent isolation promotes species formation.

 

 

 

 

Mountain populations Alpine zones
Glaciers link alpine zones into become isolated, oo are reconnected. Separately
one continuous range. Glaciers recede permitting divergence Glaciatiiil > evolved species come

and speciation. back into contact.

en
>

 

 

FIGURE 22.15

Periodic glaciation encouraged species formation among alpine buttercups in New Zealand. The formation of extensive glaciers
during the Pleistocene linked the alpine zones of many mountains together. When the glaciers receded, these alpine zones were isolated
from one another, only to become reconnected with the advent of the next glacial period. During periods of isolation, populations of

alpine buttercups diverged in the isolated habitats.

Chapter 22 The Origin of Species. 471
