FIGURE 22.10

Differences between species can result
from a few genes that have major
effects. (a) Mimulus lewisii has pale pink
flowers and concentrated nectar, which are
optimal for attracting bumblebees to serve
as pollinators. (4) By contrast, M. cardinalis
has the red flowers and copious dilute
nectar typical of hummingbird-pollinated
plants. Differences in flower shape and
color are the result of a few genes of large
effect.

(a) Mimulus lewisii

types would be retained as polymorphisms within a single
population. For this reason, most biologists consider sym-
patric speciation a rare event.

Nonetheless, in recent years, a number of cases have
appeared that appear difficult to interpret in any way
other than sympatric speciation. For example, the vol-
canic crater lake Barombi Mbo in Cameroon is extremely
small and ecologically homogeneous, with no opportunity
for within-lake isolation. Nonetheless, 11 species of
closely related cichlid fish occur in the lake; all of the
species are more closely related evolutionarily to each
other than to any species outside of the crater. The most
reasonable explanation is that an ancestral species colo-
nized the crater and subsequently speciated in sympatry
multiple times.

Genetic Changes Underlying Speciation

How much divergence does it take to create a new
species? How many gene changes does it take? Since Dar-
win, the traditional view has been that new species arise
by the accumulation of many small genetic differences.
While there is little doubt that many species have formed
in this gradual way, new techniques of molecular biology
suggest that in at least some cases, the evolution of a new
species may involve very few genes. Studying two species
of monkeyflower found in the western United States, re-
searchers found that only a few genes separate the two
species, even though at first glance the two species appear
to be very different (figure 22.10). Using gene technolo-
gies like those described in chapter 19, the researchers
found that all of the major differences in the flowers, in-
cluding not only flower shape and color, but also nectar
production, were attributable to several genes, each of
which had great phenotypic effects. Because individual
genes have such powerful effects, species as different as
these two can evolve in relatively few steps.

 

(b) Mimulus cardinalis

The Role of Polyploidy in Species Formation

Among plants, fertile individuals often arise from sterile
ones through polyploidy, which doubles the chromo-
some number of the original sterile hybrid individual. A
polyploid cell, tissue, or individual has more than two
sets of chromosomes. Polyploid cells and tissues occur
spontaneously and reasonably often in all organisms, al-
though in many they are soon eliminated. A hybrid may
be sterile simply because its sets of chromosomes, de-
rived from male and female parents of different species,
do not pair with one another. If the chromosome num-
ber of such a hybrid doubles, the hybrid, as a result of
the doubling, will have a duplicate of each chromosome.
In that case, the chromosomes will pair, and the fertility
of the polyploid hybrid individual may be restored. It is
estimated that about half of the approximately 260,000
species of plants have a polyploid episode in their his-
tory, including many of great commercial importance,
such as bread wheat, cotton, tobacco, sugarcane, ba-
nanas, and potatoes. As you might imagine, the advan-
tages a polyploid plant offers for natural selection can be
substantial as a result of their great levels of genetic vari-
ation; hence, the significance of polyploidy in the evolu-
tion of plants.

Because polyploid plants cannot reproduce with their
ancestors, reproductive isolation can evolve in one step.
Consequently, speciation by polyploidy is one uncontro-
versial means of sympatric speciation. Although much
rarer than in plants, speciation by polyploidy is also
known from a variety of animals, including insects, fish,
and salamanders.

 

Speciation occurs much more readily in the absence of
gene flow among populations. However, speciation can
occur in sympatry by means of polyploidy, and perhaps
in other cases also.

 

Chapter 22. The Origin of Species 467
