22.3. We have learned a great deal about how species form.

One of the oldest questions in the field of evo-
lution is: how does one ancestral species be-
come divided into two descendant species? If
species are defined by the existence of repro-
ductive isolation, then the process of speciation
equates with the evolution of reproductive iso-
lating mechanisms. How do reproductive isolat-
ing mechanisms evolve?

Reproductive Isolation May
Evolve as a By-Product of
Evolutionary Change

Most reproductive isolating mechanisms ini-
tially arise for some reason other than to pro-
vide reproductive isolation. For example, a
population that colonizes a new habitat may
evolve adaptations for living in that habitat. As
a result, individuals from that population
might never encounter individuals from the
ancestral population. Even if they do meet, the
population in the new habitat may have
evolved new phenotypes or behavior so that
members of the two populations no longer
recognize each other as potential mates (figure
22.7). For this reason, some biologists believe
that the term “isolating mechanisms” is mis-
guided, because it implies that the traits
evolved specifically for the purpose of geneti-
cally isolating a species, which in most cases is
probably incorrect.

FIGURE 22.7
Reproductive isolating mechanisms. A
variety of different mechanisms can
prevent successful reproduction between
individuals of different species.

Prezygotic isolating mechanisms

Postzygotic isolating mechanisms

Species 1

Species 2

 

Geographic isolation
Species occur in different places

 

 

Ecological isolation
Species utilize different resources in the habitat

 

 

Behavioral isolation
Species have different mating rituals

 

 

 

 

 

Temporal isolation
Mating or flowering occur during
different seasons or at different times of the day

 

 

   

y

Mating <

    

 

 

Mechanical isolation
Structural differences prevent mating or pollen transfer

 

 

 

 

 

Prevention of gamete fusion
Gametes fail to attract each other or function poorly

 

 

2

Fertilization

 

 

 

Hybrid embryos do not develop properly

 

 

Hybrid adults do not survive in nature

 

 

 

Hybrid adults are sterile or have reduced fertility

 

 

 

 

 

Fertile hybrid offspring

Chapter 22 The Origin of Species

463
