Hawaiian Drosophila

Our second example of a cluster of species is the fly
genus Drosophila on the Hawaiian Islands, which we men-
tioned earlier as an example of behavioral isolation.
There are at least 1250 species of this genus throughout
the world, and more than a quarter are found only in the
Hawaiian Islands (figure 22.12). New species of
Drosophila are still being discovered in Hawaii, although
the rapid destruction of the native vegetation is making
the search more difficult. Aside from their sheer number,
Hawaiian Drosophila species are unusual because of the
morphological and behavioral traits discussed earlier. No
comparable species of Drosophila are found anywhere else
in the world.

A second, closely related genus of flies, Scaptomyza, also
forms a species cluster in Hawaii, where it is represented by
as many as 300 species. A few species of Scaptomyza are
found outside of Hawaii, but the genus is better repre-
sented there than elsewhere. In addition, species intermedi-
ate between Seaptomyza and Drosophila exist in Hawaii, but
nowhere else. The genera are so closely related that scien-
tists have suggested that all of the estimated 800 species of
these two genera that occur in Hawaii may have derived
from a single common ancestor.

The native Hawaiian flies are closely associated with
the remarkable native plants of the islands and are often
abundant in the native vegetation. Evidently, when their
ancestors first reached these islands, they encountered
many “empty” habitats that other kinds of insects and
other animals occupied elsewhere. The evolutionary op-
portunities the ancestral Drosophila flies found were simi-
lar to those the ancestors of Darwin’s finches in the Gala-
pagos Islands encountered, and both groups evolved in a
similar way. Many of the Hawaiian Drosophila species are
highly selective in their choice of host plants for their lar-
vae and in the part of the plant they use. The larvae of
various species live in rotting stems, fruits, bark, leaves, or
roots, or feed on sap.

New islands have continually arisen from the sea in the
region of the Hawaiian Islands. As they have done so, they
appear to have been invaded successively by the various
Drosophila groups present on the older islands. New species
have evolved as new islands have been colonized. The
Hawaiian species of Drosophila have had even greater evolu-
tionary opportunities than Darwin’s finches because of
their restricted ecological niches and the variable ages of
the islands. They clearly tell one of the most unusual evolu-
tionary stories found anywhere in the world.

 

(a) Drosophila mulli

 

(b) Drosophila digressa

FIGURE 22.12
Hawaiian Drosopbila. The hundreds of species that have evolved
on the Hawaiian Islands are extremely variable in appearance,
although genetically almost identical.

 

The adaptive radiation of about 800 species of the flies
Drosophila and Scaptomyza on the Hawaiian Islands,
probably from a single common ancestor, is one of the
most remarkable examples of intensive species
formation found anywhere on earth.

 

Chapter 22 The Origin of Species 469
