Deoxyribose-phosphate
backbone

    
  

 

—B, _ Ribose-phosphate
— backbone

FIGURE 3.16

DNA versus RNA. DNA forms a double helix, uses deoxyribose as
the sugar in its sugar-phosphate backbone, and utilizes thymine
among its nitrogenous bases. RNA, on the other hand, is usually
single-stranded, uses ribose as the sugar in its sugar-phosphate
backbone, and utilizes uracil in place of thymine.

3.16). Although there is no chemical reason why RNA can-
not form double helices as DNA does, cells do not possess
the enzymes necessary to assemble double strands of RNA,
as they do for DNA. Using two different molecules, one
single-stranded and the other double-stranded, separates
the role of DNA in storing hereditary information from the
role of RNA in using this information to specify protein
structure.

Which Came First, DNA or RNA?

The information necessary for the synthesis of proteins is
stored in the cell’s double-stranded DNA base sequences.
The cell uses this information by first making an RNA
transcript of it: RNA nucleotides pair with complementary

Nitrogenous base
(adenine)

Triphosphate group

NHp
N.
i SN
° ° ° |
I Il Il ZA
O= on N
b

poo F—0-CH,

OH OH
5-carbon sugar

FIGURE 3.17

ATP. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) contains adenine, a five-
carbon sugar, and three phosphate groups. This molecule serves
to transfer energy rather than store genetic information.

DNA nucleotides. By storing the information in DNA while
using a complementary RNA sequence to actually direct
protein synthesis, the cell does not expose the information-
encoding DNA chain to the dangers of single-strand cleav-
age every time the information is used. Therefore, DNA is
thought to have evolved from RNA as a means of preserv-
ing the genetic information, protecting it from the ongo-
ing wear and tear associated with cellular activity. This ge-
netic system has come down to us from the very
beginnings of life.

The cell uses the single-stranded, short-lived RNA tran-
script to direct the synthesis of a protein with a specific se-
quence of amino acids. Thus, the information flows from
DNA to RNA to protein, a process that has been termed the
“central dogma” of molecular biology.

ATP

In addition to serving as subunits of DNA and RNA, nu-
cleotide bases play other critical roles in the life of a cell.
For example, adenine is a key component of the molecule
adenosine triphosphate (ATP; figure 3.17), the energy cur-
rency of the cell. It also occurs in the molecules nicotina-
mide adenine dinucleotide (NAD*) and flavin adenine dinu-
cleotide (FAD*), which carry electrons whose energy is used
to make ATP.

 

A nucleic acid is a long chain of five-carbon sugars with
an organic base protruding from each sugar. DNA is a
double-stranded helix that stores hereditary
information as a specific sequence of nucleotide bases.
RNA is a single-stranded molecule that transcribes this
information to direct protein synthesis.

 

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 49
