The Geography of Speciation

Speciation is a two-part process. First, initially identical
populations must diverge and, second, reproductive isola-
tion must evolve to maintain these differences. The diffi-
culty with this process, as we have seen, is that the homog-
enizing effect of gene flow between populations will
constantly be acting to erase any differences that may arise,
cither by genetic drift or natural selection. Of course, gene
flow only occurs between populations that are in contact.
Consequently, evolutionary biologists have long recognized
that speciation is much more likely in geographically iso-
lated populations.

Allopatric Divergence Is the Primary Means of
Speciation.

Ernst Mayr was the first biologist to strongly make the
case for allopatric speciation. Marshalling data from a
wide variety of organisms and localities, Mayr was clearly
able to demonstrate that geographically separated popu-
lations appear much more likely to have evolved substan-
tial differences leading to speciation. For example, the
Papuan kingfisher, Tanysiptera hydrocharis, varies little
throughout its wide range in New Guinea despite the

   

FIGURE 22.9

great variation in the island’s topography and climate. By
contrast, isolated populations on nearby islands are strik-
ingly different from each other and from the mainland
population (figure 22.9).

Many other examples indicate that speciation can
occur in allopatry. Given that one would expect isolated
populations to diverge over time by either drift or selec-
tion, this result is not surprising. Rather, the question be-
comes: Is geographic isolation required for speciation to
occur?

Whether Speciation Can Occur in Sympatry Is
Controversial

As we saw in chapter 20, disruptive selection can cause a
population to contain individuals exhibiting two different
phenotypes. One might think that if selection were strong
enough, these two phenotypes would evolve into different
species. However, before the two phenotypes could be-
come different species, they would have to evolve repro-
ductive isolating mechanisms. Because the two phenotypes
would initially not be reproductively isolated at all, genetic
exchange between individuals of the two phenotypes would
tend to prevent genetic divergence in mating preferences
or other isolating mechanisms. As a result, the two pheno-

PACIFIC OCEAN

Phenotypic differentiation in the Papuan kingfisher in New Guinea. Isolated island populations (above left) are quite distinctive,
showing variation in tail feather structure and length, plumage coloration, and bill size, whereas kingfishers on the mainland (above right)

show little variation.

466 = Part VI Evolution
