Lake Victoria Cichlid Fishes

Lake Victoria is an immense shallow freshwater sea about
the size of Switzerland in the heart of equatorial East
Africa, until recently home to an incredibly diverse collec-
tion of over 300 species of cichlid fishes.

Recent Radiation

This cluster of species appears to have evolved recently and
quite rapidly. By sequencing the cytochrome b gene in
many of the lake’s fish, scientists have been able to estimate
that the first cichlids entered Lake Victoria only 200,000
years ago, colonizing from the Nile. Dramatic changes in
water level encouraged species formation. As the lake rose,
it flooded new areas and opened up new habitat. Many of
the species may have originated after the lake dried down
14,000 years ago, isolating local populations in small lakes
until the water level rose again.

Cichlid Diversity

These small, perchlike fishes range from 2 to 10 inches in
length, and the males come in endless varieties of colors.
The most diverse assembly of vertebrates known to sci-
ence, the Lake Victoria cichlids defy simple description.
We can gain some sense of the vast range of types by
looking at how different species eat. There are mud
biters, algae scrapers, leaf chewers, snail crushers, snail
shellers (who pounce on slow-crawling snails and spear

Fish eater

Algae scraper

FIGURE 22.13

 

their soft parts with long curved teeth before the snail
can retreat into its shell), zooplankton eaters, insect
caters, prawn eaters, and fish eaters. Scale-scraping cich-
lids rasp slices of scales off of other fish. There are even
cichlid species that are “pedophages,” eating the young of
other cichlids.

Cichlid fish have a remarkable trait that may have been
instrumental in this evolutionary radiation: a second set of
functioning jaws occurs in the throats of cichlid fish (figure
22.13)! The ability of these jaws to manipulate and process
food has freed the oral jaws to evolve for other purposes,
and the result has been the incredible diversity of ecologi-
cal roles filled by these fish.

Abrupt Extinction

Much of this diversity is gone. In the 1950s, the Nile perch,
a commercial fish with a voracious appetite, was introduced
on the Ugandan shore of Lake Victoria. Since then it has
spread through the lake, eating its way through the cich-
lids. By 1990 all the open-water cichlid species were ex-
tinct, as well as many living in rocky shallow regions. Over
70% of all the named Lake Victoria cichlid species had dis-
appeared, as well as untold numbers of species that had yet
to be described.

 

Very rapid speciation occurred among cichlid fishes
isolated in Lake Victoria, but widespread extinction
followed when the isolation ended.

 

Zooplankton eater

 

Insect eater

Cichlid fishes of Lake Victoria. These fishes have evolved adaptations to use a variety of different habitats. The second set of jaws located
in the throat of these fish has provided evolutionary flexibility, allowing oral jaws to be modified in many ways.

470 Part VI_ Evolution
