| 22.4 Clusters of species reflect rapid evolution.

Darwin’s Finches

One of the most visible manifestations of evolution is the
existence of groups of closely related species that have re-
cently evolved from a common ancestor by occupying
different habitats. This type of adaptive radiation oc-
curred among the 13 species of Darwin’s finches on the
Galapagos Islands. Presumably, the ancestor of Darwin’s
finches reached these islands before other land birds, and
all of the types of habitats where birds occur on the
mainland were unoccupied. As the new arrivals moved
into these vacant ecological niches and adopted new
lifestyles, they were subjected to diverse sets of selective
pressures. Under these circumstances, and aided by the
geographic isolation afforded by the many islands of the
Galapagos archipelago, the ancestral finches rapidly split
into a series of diverse populations, some of which
evolved into separate species. These species now occupy
many different kinds of habitats on the Galépagos Islands
(figure 22.11), habitats comparable to those several dis-
tinct groups of birds occupy on the mainland. The 13
species comprise four groups:

Warbler finch

(Certhidea olivacea)
Woodpecker finch ; eS

(Cactospiza pallida)

      

Small
insectivorous

tree finch
(C. parvulus)

Large
insectivorous

tree finch
(C. psittacula)

Vegetarian
tree finch

(Platyspiza
crassirostris)

a Insect eaters
=
FIGURE 22.11

1. Ground finches. There are six species of Geospiza
ground finches. Most of the ground finches feed on
seeds. The size of their bills is related to the size of
the seeds they eat. Some of the ground finches feed
primarily on cactus flowers and fruits and have a
longer, larger, more pointed bill than the others.

2. Tree finches. There are five species of insect-
eating tree finches. Four species have bills that are
suitable for feeding on insects. The woodpecker finch
has a chisel-like beak. This unusual bird carries
around a twig or a cactus spine, which it uses to probe
for insects in deep crevices.

3. Warbler finch. This unusual bird plays the same
ecological role in the Galépagos woods that warblers
play on the mainland, searching continually over
the leaves and branches for insects. It has a slender,
warbler-like beak.

4. Vegetarian finch. The very heavy bill of this bud-
eating bird is used to wrench buds from branches.

 

Darwin’s finches, all derived from one similar mainland
species, have radiated widely on the Galapagos Islands
in the absence of competition.

 

 

Cactus ground finch
(Geospiza scandens)

Sharp-beaked
ground finch
(G. dificilis)

Small ground

finch

(G. fuliginosa)
Medium ground
finch
(G. fortis)
Large
ground

2 finch

(G.
magnirostris)

Darwin’s finches. Ten of the 13 Galipagos species of Darwin's finches occur on Isla Santa Cruz, one of the Galspagos Islands. These
species show differences in bills and feeding habits. The bills of several of these species resemble those of distinct families of birds on the
mainland. This condition presumably arose when the finches evolved new species in habitats lacking small birds. The woodpecker finch
uses cactus spines to probe in crevices of bark and rotten wood for food. Scientists believe all of these birds derived from a single common
ancestor.

468 = Part VI Evolution
