Selection May Reinforce Isolating Mechanisms

The formation of species is a continuous process, one that
we can understand because of the existence of intermediate
stages at all levels of differentiation. If populations that are
partly differentiated come into contact with one another,
they may still be able to interbreed freely, and the differ-
ences between them may disappear over the course of time
as genetic exchange homogenizes the populations. Con-
versely, if the populations are reproductively isolated, then
no genetic exchange will occur and the two populations will
be different species.

However, there is an intermediate situation in which
reproductive isolation has partially evolved, but is not
complete. As a result, hybridization will occur at least
occasionally. If they are partly sterile, or not as well
adapted to the existing habitats as their parents, these hy-
brids will be at a disadvantage. As a result, selection
would favor any alleles in the parental populations that
prevented hybridization because individuals that avoided
hybridizing would be more successful in passing their
genes on to the next generation. The result would be the
continual improvement of prezygotic isolating mecha-
nisms until the two populations were completely repro-
ductively isolated. This process is termed reinforcement
because initially incomplete isolating mechanisms are re-
inforced by natural selection until they are completely
effective.

Reinforcement is by no means inevitable, however.
When incompletely isolated populations come together,
gene flow immediately begins to occur between the
species. Although hybrids may be inferior, they are not, in
this case, completely inviable or infertile (if they were,
then the species would be reproductively isolated); hence,
when these hybrids reproduce with members of either
population, they will serve as a conduit of genetic ex-
change from one population to the other. As a result, the
two populations will tend to lose their genetic distinctive-
ness. Thus, a race ensues: can reproductive isolation be
perfected before gene flow destroys the differences be-
tween the populations? Experts disagree on the likely out-
come, but many believe that reinforcement is the much
less common outcome.

The Role of Natural Selection in Speciation

What role does natural selection play in the speciation
process? Certainly, the process of reinforcement is driven
by natural selection favoring the perfection of reproductive
isolation. But, as we have seen, reinforcement may not be
common. Is natural selection necessarily involved in the
initial evolution of isolating mechanisms?

464 = Part VI Evolution

Random Changes May Cause Reproductive
Isolation

‘As we discussed in chapter 20, populations may diverge
for purely random reasons. Genetic drift in small popula-
tions, founder effects, and population bottlenecks all may
lead to changes in traits that cause reproductive isolation.
For example, in the Hawaiian Islands, closely related
species of Drosophila often differ greatly in their courtship
behavior. Colonization of new islands by these fruit flies
probably involves a founder effect, in which one or a few
fruit flies—perhaps only a single pregnant female—is
blown by strong winds to a new island. Changes in
courtship behavior between ancestor and descendant
populations may be the result of such founder events.
Given long enough periods of time, any two isolated
populations will diverge due to genetic drift. In some
cases, this random divergence may affect traits responsi-
ble for reproductive isolation, and speciation will have
occurred.

Adaptation and Speciation

Nonetheless, adaptation and speciation are probably re-
lated in many cases. As species adapt to different circum-
stances, they will accumulate many differences that may
lead to reproductive isolation. For example, if one popula-
tion of flies adapts to wet conditions and another to dry
conditions, then the populations will evolve a variety of dif-
ferences in physiological and sensory traits; these differ-
ences may promote ecological and behavioral isolation and
may cause any hybrids they produce to be poorly adapted
to either habitat.

Selection might also act directly on mating behavior.
Male Anolis lizards, for example, court females by extend-
ing a colorful flap of skin, called a “dewlap,” that is lo-
cated under their throat (figure 22.8). The ability of one
lizard to see the dewlap of another lizard depends not
only on the color of the dewlap, but the environment in
which they occur. As a result, a light-colored dewlap is
most effective in reflecting light in a dim forest, whereas
dark colors are more apparent in the bright glare of open
habitats. As a result, when these lizards occupy new habi-
tats, natural selection will favor evolutionary change in
dewlap color because males whose dewlaps cannot be seen
will attract few mates. However, the lizards also distin-
guish members of their own species from those of other
species by the color of the dewlap. Hence, adaptive
change in mating behavior could have the incidental con-
sequence of causing speciation.

Laboratory scientists have conducted experiments on
fruit flies and other organisms in which they isolate popula-
