Problems with the Biological
Species Concept

Since the biological species concept was first proposed by
Ernst Mayr in the 1940s, it has been the predominant idea
of how to recognize and define species. However, in recent
years, workers from a variety of fields have begun to ques-
tion how universally applicable the concept really is.

The Extent of Hybridization

The crux of the matter concerns hybridization. Biological
species are reproductively isolated, so that hybridization
should be rare. If hybridization is common, one would ex-
pect one of two quick outcomes: either reinforcement
would occur, leading to the perfection of isolating mecha-
nisms and an end to hybridization, or the two populations
would merge together into a single homogeneous gene
pool.

However, in recent years biologists have detected much
greater amounts of hybridization than previously realized
between populations that seem to neither be experiencing
reinforcement nor losing their specific identities. Botanists
have always been aware that species can often experience
substantial amounts of hybridization. One study found that
more than 50% of the plant species surveyed in California
were not well defined by genetic isolation. For example,
the fossil record indicates that balsam poplars and cotton-
woods have been phenotypically distinct for 12 million
years, but throughout this time, they have routinely pro-
duced hybrids. Consequently, for many years, many
botanists have felt that the biological species concept only
applies to animals.

What is becoming increasingly evident, however, is
that hybridization is not all that uncommon in animals,
either. One recent survey indicated that almost 10% of
the world’s 9500 bird species are known to have hy-
bridized in nature. Recent years have seen the documen-
tation of more and more cases in which substantial hy-
bridization occurs between animal species. Again, the
Galdpagos finches provide a particularly well-studied ex-
ample. Three species on the island of Daphne Major—the
medium ground finch, the cactus finch, and the small
ground finch—are clearly distinct morphologically and
occupy different ecological niches. Careful studies over
the past 20 years by Peter and Rosemary Grant found
that, on average, 2% of the medium ground finches and
1% of the cactus finches mated with other species every
year. Furthermore, hybrid offspring appeared to be at no

disadvantage either in terms of survival or subsequent re-
production. This is not a trivial amount of genetic ex-
change, and one might expect to see the species coalesc-
ing into one variable population, but the species are
nonetheless maintaining their distinctiveness.

Alternatives to the Biological Species Concept

This is not to say hybridization is rampant throughout the
animal world. As the bird survey indicated, 90% of bird
species are not known to hybridize, and even fewer proba-
bly experience significant amounts of hybridization. Still, it
is a common enough occurrence to cast doubt about
whether reproductive isolation is the only force maintain-
ing the integrity of species.

An alternative hypothesis is that the distinctions among
species are maintained by natural selection. The idea is that
each species has adapted to its own specific part of the envi-
ronment. Stabilizing selection then maintains the species’
adaptations; hybridization has little effect because alleles
introduced into the gene pool from other species quickly
would be eliminated by natural selection.

We have already seen in chapter 20 that the interac-
tion between gene flow and natural selection can have
many outcomes. In some cases, strong selection can over-
whelm any effects of gene flow, but in other situations,
gene flow can prevent populations from eliminating less
successful alleles from a population. As a general explana-
tion, then, natural selection is not likely to have any
fewer exceptions than the biological species concept, al-
though it may prove more successful for certain types of
organisms or habitats.

A variety of other ideas have been put forward to estab-
lish criteria for defining species. Many of these are spe-
cific to a particular type of organism and none has univer-
sal applicability. In truth, it may be that there is no single
explanation for what maintains the identity of species.
Given the incredible variation evident in plants, animals,
and microorganisms in all aspects of their biology, it is
perhaps not surprising that different processes are operat-
ing in different organisms. This is an area of active re-
search that demonstrates the dynamic nature of the field
of evolutionary biology.

 

 

Hybridization has always been recognized to be
widespread among plants, but recent research reveals
that it is surprisingly high in animals, too. Because of
the diversity of living organisms, no single definition of
what constitutes a species may be universally applicable.

 

Chapter 22. The Origin of Species 475
