23.1 The evolutionary path to humans starts with the advent of primates.

The Evolutionary Path to Apes

The story of human evolution begins around 65 million
years ago, with the explosive radiation of a group of small,
arboreal mammals called the Archonta. These primarily in-
sectivorous mammals had large eyes and were most likely
nocturnal (active at night). Their radiation gave rise to dif-
ferent types of mammals, including bats, tree shrews, and
primates, the order of mammals that contains humans.

The Earliest Primates

Primates are mammals with two distinct features that al-
lowed them to succeed in the arboreal, insect-eating envi-
ronment:

1. Grasping fingers and toes. Unlike the clawed feet
of tree shrews and squirrels, primates have grasping
hands and feet that let them grip limbs, hang from
branches, seize food, and, in some primates, use tools.
The first digit in many primates is opposable and at
least some, if not all, of the digits have nails.

2. Binocular vision. Unlike the eyes of shrews and
squirrels, which sit on each side of the head so that
the two fields of vision do not overlap, the eyes of pri-
mates are shifted forward to the front of the face.
This produces overlapping binocular vision that lets
the brain judge distance precisely—important to an
animal moving through the trees.

Other mammals have binocular vision, but only pri-
mates have both binocular vision and grasping hands, mak-
ing them particularly well adapted to their environment.
While early primates were mostly insectivorous, their den-
tition began to change from the shearing, triangular-
shaped molars specialized for insect eating to the more
flattened, square-shaped molars and rodentlike incisors
specialized for plant eating. Primates that evolved later
also show a continuous reduction in snout length and
number of teeth.

The Evolution of Prosimians

About 40 million years ago, the earliest primates split into
two groups: the prosimians and the anthropoids. The
prosimians (“before monkeys”) looked something like a
cross between a squirrel and a cat and were common in
North America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Only a few
prosimians survive today, lemurs, lorises and tarsiers (figure
23.2). In addition to having grasping digits and binocular
vision, prosimians have large eyes with increased visual acu-
ity. Most prosimians are nocturnal, feeding on fruits,
leaves, and flowers, and many lemurs have long tails for
balancing.

478 = Part VI_ Evolution

 

FIGURE 23.2

A prosimian. This tarsier, a prosimian native to tropical Asia,
shows the characteristic features of primates: grasping fingers and
toes and binocular vision.

Origin of the Anthropoids

The anthropoids, or higher primates, include monkeys,
apes, and humans (figure 23.3). Anthropoids are almost all
diurnal—that is, active during the day—feeding mainly on
fruits and leaves. Evolution favored many changes in eye
design, including color vision, that were adaptations to day-
time foraging. An expanded brain governs the improved
senses, with the braincase forming a larger portion of the
head. Anthropoids, like the relatively few diurnal prosimi-
ans, live in groups with complex social interactions. In ad-
dition, the anthropoids tend to care for their young for
prolonged periods, allowing for a long childhood of learn-
ing and brain development.

The early anthropoids, now extinct, are thought to have
evolved in Africa. Their direct descendants are a very suc-
cessful group of primates, the monkeys.

New World Monkeys. About 30 million years ago, some
anthropoids migrated to South America, where they
evolved in isolation. Their descendants, known as the New
World monkeys, are easy to identify: all are arboreal, they
have flat spreading noses, and many of them grasp objects

with long prehensile tails (figure 23.42).
