3.4 Lipids make membranes and store energy.

Lipids are a loosely defined group of molecules with one
main characteristic: they are insoluble in water. The most
familiar lipids are fats and oils. Lipids have a very high pro-
portion of nonpolar carbon-hydrogen (C—H) bonds, and so
long-chain lipids cannot fold up like a protein to sequester
their nonpolar portions away from the surrounding aqueous
environment. Instead, when placed in water many lipid mol-
ecules will spontaneously cluster together and expose what
polar groups they have to the surrounding water while se-
questering the nonpolar parts of the molecules together
within the cluster. This spontaneous assembly of lipids is of
paramount importance to cells, as it underlies the structure
of cellular membranes.

Phospholipids Form Membranes

Phospholipids are among the most important molecules of
the cell, as they form the core of all biological membranes.
An individual phospholipid is a composite molecule, made
up of three kinds of subunits:

1. Glycerol, a three-carbon alcohol, with each carbon
bearing a hydroxyl group. Glycerol forms the back-
bone of the phospholipid molecule.

2. Fatty acids, long chains of C—H bonds (hydrocarbon
chains) ending in a carboxyl (~COOH) group. Two
fatty acids are attached to the glycerol backbone in a
phospholipid molecule.

3. Phosphate group, attached to one end of the glycerol.
The charged phosphate group usually has a charged
organic molecule linked to it, such as choline, etha-
nolamine, or the amino acid serine.

The phospholipid molecule can be thought of as having a
polar “head” at one end (the phosphate group) and two
long, very nonpolar “tails” at the other. In water, the non-
polar tails of nearby phospholipids aggregate away from the
water, forming two layers of tails pointed toward each oth-
er—a lipid bilayer (figure 3.18). Lipid bilayers are the basic
framework of biological membranes, discussed in detail in
chapter 6.

H
|

H—C—Fatty acid
|

H—C—Fatty acid
|

H—C—Phosphate group

I
H

 

Because the C—H bonds in lipids are very nonpolar,
they are not water-soluble, and aggregate together in
water. This kind of aggregation by phospholipids forms
biological membranes.

 

Oil

Hydrophobic
“tails”
Hydrophilic

"heads"
(a)

Water

Water

Hydrophilic
region

Hydrophobic

region
Hydrophilic

region

(b)
FIGURE 3.18

Water

Phospholipids. (a) At an oil-water interface, phospholipid molecules will orient so that their polar (hydrophilic) heads are in the polar
medium, water, and their nonpolar (hydrophobic) tails are in the nonpolar medium, oil. (#) When surrounded by water, phospholipid
molecules arrange themselves into two layers with their heads extending outward and their tails inward.

50 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things
