How Humans Evolved

Concept Outline

23.1 The evolutionary path to humans starts with the
advent of primates.

The Evolutionary Path to Apes. Primates first evolved
65 million years ago, giving rise first to prosimians and then
to monkeys.

How the Apes Evolved. Apes, including our closest
relatives, the chimpanzees, arose from an ancestor common
to Old World monkeys.

23.2 The first hominids to evolve were
australopithecines.

An Evolutionary Tree with Many Branches. The first
hominids were australopithecines, of which there were
several different kinds.

The Beginning of Hominid Evolution. The ability to
walk upright on two legs marks the beginning of hominid
evolution. One can draw the hominid family tree in two
very different ways, either lumping variants together or
splitting them into separate species.

23.3 The genus Homo evolved in Africa.

African Origin: Early Homo. ‘There may have been
several species of early Homo, with brains significantly
larger than those of australopithecines.

Out of Africa: Homo erectus. ‘The first hominid species
to leave Africa was the relatively large-brained H. erectus,
the longest lived species of Homo.

23.4 Modern humans evolved quite recently.

The Last Stage of Hominid Evolution. Modern
humans evolved within the last 600,000 years, our own
species within the last 200,000 years.

Our Own Species: Homo sapiens. Our species appears
to have evolved in Africa, and then migrated to Europe and
Asia.

Human Races. Our species is unique in evolving
culturally. Differences in populations in skin color reflect
adaptation to different environments, rather than genetic
differentiation among populations.

 

FIGURE 23.1

The trail of our ancestors. ‘These fossil footprints, made in
Africa 3.7 million years ago, look as if they might have been left
by a mother and child walking on the beach. But these tracks,
preserved in volcanic ash, are not human. They record the
passage of two individuals of the genus Australopithecus, the group
from which our genus, Homo, evolved.

n 1871 Charles Darwin published another ground-

breaking book, The Descent of Man. In this book, he sug-
gested that humans evolved from the same African ape an-
cestors that gave rise to the gorilla and the chimpanzee.
Although little fossil evidence existed at that time to sup-
port Darwin’s case, numerous fossil discoveries made since
then strongly support his hypothesis (figure 23.1). Human
evolution is the part of the evolution story that often inter-
ests people most, and it is also the part about which we
know the most. In this chapter we follow the evolutionary
journey that has led to humans, telling the story chronolog-
ically. It is an exciting story, replete with controversy.

477
