Chimpanzee

Skull attaches posteriorly

Spine slightly curved

© Arms longer than legs
and also used for walking

© Long, narrow pelvis

Femur angled out

FIGURE 23.6

 

Australopithecine

Skull attaches inferiorly
Spine S-shaped

Arms shorter than legs
and not used for walking

Bowl-shaped pelvis

Femur angled in

‘A comparison of ape and hominid skeletons. Early humans, such as australopithecines, were able to walk upright because their arms
were shorter, their spinal cord exited from the bottom of the skull, their pelvis was bowl-shaped and centered the body weight over the
legs, and their femurs angled inward, directly below the body, to carry its weight.

Which Ape Is Our Closest Relative?

Studies of ape DNA have explained a great deal about how
the living apes evolved. The Asian apes evolved first. The
line of apes leading to gibbons diverged from other apes
about 15 million years ago, while orangutans split off about
10 million years ago (see figure 23.3). Neither are closely
related to humans.

The African apes evolved more recently, between 6
and 10 million years ago. These apes are the closest liv-
ing relatives to humans; some taxonomists have even ad-
vocated placing humans and the African apes in the same
zoological family, the Hominidae. Fossils of the earliest
hominids, described later in the chapter, suggest that the
common ancestor of the hominids was more like a chim-
panzee than a gorilla. Based on genetic differences, sci-
entists estimate that gorillas diverged from the line lead-
ing to chimpanzees and humans some 8 million years
ago.

Sometime after the gorilla lineage diverged, the com-
mon ancestor of all hominids split off from chimpanzee
line to begin the evolutionary journey leading to humans.
Because this split was so recent, the genes of humans and
chimpanzees have not had time to evolve many genetic dif-
ferences. For example, a human hemoglobin molecule dif-
fers from its chimpanzee counterpart in only a single amino
acid. In general, humans and chimpanzees exhibit a level of
genetic similarity normally found between closely related
sibling species of the same genus!

Comparing Apes to Hominids

The common ancestor of apes and hominids is thought to
have been an arboreal climber. Much of the subsequent
evolution of the hominoids reflected different approaches
to locomotion. Hominids became bipedal, walking up-
right, while the apes evolved knuckle-walking, supporting
their weight on the back sides of their fingers (monkeys, by
contrast, use the palms of their hands).

Humans depart from apes in several areas of anatomy re-
lated to bipedal locomotion (figure 23.6). Because humans
walk on two legs, their vertebral column is more curved than
an ape’s, and the human spinal cord exits from the bottom
rather than the back of the skull. The human pelvis has be-
come broader and more bowl-shaped, with the bones curving
forward to center the weight of the body over the legs. The
hip, knee, and foot (in which the human big toe no longer
splays sideways) have all changed proportions. Being bipedal,
humans carry much of the body’s weight on the lower limbs,
which comprise 32 to 38% of the body’s weight and are
longer than the upper limbs; human upper limbs do not bear
the body’s weight and make up only 7 to 9% of human body
weight. African apes walk on all fours, with the upper and
lower limbs both bearing the body’s weight; in gorillas, the
longer upper limbs account for 14 to 16% of body weight,
the somewhat shorter lower limbs for about 18%.

 

Hominoids, the apes and hominids, arose from Old
World monkeys. Among living apes, chimpanzees seem
the most closely related to humans.

 

Chapter 23. How Humans Evolved 481
