 

The Pace of Evolution

Different kinds of organisms evolve at
different rates. Mammals, for exam-
ple, evolve relatively slowly. On the
basis of a relatively complete fossil
record, it has been estimated that an
average value for the duration of a
“typical” mammal species, from for-
mation of the species to its extinction,
might be about 200,000 years. Ameri-
can paleontologist George Gaylord
Simpson has pointed out that certain
groups of animals, such as lungfishes,
are apparently evolving even more
slowly than mammals. In fact, Simp-
son estimated that there has been lit-
tle evolutionary change among lung-
fishes over the past 150 million years,
and even slower rates of evolution
occur in other groups.

Evolution in Spurts?

Not only does the rate of evolution

 

@
—
E

 

differ greatly from group to group,

 

(a) Punctuated eq

 

 

 

 

(b) Gradualism

 

 

but evolution within a group appar-

 

 

ently proceeds rapidly during some
periods and relatively slowly during
others. The fossil record provides evi-
dence for such variability in evolution-
ary rates, and evolutionists are very
interested in understanding the factors
that account for it. In 1972, paleontol-
ogists Niles Eldredge of the American
Museum of Natural History in New York and Stephen
Jay Gould of Harvard University proposed that evolution
normally proceeds in spurts. They claimed that the evo-
lutionary process is a series of punctuated equilibria.
Evolutionary innovations would occur and give rise to
new lines; then these lines might persist unchanged for a
long time, in “equilibrium.” Eventually there would be a
new spurt of evolution, creating a “punctuation” in the
fossil record. Eldredge and Gould contrast their theory
of punctuated equilibrium with that of gradualism, or
gradual evolutionary change, which they claimed was
what Darwin and most earlier students of evolution had
considered normal (figure 22.18).

Eldredge and Gould proposed that stasis, or lack of
evolutionary change, would be expected in large popula-
tions experiencing stabilizing selection over long periods
of time. In contrast, rapid evolution of new species might
occur if populations colonized new areas. Such popula-
tions would be small, isolated, and possibly already dif-
fering from their parental population as a result of the
founder effect. This, combined with selective pressures

FIGURE 22.18

474 Part VI Evolution

‘Two views of the pace of macroevolution. (a) Punctuated equilibrium surmises that
species formation occurs in bursts, separated by long periods of quiet, while (#) gradualism
surmises that species formation is constantly occurring.

from a new environment, could bring about rapid
change.

Unfortunately, the distinctions are not as clear-cut as
implied by this discussion. Some well-documented groups
such as African mammals clearly have evolved gradually,
and not in spurts. Other groups, like marine bryozoa, seem
to show the irregular pattern of evolutionary change the
punctuated equilibrium model predicts. It appears, in fact,
that gradualism and punctuated equilibrium are two ends
of a continuum. Although some groups appear to have
evolved solely in a gradual manner and others only in a
punctuated mode, many other groups appear to show evi-
dence of both gradual and punctuated episodes at different
times in their evolutionary history.

 

‘The punctuated equilibrium model assumes that
evolution occurs in spurts, between which there are
long periods in which there is little evolutionary
change. The gradualism model assumes that evolution
proceeds gradually, with successive change in a given
evolutionary line.

 
