23.2 The first hominids to evolve were australopithecines.

An Evolutionary Tree with Many
Branches

Five to 10 million years ago, the world’s climate began to
get cooler, and the great forests of Africa were largely re-
placed with savannas and open woodland. In response to
these changes, a new kind of hominoid was evolving, one
that was bipedal. These new hominoids are classified as
hominids—that is, of the human line.

There are two major groups of hominids: three to seven
species of the genus Homo (depending how you count
them) and seven species of the older, smaller-brained genus
Australopithecus. In every case where the fossils allow a de-
termination to be made, the hominids are bipedal, walking
upright. Bipedal locomotion is the hallmark of hominid
evolution. We will first discuss Australopithecus, and then
Homo.

Discovery of Australopithecus

The first hominid was discovered in 1924 by Raymond
Dart, an anatomy professor at Johannesburg in South
Africa. One day, a mine worker brought him an unusual
chunk of rock—actually, a rock-hard mixture of sand and
soil. Picking away at it, Professor Dart uncovered a skull
unlike that of any ape he had ever seen. Beautifully pre-

Po

FIGURE 23.7

served, the skull was of a five-year-old individual, still
with its milk teeth. While the skull had many apelike fea-
tures such as a projecting face and a small brain, it had
distinctly human features as well—for example, a rounded
jaw unlike the pointed jaw of apes. The ventral position
of the foramen magnum (the hole at the base of the skull
from which the spinal cord emerges) suggested that the
creature had walked upright. Dart concluded it was a
human ancestor.

What riveted Dart’s attention was that the rock in which
the skull was embedded had been collected near other fos-
sils that suggested that the rocks and their fossils were sev-
eral million years old! At that time, the oldest reported fos-
sils of hominids were less than 500,000 years old, so the
antiquity of this skull was unexpected and exciting. Scien-
tists now estimate Dart’s skull to be 2.8 million years old.
Dart called his find Australopithecus africanus (from the
Latin australo, meaning “southern” and the Greek pithecus,
meaning “ape”), the ape from the south of Africa.

Today, fossils are dated by the relatively new process of
single-crystal laser-fusion dating. A laser beam melts a sin-
gle potassium feldspar crystal, releasing argon gas, which is
measured in a gas mass spectrometer. Because the argon in
the crystal has accumulated at a known rate, the amount re-
leased reveals the age of the rock and thus of nearby fossils.
The margin of error is less than 1%.

aed

 

Nearly human. ‘These four skulls, all photographed from the same angle, are among the best specimens available of the key

Australopithecus species.

482 = Part VI_ Evolution
