Out of Africa: Homo erectus

Our picture of what early Homo was like lacks detail, be-
cause it is based on only a few specimens. We have much
more information about the species that replaced it, Homo
erectus.

Java Man

After the publication of Darwin’s book On the Origin of
Species in 1859, there was much public discussion about
“the missing link,” the fossil ancestor common to both hu-
mans and apes. Puzzling over the question, a Dutch doctor
and anatomist named Eugene Dubois decided to seek fossil
evidence of the missing link in the home country of the
orangutan, Java. Dubois set up practice in a river village in
eastern Java. Digging into a hill that villagers claimed had
“dragon bones,” he unearthed a skull cap and a thighbone
in 1891. He was very excited by his find, informally called
Java man, for three reasons:

1. The structure of the thigh bone clearly indicated that
the individual had long, straight legs and was an ex-
cellent walker.

2. The size of the skull cap suggested a very large brain,
about 1000 cubic centimeters.

3. Most surprisingly, the bones seemed as much as
500,000 years old, judged by other fossils Dubois un-
earthed with them.

The fossil hominid that Dubois had found was far older
than any discovered up to that time, and few scientists were
willing to accept that it was an ancient species of human.

Peking Man

Another generation passed before scientists were forced to
admit that Dubois had been right all along. In the 1920s a
skull was discovered near Peking (now Beijing), China, that
closely resembled Java man. Continued excavation at the
site eventually revealed 14 skulls, many excellently pre-
served. Crude tools were also found, and most important of
all, the ashes of campfires. Casts of these fossils were dis-
tributed for study to laboratories around the world. The
originals were loaded onto a truck and evacuated from
Peking at the beginning of World War II, only to disap-
pear into the confusion of history. No one knows what
happened to the truck or its priceless cargo. Fortunately,
Chinese scientists have excavated numerous additional
skulls of Peking man since 1949.

A Very Successful Species

Java man and Peking man are now recognized as belonging
to the same species, Homo erectus. Homo erectus was a lot
larger than Homo habilis—about 1.5 meters tall. It had a
large brain, about 1000 cubic centimeters (figure 23.12),

 

 

H. neanderthalensis @
= EOS H. sapiens @
2
g H. heidelbergensis @

3
= e
3 1000 | H. erectus
5
3 J © 1. ergaster
a H. rudolfensis
5 ae H. habilis
5
x= a AA. robustus
500 _ A. boisei
a _ A. africanus
A. afarensis

 

4.0 3.5 30 25 20 15 1.0 05 0
Millions of years ago

 

 

 

FIGURE 23.12

Brain size increased as hominids evolved. Homo erectus had a
larger brain than early Homo, which in turn had larger brains than
those of the australopithecines with which they shared East African
grasslands. Maximum brain size (and apparently body size) was
attained by H. neanderthalensis. Both brain and body size appear to
have declined some 10% in recent millennia.

and walked erect. Its skull had prominent brow ridges and,
like modern humans, a rounded jaw. Most interesting of
all, the shape of the skull interior suggests that H. erectus
was able to talk.

Where did H. erectus come from? It should come as no
surprise to you that it came out of Africa. In 1976 a com-
plete H. erectus skull was discovered in East Africa. It was
1.5 million years old, a million years older than the Java
and Peking finds. Far more successful than H. babilis, H.
erectus quickly became widespread and abundant in
Africa, and within 1 million years had migrated into Asia
and Europe. A social species, H. erectus lived in tribes of
20 to 50 people, often dwelling in caves. They success-
fully hunted large animals, butchered them using flint
and bone tools, and cooked them over fires—the site in
China contains the remains of horses, bears, elephants,
deer, and rhinoceroses.

Homo erectus survived for over a million years, longer
than any other species of human. These very adaptable
humans only disappeared in Africa about 500,000 years
ago, as modern humans were emerging. Interestingly,
they survived even longer in Asia, until about 250,000
years ago.

 

Homo erectus evolved in Africa, and migrated from there
to Europe and Asia.

 

Chapter 23 How Humans Evolved 487
