The Beginning of Hominid
Evolution

The Origins of Bipedalism

For much of this century, biologists have debated the se-
quence of events that led to the evolution of hominids. A
key element may have been bipedalism. Bipedalism seems
to have evolved as our ancestors left dense forests for grass-
lands and open woodland (figure 23.8). One school of
thought proposes that hominid brains enlarged first, and
then hominids became bipedal. Another school sees
bipedalism as a precursor to bigger brains. Those who
favor the brain-first hypothesis speculate that human intel-
ligence was necessary to make the decision to walk upright
and move out of the forests and onto the grassland. Those
who favor the bipedalism-first hypothesis argue that
bipedalism freed the forelimbs to manufacture and use
tools, favoring the subsequent evolution of bigger brains.

A treasure trove of fossils unearthed in Africa has settled
the debate. These fossils demonstrate that bipedalism ex-
tended back 4 million years ago; knee joints, pelvis, and leg
bones all exhibit the hallmarks of an upright stance. Sub-
stantial brain expansion, on the other hand, did not appear
until roughly 2 million years ago. In hominid evolution,
upright walking clearly preceded large brains.

Remarkable evidence that early hominids were bipedal is
a set of some 69 hominid footprints found at Laetoli, East
Africa. Two individuals, one larger than the other, walked
upright side-by-side for 27 meters, their footprints pre-
served in 3.7-million-year-old volcanic ash (see figure
23.1). Importantly, the big toe is not splayed out to the side
as in a monkey or ape—the footprints were clearly made by
a hominid.

The evolution of bipedalism marks the beginning of the
hominids. The reason why bipedalism evolved in hominids
remains a matter of controversy. No tools appeared until
2.5 million years ago, so toolmaking seems an unlikely
cause. Alternative ideas suggest that walking upright is
faster and uses less energy than walking on four legs; that
an upright posture permits hominids to pick fruit from
trees and see over tall grass; that being upright reduces the
body surface exposed to the sun’s rays; that an upright
stance aided the wading of aquatic hominids, and that
bipedalism frees the forelimbs of males to carry food back
to females, encouraging pair-bonding. All of these sugges-
tions have their proponents, and none are universally ac-
cepted. The origin of bipedalism, the key event in the evo-
lution of hominids, remains a mystery.

The Root of the Hominid Tree

The Oldest Known Hominid. In 1994, a remarkable,
nearly complete fossil skeleton was unearthed in Ethiopia.
The skeleton is still being painstakingly assembled, but it
seems almost certainly to have been bipedal; the foramen
magnum, for example, is situated far forward, as in other
bipedal hominids. Some 4.4 million years old, it is the
most ancient hominid yet discovered. It is significantly
more apelike than any australopithecine and so has been
assigned to a new genus, Ardipithecus from the local Afar
language ardi for “ground” and the Greek pithecus for
“ape” (figure 23.92).

The First Australopithecine. In 1995, hominid fossils
of nearly the same age, 4.2 million years old, were found in
the Rift Valley in Kenya. The fossils are fragmentary, but
they include complete upper and lower jaws, a piece of the

 

FIGURE 23.8

A reconstruction of an early hominid walking upright. These articulated plaster skeletons, made by Owen Lovejoy and his students at
Kent State University, depict an early hominid (Australopithecus afarensis) walking upright.

484 = Part VI Evolution
