Human Races

Human beings, like all other species, have differentiated in
their characteristics as they have spread throughout the
world. Local populations in one area often appear signifi-
cantly different from those that live elsewhere. For exam-
ple, northern Europeans often have blond hair, fair skin,
and blue eyes, whereas Africans often have black hair, dark
skin, and brown eyes. These traits may play a role in adapt-
ing the particular populations to their environments. Blood
groups may be associated with immunity to diseases more
common in certain geographical areas, and dark skin
shields the body from the damaging effects of ultraviolet
radiation, which is much stronger in the tropics than in
temperate regions.

All human beings are capable of mating with one an-
other and producing fertile offspring. The reasons that
they do or do not choose to associate with one another are
purely psychological and behavioral (cultural). The number
of groups into which the human species might logically be
divided has long been a point of contention. Some contem-
porary anthropologists divide people into as many as 30
“races,” others as few as three: Caucasoid, Negroid, and
Oriental. American Indians, Bushmen, and Aborigines are
examples of particularly distinctive subunits that are some-
times regarded as distinct groups.

The problem with classifying people or other organisms
into races in this fashion is that the characteristics used to
define the races are usually not well correlated with one an-
other, and so the determination of race is always somewhat
arbitrary. Humans are visually oriented; consequently, we
have relied on visual cues—primarily skin color—to define
races. However, when other types of characters, such as
blood groups, are examined, patterns of variation corre-
spond very poorly with visually determined racial classes.
Indeed, if one were to break the human species into sub-
units based on overall genetic similarity, the groupings
would be very different than those based on skin color or
other visual features (figure 23.16).

In human beings, it is simply not possible to delimit
clearly defined races that reflect biologically differentiated
and well-defined groupings. The reason is simple: different
groups of people have constantly intermingled and inter-
bred with one another during the entire course of history.
This constant gene flow has prevented the human species
from fragmenting in highly differentiated subspecies.
Those characteristics that are differentiated among popula-
tions, such as skin color, represent classic examples of the
antagonism between gene flow and natural selection. As
we saw in chapter 20, when selection is strong enough, as it
is for dark coloration in tropical regions, populations can
differentiate even in the presence of gene flow. However,
even in cases such as this, gene flow will still ensure that
populations are relatively homogeneous for genetic varia-
tion at other loci.

 

 

Order of genetic sit

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Skin pigmentation

Very Very
dark —> Dark —> Medium —> Light —> light

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 23.16

Patterns of genetic variation in human populations differ from
patterns of skin color variation. (a) Genetic variation among
Homo sapiens. Fight categories of humans were recognized based
on overall similarity at many enzyme and blood group genetic loci.
The code below the figure is arranged in order of similarity. (6)
Similarity among Hom sapiens based on skin color. The categories
are arranged by amount of pigmentation in the skin.

For this reason, relatively little of the variation in the
human species represents differences between the de-
scribed races. Indeed, one study calculated that only 8% of
all genetic variation among humans could be accounted for
as differences that exist among racial groups; in other
words, the human racial categories do a very poor job in
describing the vast majority of genetic variation that exists
in humans. For this reason, most modern biologists reject
human racial classifications as reflecting patterns of biolog-
ical differentiation in the human species. This is a sound
biological basis for dealing with each human being on his
or her own merits and not as a member of a particular
“race.”

 

Human races do not reflect significant patterns of
underlying biological differentiation.

 

Chapter 23 How Humans Evolved 491
