Chapter 25

Summary

Questions

   

www.biocourse.com

www.mhhe.com

Media Resources

23.1 The evolutionary path to humans starts with the advent of primates.

 

* Prcehensile (grasping) fingers and toes and binocular
vision were distinct adaptations that allowed early
primates to be successful in their particular
environments.

* Mainly diurnal (day-active) anthropoids and mainly
nocturnal (night-active) prosimians diverged about 40
million years ago. Anthropoids include monkeys,
apes, and humans, and all exhibit complex social
interactions and enlarged brains.

¢ The hominoids evolved from anthropoid ancestors
about 25 million years ago. Hominoids consist of the
apes (gibbons, orangutans, gorillas, and chimpanzees)
and upright-walking hominids (human beings and
their direct ancestors).

1. Which characteristics were
selected for in the earliest
primates to allow them to
become successful in their
environment?

2. How do monkeys differ from
prosimians?

3. How are apes distinguished
from monkeys?

- * Evolution of Primates

4, What is the best explanation
for why humans and
chimpanzees are so similar
genetically?

23.2 The first hominids to evolve were australopithecines.

 

* Early hominids belonging to the genus
Australopithecus were ancestral to humans. They
exhibited bipedalism (walking upright on two feet)
and lived in Africa over 4 million years ago.

23.3. The genus Homo evolved in Africa.

5. When did the first hominids
appear? What were they called?
What distinguished them from
the apes?

 

¢ Hominids with an enlarged brain and the ability to
use tools belong to the genus Homo. Species of early
Homo appeared in Africa about 2 million years ago
and became extinct about 1.5 million years ago.

© Homo erectus appeared in Africa at least 1.5 million
years ago and had a much larger brain than early
species of Homo. Homo erectus also walked erect and
presumably was able to talk. Within a million years,
Homo erectus migrated from Africa to Europe and
Asia.

23.4 Modern humans evolved quite recently.

* On Science Article:
Human Evolution

6. Why is there some doubt in
the scientific community that
Homo habilis was a true human?

7. How did Homo erectus differ
from Homo habilis?

 

* The modern species of Homo appeared about 600,000
years ago in Africa and about 350,000 years ago in
Eurasia.

* The Neanderthals appeared in Europe about 130,000
years ago. They made diverse tools and showed
evidence of symbolic thinking.

* Studies of mitochondrial DNA suggest (but do not
yet prove) that all of today’s human races originated
from Africa.

* Categorization of humans into races does not
adequately reflect patterns of genetic differentiation
among people in different parts of the world.

492 Part VI Evolution

8. The greatest number of
different mitochondrial DNA
sequences in humans occurs in
Africa. What does this tell us
about human evolution?

9. How did Cro-Magnons differ
from Neanderthals? Is there any
evidence that they coexisted with
Neanderthals? If so, where and
when?

S * Huminid History

10. Are the commonly
recognized human races
equivalent to subspecies of other
plant and animal species?
