FIGURE 23.9

Hominid fossils. (a) Our earliest known
ancestor. A tooth from Ardipithecus ramidus,
discovered in 1994. The name ramidus is
from the Latin word for “root,” as this is
thought to be the root of the hominid family
tree. The earliest known hominid, at 4.4
million years old, A. ramidus was about the
size of a chimpanzee and apparently could
walk upright. () The earliest
australopithecine. This fossil jaw of
Australopithecus is about 4.2 million years old,
making A. anamensis the oldest known
australopithecine.

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
  
 
   

 

 

 

 

 

skull, arm bones, and a partial leg
bone. The fossils were assigned to the H. sapiens H. neanderthalensis
species Australopithecus anamensis (fig- 0 a 5 |
ure 23.9b); anam is the Turkana word be .
for lake. They were categorized in the 05 7 Piferectist ]
genus Australopithecus rather than VAN robustis
Ardipithecus because the fossils have 1 = 1
bipedal characteristics and are much H. ergaster ete]
: : H. heidelbergensi ga
less apelike than A. ramidus. Although  & 15 ve # habilis ]
clearly australopithecine, the fossils are H.rudolfensis
intermediate in many ways between 8 2 1
apes and A. afarensis. Numerous frag- “6 A. africanus
mentary specimens of A. anamensis % 25 |
have since been found. Most re- 3
searchers agree that these slightly built . 7 ; ‘A.aethiopicus |
A. anamensis individuals represent the Cassie By som 7 A. afarensis
true base of our family tree, the first 38 See aaeee ]
members of the genus Australopithecus, I eee
and thus ancestor to A. afarensis and all 4 | |
other australopithecines. B Classified pears 7 “TE Ardipithecus
45 scientists as the single pee
species Homo habilis
Differing Views of the Hominid
Family Tree FIGURE 23.10

Investigators take two different philo-
sophical approaches to characterizing
the diverse group of African hominid
fossils. One group focuses on common
elements in different fossils, and tends
to lump together fossils that share key
characters. Differences between the fossils are attributed
to diversity within the group. Other investigators focus
more pointedly on the differences between hominid fos-
sils. They are more inclined to assign fossils that exhibit
differences to different species. The hominid phyloge-
netic tree in figure 23.10 presents such a view. Where
the “lumpers” tree presents three species of Homo, for ex-
ample, the “splitters” tree presents no fewer than seven!
At this point, it is not possible to decide which view is
correct; more fossils are needed to determine how much

A hominid evolutionary tree. In this tree, the most widely accepted, the vertical bars
show the known dates of first and last appearances of proposed species; bars are broken
where dates are uncertain. Six species of Australopithecus and seven of Homo are included.

of the differences between fossils represents within-
species variation and how much characterizes between-
species differences.

 

The evolution of bipedalism—walking upright—marks
the beginning of hominid evolution, although no one is
quite sure why bipedalism evolved. The root of the
hominid evolutionary tree is only imperfectly known.
The earliest australopithecine yet described is A.
anamensis, over 4 million years old.

 

Chapter 23 How Humans Evolved 485
