Our Own Species: Homo sapiens

H. sapiens is the only surviving species of the genus Homo,
and indeed is the only surviving hominid. Some of the
best fossils of Homo sapiens are 20 well-preserved skele-
tons with skulls found in a cave near Nazareth in Israel.
Modern dating techniques date these humans to between
90,000 and 100,000 years old. The skulls are modern in
appearance, with high, short braincases, vertical fore-
heads with only slight brow ridges, and a cranial capacity
of roughly 1550 cc, well within the range of modern
humans.

Cro-Magnons Replace the Neanderthals

The Neanderthals (classified by many paleontologists as a
separate species Homo neanderthalensis) were named after
the Neander Valley of Germany where their fossils were
first discovered in 1856. Rare at first outside of Africa, they
became progressively more abundant in Europe and Asia,
and by 70,000 years ago had become common. The Nean-
derthals made diverse tools, including scrapers, spearheads,
and handaxes. They lived in huts or caves. Neanderthals
took care of their injured and sick and commonly buried
their dead, often placing food, weapons, and even flowers
with the bodies. Such attention to the dead strongly sug-
gests that they believed in a life after death. This is the first
evidence of the symbolic thinking characteristic of modern
humans.

Fossils of H. neanderthalensis abruptly disappear from the
fossil record about 34,000 years ago and are replaced by
fossils of H. sapiens called the Cro-Magnons (named after
the valley in France where their fossils were first discov-
ered). We can only speculate why this sudden replacement
occurred, but it was complete all over Europe in a short pe-
riod. There is some evidence that the Cro-Magnons came
from Africa—fossils of essentially modern aspect but as
much as 100,000 years old have been found there. Cro-
Magnons seem to have replaced the Neanderthals com-
pletely in the Middle East by 40,000 years ago, and then
spread across Europe, coexisting and possibly even inter-
breeding with the Neanderthals for several thousand years.
The Cro-Magnons had a complex social organization and
are thought to have had full language capabilities. They
lived by hunting. The world was cooler than it is now—the
time of the last great ice age—and Europe was covered
with grasslands inhabited by large herds of grazing animals.
Pictures of them can be seen in elaborate and often beauti-
ful cave paintings made by Cro-Magnons throughout Eu-
rope (figure 23.15).

Humans of modern appearance eventually spread across
Siberia to North America, which they reached at least
13,000 years ago, after the ice had begun to retreat and a
land bridge still connected Siberia and Alaska. By 10,000
years ago, about 5 million people inhabited the entire
world (compared with more than 6 billion today).

490) = Part VI Evolution

 

FIGURE 23.15
Cro-Magnon art. Rhinoceroses are among the animals depicted
in this remarkable cave painting found in 1995 near Vallon-Pont
@Are, France.

Homo sapiens Are Unique

We humans are animals and the product of evolution. Our
evolution has been marked by a progressive increase in brain
size, distinguishing us from other animals in several ways.
First, humans are able to make and use tools effectively—a
capability that, more than any other factor, has been respon-
sible for our dominant position in the animal kingdom. Sec-
ond, although not the only animal capable of conceptual
thought, we have refined and extended this ability until it has
become the hallmark of our species. Lastly, we use symbolic
language and can with words shape concepts out of experi-
ence. Our language capability has allowed the accumulation
of experience, which can be transmitted from one generation
to another. Thus, we have what no other animal has ever
had: extensive cultural evolution. Through culture, we have
found ways to change and mold our environment, rather
than changing evolutionarily in response to the demands of
the environment. We control our biological future in a way
never before possible—an exciting potential and frightening
responsibility.

 

Our species, Homo sapiens, is good at conceptual
thought and tool use, and is the only animal that uses
symbolic language.

 
