23.3

African Origin: Early Homo

The first humans evolved from australopithecine ancestors
about 2 million years ago. The exact ancestor has not been
clearly defined, but is commonly thought to be A. afarensis.
Only within the last 30 years have a significant number of
fossils of early Homo been uncovered. An explosion of in-
terest has fueled intensive field exploration in the last few
years, and new finds are announced regularly; every year,
our picture of the base of the human evolutionary tree
grows clearer. The account given here will undoubtedly be
outdated by future discoveries, but it provides a good ex-
ample of science at work.

Homo bhabilis

In the early 1960s, stone tools were found scattered among
hominid bones close to the site where A. boisei had been
unearthed. Although the fossils were badly crushed,
painstaking reconstruction of the many pieces suggested a
skull with a brain volume of about 680 cubic centimeters,
larger than the australopithecine range of 400 to 550 cubic
centimeters. Because of its association with tools, this early
human was called Homo habilis, meaning “handy man.” Par-
tial skeletons discovered in 1986 indicate that H. babilis was
small in stature, with arms longer than legs and a skeleton
much like Australopithecus. Because of its general similarity
to australopithecines, many researchers at first questioned
whether this fossil was human.

Homo rudolfensis

In 1972, Richard Leakey, working east of Lake Rudolf in
northern Kenya, discovered a virtually complete skull about
the same age as H. babilis. The skull, 1.9 million years old,
had a brain volume of 750 cubic centimeters and many of
the characteristics of human skulls—it was clearly human
and not australopithecine. Some anthropologists assign
this skull to H. babilis, arguing it is a large male. Other an-
thropologists assign it to a separate species, H. rudolfensis,
because of its substantial brain expansion.

Homo ergaster

Some of the early Homo fossils being discovered do not eas-
ily fit into either of these species (figure 23.11). They tend
to have even larger brains than H. rudolfensis, with skeletons
less like an australopithecine and more like a modern
human in both size and proportion. Interestingly, they also
have small cheek teeth, as modern humans do. Some an-
thropologists have placed these specimens in a third species
of early Homo, H. ergaster (ergaster is from the Greek for
“workman”.

486 = Part VI Evolution

The genus Homo evolved in Africa.

 

FIGURE 23.11

Early Homo. This skull of a boy, who apparently died in early
adolescence, is 1.6 million years old and has been assigned to the
species Homo ergaster (a form of Homo habilis recognized by some
as a separate species). Much larger than earlier hominids, he was
about 1.5 meters in height and weighed approximately

47 kilograms.

How Diverse Was Early Homo?

Because so few fossils have been found of early Homo, there
is lively debate about whether they should all be lumped
into H. habilis or split into the three species H. rudolfensis,
H. habilis, and H. ergaster. If the three species designations
are accepted, as increasing numbers of researchers are
doing, then it would appear that Homo underwent an adap-
tive radiation (as described in chapter 22) with H. rudolfensis
the most ancient species, followed by H. habilis and then H.
ergaster. Because of its modern skeleton, H. ergaster is
thought the most likely ancestor to later species of Homo

(see figure 23.10).

 

Early species of Homo, the oldest members of our
genus, had a distinctly larger brain than
australopithecines and most likely used tools. There
may have been several different species.

 
