23.4 Modern humans evolved quite recently.

The Last Stage of Hominid
Evolution

The evolutionary journey to modern humans entered its
final phase when modern humans first appeared in Africa
about 600,000 years ago. Investigators who focus on human
diversity consider there to have been three species of mod-
ern humans: Homo heidelbergensis, H. neanderthalensis, and
H. sapiens (see figure 23.10). Other investigators lump the
three species into one, H. sapiens (“wise man”). ‘The oldest
modern human, Homo heidelbergensis, is known from a
600,000-year-old fossil from Ethiopia. Although it coex-
isted with H. erectus in Africa, H. heidelbergensis has more
advanced anatomical features, such as a bony keel running
along the midline of the skull, a thick ridge over the eye
sockets, and a large brain. Also, its forehead and nasal
bones are very like those of H. sapiens.

As H. erectus was becoming rarer, about 130,000 years
ago, a new species of human arrived in Europe from Africa.
Homo neanderthalensis likely branched off from the ancestral
line leading to modern humans as long as 500,000 years
ago. Compared with modern humans, Neanderthals were
short, stocky, and powerfully built. Their skulls were mas-
sive, with protruding faces, heavy, bony ridges over the
brows (figure 23.13), and larger brain-cases.

aay

FIGURE 23.13

Out of Africa—Again?

The oldest fossil known of Homo sapiens, our own species,
is from Ethiopia and is about 130,000 years old. Other
fossils from Israel appear to be between 100,000 and
120,000 years old. Outside of Africa and the Middle East,
there are no clearly dated H. sapiens fossils older than
roughly 40,000 years of age. The implication is that H.
Sapiens evolved in Africa, then migrated to Europe and
Asia, the Out-of-Africa model. An opposing view, the
Multiregional model, argues that the human races inde-
pendently evolved from H. erectus in different parts of the
world.

Recently, scientists studying human mitochondrial
DNA have added fuel to the fire of this controversy. Be-
cause DNA accumulates mutations over time, the oldest
populations should show the greatest genetic diversity. It
turns out that the greatest number of different mitochon-
drial DNA sequences occur among modern Africans.
This result is consistent with the hypothesis that humans
have been living in Africa longer than on any other conti-
nent, and from there spread to all parts of the world, re-
tracing the path taken by H. erectus half a million years
before (figure 23.14).

ero

 

Our own genus. These four skulls illustrate the changes that have occurred during the evolution of the genus Homo. The Homo sapiens is
essentially the same as human skulls today. The skulls were photographed from the same angle.

488 = Part VI Evolution
