CHs, o
CHs7N*— CH» CHa O— p> OCH, °

I
CH, °
|

CHa O~ G~ (CHalr — CH= CH (CH.)7— CH

(a) Phospholipid (phosphatidyl choline)

 

 

 

Ho geey
i
ngo Eo oo
H H HHH
OH HH HH
ieotototo oto
H—C-—O C~G~ CG G—C-H
|
H H HHH
HH
ieotototouil
nope eee
H H H H HH

(b) Triacylglycerol molecule

FIGURE 3.19

I
CH —O—C—(CHp);4—CHs

s i i

Cc. CH, cH

&@N. 7 NZ NS
CH; CH, CHa CH,

(0) Terpene (citronellol)

HC. CH, CH, CH,
NZ NZ NZ
CH ‘CH; CH
CH, \
CH;
CH,
HO
(d) Steroid (cholesterol)

Lipids. These structures represent four major classes of biologically important lipids: (a) phospholipids, (6) triacylglycerols

(triglycerides), (c) terpenes, and (d) steroids.

Fats and Other Kinds of Lipids
Fats are another kind of lipid, but unlike phospholipids, fat

molecules do not have a polar end. Fats consist of a glycerol
molecule to which is attached three fatty acids, one to each
carbon of the glycerol backbone. Because it contains three
fatty acids, a fat molecule is called a triglyceride, or, more
properly, a triacylglycerol (figure 3.19). The three fatty
acids of a triglyceride need not be identical, and often they
differ markedly from one another. Organisms store the en-
ergy of certain molecules for long periods in the many
C—H bonds of fats.

Because triglyceride molecules lack a polar end, they are
not soluble in water. Placed in water, they spontaneously
clump together, forming fat globules that are very large rel-
ative to the size of the individual molecules. Because fats are
insoluble, they can be deposited at specific locations within
an organism.

Storage fats are one kind of lipid. Oils such as olive oil,
corn oil, and coconut oil are also lipids, as are waxes such as
beeswax and earwax (see table 3.1). The hydrocarbon chains
of fatty acids vary in length; the most common are even-
numbered chains of 14 to 20 carbons. If all of the internal
carbon atoms in the fatty acid chains are bonded to at least
two hydrogen atoms, the fatty acid is said to be saturated,
because it contains the maximum possible number of hydro-
gen atoms (figure 3.20). If a fatty acid has double bonds be-

tween one or more pairs of successive carbon atoms, the
fatty acid is said to be unsaturated. If a given fatty acid has
more than one double bond, it is said to be polyunsaturat-
ed. Fats made from polyunsaturated fatty acids have low
melting points because their fatty acid chains bend at the
double bonds, preventing the fat molecules from aligning
closely with one another. Consequently, a polyunsaturated
fat such as corn oil is usually liquid at room temperature and
is called an oil. In contrast, most saturated fats such as those
in butter are solid at room temperature.

Organisms contain many other kinds of lipids besides
fats (see figure 3.19). Terpenes are long-chain lipids that are
components of many biologically important pigments, such
as chlorophyll and the visual pigment retinal. Rubber is
also a terpene. Steroids, another type of lipid found in mem-
branes, are composed of four carbon rings. Most animal
cell membranes contain the steroid cholesterol. Other ste-
roids, such as testosterone and estrogen, function in multi-
cellular organisms as hormones. Prostaglandins are a group
of about 20 lipids that are modified fatty acids, with two
nonpolar “tails” attached to a five-carbon ring. Prostaglan-
dins act as local chemical messengers in many vertebrate
tissues.

 

Cells contain many kinds of molecules in addition to
membrane phospholipids that are not soluble in water.

 

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 51
