Other Kinds of Australopithecus

In 1938, a second, stockier kind of Australopithecus was un-
earthed in South Africa. Called A. robustus, it had massive
teeth and jaws. In 1959, in East Africa, Mary Leakey dis-
covered a third kind of Australopithecus—A. boisei (after
Charles Boise, an American-born businessman who con-
tributed to the Leakeys’ projects)—who was even more
stockily built. Like the other australopithecines, A. boisei
was very old—almost 2 million years. Nicknamed “Nut-
cracker man,” A. boisei had a great bony ridge—a Mohawk
haircut of bone—on the crest of the head to anchor its im-
mense jaw muscles (figure 23.7).

In 1974, anthropologist Don Johanson went to the re-
mote Afar Desert of Ethiopia in search of early human
fossils and hit the jackpot. He found the most complete,
best preserved australopithecine skeleton known. Nick-
named “Lucy,” the skeleton was 40% complete and over
3 million years old. The skeleton and other similar fossils
have been assigned the scientific name Australopithecus
afarensis (from the Afar Desert). The shape of the pelvis
indicated that Lucy was a female, and her leg bones
proved she walked upright. Her teeth were distinctly ho-
minid, but her head was shaped like an ape’s, and her
brain was no larger than that of a chimpanzee, about 400
cubic centimeters, about the size of a large orange. More
than 300 specimens of A. afarensis have since been
discovered.

Pec

FIGURE 23.7 (continued).

In the last 10 years, three additional kinds of australo-
pithecines have been reported. These seven species pro-
vide ample evidence that australopithecines were a di-
verse group, and additional species will undoubtedly be
described by future investigators. The evolution of ho-
minids seems to have begun with an initial radiation of
numerous species.

Early Australopithecines Were Bipedal

We now know australopithecines from hundreds of fossils.
The structure of these fossils clearly indicates that australo-
pithecines walked upright. These early hominids weighed
about 18 kilograms and were about | meter tall. Their den-
tition was distinctly hominid, but their brains were not any
larger than those of apes, generally 500 cc or less. Homo
brains, by comparison, are usually larger than 600 cc; mod-
ern H. sapiens brains average 1350 cc. Australopithecine
fossils have been found only in Africa. Although all the fos-
sils to date come from sites in South and East Africa (ex-
cept for one specimen from Chad), it is probable that they
lived over a much broader area of Africa. Only in South
and East Africa, however, are sediments of the proper age
exposed to fossil hunters.

 

The australopithecines were hominids that walked
upright and lived in Africa over 3 million years ago.

 

yw

 

Chapter 23 How Humans Evolved 483
