 

Windblown
fruits é
Asclepias syriaca
Adherent
fruits
FIGURE 24.6 ap
Some of the many Medicago polycarpa
adaptations of seeds to
facilitate dispersal. Seeds
have evolved a number of Fleshy
different means of moving fruits

long distances from their

maternal plant. Solanum dulcamara

Clumped Spacing

Individuals clump into groups or clusters in response to un-
even distribution of resources in their immediate environ-
ments. Clumped distributions are common in nature be-
cause individual animals, plants, and microorganisms tend
to prefer microhabitats defined by soil type, moisture, or
certain kinds of host trees.

Social interactions also can lead to clumped distribu-
tions. Many species live and move around in large groups,
which go by a variety of names (examples include herds of
antelope, flocks of birds, gaggles of geese, packs of wolves,
prides of lions). Such groupings can provide many advan-
tages, including increased awareness of and defense
against predators, decreased energetic cost of moving
through air and water, and access to the knowledge of all
group members.

At a broader scale, populations are often most densely
populated in the interior of their range and less densely dis-
tributed toward the edges. Such patterns usually result
from the manner in which the environment changes in dif-
ferent areas. Populations are often best adapted to the con-
ditions in the interior of their distribution. As environmen-
tal conditions change, individuals are less well adapted and
thus densities decrease. Ultimately, the point is reached at
which individuals cannot persist at all; this marks the edge
of a population’s range.

The Human Effect

By altering the environment, we have allowed some
species, such as coyotes, to expand their ranges, although,
sadly, for most species the effect has been detrimental.
Moreover, humans have served as an agent of dispersal for
many species. Some of these transplants have been widely
successful. For example, 100 starlings were introduced

Pn of

Acer saccharum Terminalia calamansanai

 

Bidens frondosa

J

Juniperus chinensis

Ranunculus muricatus

Rubus sp.

into New York City in 1896 in a misguided attempt to es-
tablish every species of bird mentioned by Shakespeare.
Their population steadily spread such that by 1980, they
occurred throughout the United States. Similar stories
could be told for countless numbers of plants and animals,
and the list increases every year. Unfortunately, the suc-
cess of these invaders often comes at the expense of native
species.

Dispersal Mechanisms

Dispersal to new areas can occur in many ways. Lizards,
for example, have colonized many distant islands, probably
by individuals or their eggs floating or drifting on vegeta-
tion. Seeds of many plants are designed to disperse in
many ways (figure 24.6). Some seeds are aerodynamically
designed to be blown long distances by the wind. Others
have structures that stick to the fur or feathers of animals,
so that they are carried long distances before falling to the
ground. Still others are enclosed in fruits. These seeds can
pass through the digestive systems of mammals or birds
and then germinate at the spot upon which they are defe-
cated. Finally, seeds of Arceuthobium are violently pro-
pelled from the base of the fruit in an explosive discharge.
Although the probability of long-distance dispersal events
occurring and leading to successful establishment of new
populations is slim, over millions of years, many such dis-
persals have occurred.

 

A population is a group of individuals of the same
species living together at the same place and time. The
range of a population is limited by ecologically
inhospitable habitats, but through time, these range
boundaries can change.

 

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 499
