Metapopulations

Species are often composed of a network of distinct popu-
lations that interact with each other by exchanging individ-
uals. Such networks are termed metapopulations and usu-
ally occur in areas in which suitable habitat is patchily
distributed and separated by intervening stretches of un-
suitable habitat.

To what degree populations within a metapopulation in-
teract depends on the amount of dispersal and is often not
symmetrical: populations increasing in size may tend to
send out many dispersers, whereas populations at low levels
will tend to receive more immigrants than they send off. In
addition, relatively isolated populations will tend to receive
relatively few arrivals.

Not all suitable habitats within a metapopulation’s area
may be occupied at any one time. For various reasons,
some individual populations may go extinct, perhaps as a
result of an epidemic disease, a catastrophic fire, or in-
breeding depression. However, because of dispersal from
other populations, such areas may eventually be recolo-
nized. In some cases, the number of habitats occupied in a
metapopulation may represent an equilibrium in which the
rate of extinction of existing populations is balanced by the
rate of colonization of empty habitats.

A second type of metapopulation structure occurs in
areas in which some habitats are suitable for long-term
population maintenance, whereas others are not. In these
situations, termed source-sink metapopulations, the
populations in the better areas (the sources) continually
send out dispersers that bolster the populations in the
poorer habitats (the sinks). In the absence of such
continual replenishment, sink populations would have a
negative growth rate and would eventually become
extinct.

Metapopulations of butterflies have been studied partic-
ularly intensively (figure 24.7). In one study, Ilkka Hanski
and colleagues at the University of Helsinki sampled pop-
ulations of the glanville fritillary butterfly at 1600 mead-
ows in southwestern Finland. On average, every year, 200
populations became extinct, but 114 empty meadows were
colonized. A variety of factors seemed to increase the like-
lihood of a population’s extinction, including small popu-
lation size, isolation from sources of immigrants, low re-
source availability (as indicated by the number of flowers
on a meadow), and lack of genetic variation present within
the population. The researchers attribute the greater num-
ber of extinctions than colonizations to a string of very dry
summers. Because none of the populations is large enough
to survive on its own, continued survival of the species in
southwestern Finland would appear to require the contin-
ued existence of a metapopulation network in which new
populations are continually created and existing popula-
tions are supplemented by emigrants. Continued bad
weather thus may doom the species, at least in this part of
its range.

500 Part VIT_ Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

10km
|
8 Occupied habitat patch
5 Unoccupied habitat patch

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 24.7

Metapopulations of butterflies. The glanville fritillary butterfly
occurs in metapopulations in southwestern Finland on the Aland
Islands. None of the populations is large enough to survive for
long on its own, but continual emigration of individuals from
other populations allows some populations to survive. In addition,
continual establishment of new populations tends to offset
extinction of established populations, although in recent years,
extinctions have outnumbered colonizations.

Metapopulations, where they occur, can have two im-
portant implications for the range of a species. First, by
continual colonization of empty patches, they prevent
long-term extinction. If no such dispersal existed, then
each population might eventually perish, leading to disap-
pearance of the species from the entire area. Moreover, in
source-sink metapopulations, the species as a whole occu-
pies a larger area than it otherwise might occupy. For
these reasons, the study of metapopulations has become
very important in conservation biology as natural habitats
become increasingly fragmented.

 

The distribution of individuals within a population can
be random, uniform, or clumped. Across broader areas,
individuals may occur in populations that are loosely
interconnected, termed metapopulations.

 
