Population Ecology

 

Organisms live as members of populations, groups of indi-
viduals of a species that live together. In this chapter, we
will consider the properties of populations, focusing on ele-
ments that influence whether a population will grow or
shrink, and at what rate. The explosive growth of the
world’s human population in the last few centuries provides
a focus for our inquiry.

A population consists of the individuals of a given
species that occur together at one place and time. This flex-
ible definition allows us to speak in similar terms of the
world’s human population, the population of protozoa in
the gut of an individual termite, or the population of deer
that inhabit a forest. Sometimes the boundaries defining a
boundary are sharp, such as the edge of an isolated moun-
tain lake for trout, and sometimes they are more fuzzy,
such as when individuals readily move back and forth be-
tween areas, like deer in two forests separated by a corn-
field.

Three aspects of populations are particularly important:
the range throughout which a population occurs, the dis-
persion of individuals within that range, and the size a pop-
ulation attains.

   

  
   
  

liwi
Hawaiian bird

  
   

Catalina Island
mahogany tree

FIGURE 24.2

ons are individuals of the same species that live together.

Population Distributions

No population, not even of humans, occurs in all habitats
throughout the world. Most species, in fact, have relatively
limited geographic ranges. The Devil’s Hole pupfish, for
example, lives in a single hot water spring in southern
Nevada, and the Socorro isopod is known from a single
spring system in Socorro, New Mexico (figure 24.2). At the
other extreme, some species are widely distributed. Popula-
tions of some whales, for example, are found throughout all
of the oceans of the northern or southern hemisphere.

In chapter 29 we will discuss the variety of environmental
challenges facing organisms. Suffice it to say for now that no
population contains individuals adapted to live in all of the
different environments on the earth. Polar bears are exqui-
sitely adapted to survive the cold of the Arctic, but you won’t
find them in the tropical rain forest. Certain bacteria can live
in the near boiling waters of Yellowstone’s geysers, but they
do not occur in cooler streams that are nearby. Each popula-

tion has its own requirements—temperature, humidity, cer-
tain types of food, and a host of other factors—that deter-
mine where it can live and reproduce and where it can’t. In
addition, in places that are otherwise suitable, the presence
of predators, competitors, or parasites may prevent a popula-
tion from occupying an area.

   
  

New Guinea

tree kangaroo
ae
3s Oy

Northem white rhinoceros

Species that occur in only one place. These species, and many others, are only found in a single population. All are endangered species,
and should anything happen to their single habitat, the population—and the species—would go extinct.

496 Part VII Ecology and Behavior
