Population Dispersion

Another key characteristic of population structure is the
way in which individuals of a population are arranged.
They may be randomly spaced, uniformly spaced, or

clumped (figure 24.5).

Randomly spaced

Individuals are randomly spaced within populations when
they do not interact strongly with one another or with
nonuniform aspects of their microenvironment. Random
distributions are not common in nature. Some species of
trees, however, appear to exhibit random distributions in
Amazonian rain forests.

Uniformly spaced

Individuals often are uniformly spaced within a population.
This spacing may often, but not always, result from compe-
tition for resources. The means by which it is accom-
plished, however, varies.

In animals, uniform spacing often results from behav-
ioral interactions, which we will discuss in chapter 27. In
many species, individuals of one or both sexes defend a ter-
ritory from which other individuals are excluded. These
territories serve to provide the owner with exclusive access
to resources such as food, water, hiding refuges, or mates
and tend to space individuals evenly across the habitat.
Even in nonterritorial species, individuals often maintain a
defended space into which other animals are not allowed to
intrude.

Among plants, uniform spacing also is a common result
of competition for resources. In this case, however, the
spacing results from direct competition for the resources.
Closely spaced individual plants will contest for available
sunlight, nutrients, or water. These contests can be direct,
such as one plant casting a shadow over another, or indi-
rect, such as two plants competing to see which is more
efficient at extracting nutrients or water from a shared
area. Only plants that are spaced an adequate distance
from each other will be able to coexist, leading to uniform
spacing.

FIGURE 24.5

Population dispersion. (2) Different arrangements of bacterial
colonies. The different patterns of dispersion are exhibited by
three different species of trees from the same locality in the
Amazonian rain forest. (4) Brosimum alicastrum is randomly
dispersed, (4) Coccoloba coronata is uniformly dispersed, and (d)
Chamguava schippii exhibits a clumped distribution.

498 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

 

Random

(a) Bacterial colonies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(d) Clumped distribution of Chamguava schippil
