 

 

 

 

Testing Lack’s theory of optimum clutch size. In this study
from woods near Oxford, England, researchers found that the
most common clutch size was 8, even though clutches of 12 pro-
duced the greatest number of surviving offspring. (After Boyce
and Perrins, 1987.)

The Experiment

Lack’s theory is attractive because of its simplicity and
common sense—but is it right? Many studies have been
conducted to examine this hypothesis. Typically, experi-
menters would remove eggs from nests, and look to see if
this improved the survivorship of the remaining off-
spring. If Lack is right, then it should, as the remaining
offspring will have access to a larger share of what the
parents can provide. Usually, however, removal of eggs
did not seem to make any difference. Parents just ad-
justed down the amount of food they provided. The situ-
ation was clearly more complicated than Lack’s simple
theory envisioned.

One can always argue with tests such as these, how-
ever, as they involve direct interference with the nests,
potentially having a major influence on how the birds be-
have. It is hard to believe that a bird caring for a nest of
six eggs would not notice when one turned up missing. A
clear test of Lack’s theory would require avoiding all
intervention.

Just such a test was completed in 1987 in the woods near
Oxford, England. Over many years, Oxford University re-
searchers led by Professor Mark Boyce (now at the Univer-
sity of Wyoming, Laramie) carefully monitored nests of a
songbird, the greater tit, very common in the English
countryside. They counted the number of eggs laid in each
nest (the clutch size) and then watched to see how many of
the offspring survived to fly away from the nest. Nothing
was done to interfere with the birds. Over 22 years, they
patiently examined 4489 nests.

494 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

‘Two theories of optimum clutch size. David Lack’s theory pre-
dicts that optimum clutch size will be where reproductive success
of the clutch is greatest. George Williams’s theory predicts that
optimum clutch size will be where the met benefit is greatest—that
is, where the difference between the cost of reproduction and the
reproductive success of the clutch is greatest.

The Results

The Oxford researchers found that the average clutch size
was 8 eggs, but that nests with the greatest number of sur-
viving offspring had not 8 but 12 eggs in them! Clearly,
Lack’s theory is wrong. These birds are not producing as
many offspring as natural selection to maximize fitness
(that is, number of surviving offspring) would predict (see
above left).

Lack’s proposal had seemed eminently sensible. What
was wrong? In 1966 the evolutionary theorist George
Williams suggested the problem was that Lack’s theory ig-
nores the cost of reproduction (see above). If a bird spends
too much energy feeding one brood, then it may not sur-
vive to raise another. Looking after a large clutch may ex-
tract too high a price in terms of future reproductive suc-
cess of the parent. The clutch size actually favored by
natural selection is adjusted for the wear-and-tear on the
parents, so that it is almost always smaller than the number
which would produce the most offspring in that nest—just
what the Oxford researchers observed.

However, even William’s “cost-of-reproduction” is not
enough to completely explain Boyce’s greater tit data.
There were marked fluctuations in the weather over the
years that the Oxford researchers gathered their data, and
they observed that harsh years decreased survival of the
young in large nests more than in small ones. This “bad-
year” effect reduces the fitness of individuals laying larger
clutches, and Boyce argues that it probably contributes at
least as much as cost-of-reproduction in making it more
advantageous, in the long term, for birds to lay clutches
smaller than the Lack optimum.
