Part

Vil

Ecology and Behavior

Why do tropical songbirds lay fewer
eggs?

Sometimes odd generalizations in science lead to unex-
pected places. Take, for example, a long obscure mono-
graph published in 1944 by British ornithologist (bird ex-
pert) Reginald Moreau in the journal Ibis on bird eggs.
Moreau had worked in Africa for many years before mov-
ing to a professorship in England in the early 1940s. He
was not in England long before noting that the British
songbirds seemed to lay more eggs than he was accustomed
to seeing in nests in Africa. He set out to gather informa-
tion on songbird clutch size (that is, the number of eggs in
a nest) all over the world.

Wading through a mountain of data (his Ibis paper is 51
pages long!), Moreau came to one of these odd generaliza-
tions: songbirds in the tropics lay fewer eggs than their
counterparts at higher latitudes (see above right). Tropical
songbirds typically lay a clutch of 2 or 3 eggs, on average,
while songbirds in temperate and subarctic regions gener-
ally lay clutches of 4 to 6 eggs, and some species as many as
10. The trend is general, affecting all groups of songbirds
in all regions of the world.

What is a biologist to make of such a generalization? At
first glance, we would expect natural selection to maximize
evolutionary fitness—that is, songbirds the world over
should have evolved to produce as many eggs as possible.
Clearly, the birds living in the tropics have not read Dar-
win, as they are producing only half as many eggs as they
are capable of doing.

A way out of this quandary was proposed by ornitholo-
gist Alexander Skutch in 1949. He argued that birds pro-
duced just enough offspring to offset deaths in the popula-
tion. Any extra offspring would be wasteful of individuals,
and so minimized by natural selection. An interesting idea,
but it didn’t hold water. Bird populations are not smaller in
the tropics, or related to the size of the populations there.

A second idea, put forward a few years earlier in 1947
by a colleague of Moreau’s, David Lack, was more
promising. Lack, one of the twentieth-century’s great bi-
ologists, argued that few if any birds ever produce as
many eggs as they might under ideal conditions, for the
simple reason that conditions in nature are rarely ideal.
Natural selection will indeed tend to maximize reproduc-

 

‘This Kentucky warbler is tending her nest of eggs. A similar
species in the tropics would lay fewer eggs. Why?

tive rate (that is, the number of eggs laid in clutches) as
Darwin predicted, but only to the greatest level possible
within the limits of resources. There is nothing here that
would have surprised Darwin. Birds lay fewer eggs in the
tropics simply because parents can gather fewer resources
to provide their young there—competition is just too
fierce, resources too scanty.

Lack went on to construct a general theory of clutch size
in birds. He started with the sensible assumption that in a
resource-limited environment birds can supply only so
much food to their young. Thus, the more offspring they
have, the less they can feed each nestling. As a result, Lack
proposed that natural selection will favor a compromise be-
tween offspring number and investment in each offspring,
which maximizes the number of offspring which are fed
enough to survive to maturity.

The driving force behind Lack’s theory of optimal
clutch size is his idea that broods with too many offspring
would be undernourished, reducing the probability that the
chicks would survive. In Lack’s own words:

“The average clutch-size is ultimately determined by the av-
erage maximum number of young which the parents can success-
fully raise in the region and at the season in question, i.e. ... nat-
ural selection eliminates a disproportionately large number of
young in those clutches which are higher than the average,
through the inability of the parents to get enough food for their
young, so that some or all of the brood die before or soon after
fledging (leaving the nest), with the result that few or no descen-
dants are left with their parent’s propensity to lay a larger
clutch.”

493
