PUPPET EERE EES Peery ee ee eee
RE BER pepe pe ype
HH HH HHHHHHHHHHH HHH HHHHH HH HH HH

No double bonds between carbon atoms; fatty acid Double bonds present between carbon atoms; fatty acid

chains fit close together chains do not fit close together

 

 

(a) Saturated fat

   

(b) Unsaturated fat

FIGURE 3.20

Saturated and unsaturated fats. (a) Palmitic acid, with no double bonds and, thus, a maximum number of hydrogen atoms bonded to the
carbon chain, is a saturated fatty acid. Many animal triacylglycerols (fats) are saturated. Because their fatty acid chains can fit closely
together, these triacylglycerols form immobile arrays called hard fat. ()) Linoleic acid, with three double bonds and, thus, fewer than the
maximum number of hydrogen atoms bonded to the carbon chain, is an unsaturated fatty acid. Plant fats are typically unsaturated. The
many kinks the double bonds introduce into the fatty acid chains prevent the triacylglycerols from closely aligning and produce oils, which

are liquid at room temperature.

Fats as Food

Most fats contain over 40 carbon atoms. The ratio of energy-
storing C—H bonds to carbon atoms in fats is more than
twice that of carbohydrates (see next section), making fats
much more efficient molecules for storing chemical energy.
On the average, fats yield about 9 kilocalories (kcal) of
chemical energy per gram, as compared with somewhat less
than 4 kcal per gram for carbohydrates.

All fats produced by animals are saturated (except some
fish oils), while most plant fats are unsaturated. The excep-
tions are the tropical oils (palm oil and coconut oil), which
are saturated despite their fluidity at room temperature. It
is possible to convert an oil into a solid fat by adding hy-
drogen. Peanut butter sold in stores is usually artificially
hydrogenated to make the peanut fats solidify, preventing
them from separating out as oils while the jar sits on the
store shelf. However, artificially hydrogenating unsaturat-
ed fats seems to eliminate the health advantage they have
over saturated fats, as it makes both equally rich in C—H

bonds. Therefore, it now appears that margarine made
from hydrogenated corn oil is no better for your health
than butter.

When an organism consumes excess carbohydrate, it is
converted into starch, glycogen, or fats and reserved for fu-
ture use. The reason that many humans gain weight as they
grow older is that the amount of energy they need decreas-
es with age, while their intake of food does not. Thus, an
increasing proportion of the carbohydrate they ingest is
available to be converted into fat.

A diet rich in fats is one of several factors that are
thought to contribute to heart disease, particularly to ath-
erosclerosis, a condition in which deposits of fatty tissue
called plaque adhere to the lining of blood vessels, blocking
the flow of blood. Fragments of plaque, breaking off from a
deposit, are a major cause of strokes.

 

Fats are efficient energy-storage molecules because of
their high concentration of C—H bonds.

 

52 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things
