 

15,000 years ago Present

     
  
  
  
     
  
     

 

Ly Alpine tundra Alpine tundra
| 3ki
™ Spruce-fir forests
= Spruce forests Mixed conifer forest
Sp 2km = Woodlands
& Mixed conifer forest
8
@ 1 itkm 7
fr rassland,
Wooclands chaparral, and
Grassland, chaparral, desert scrub
[_ Okm and desert scrub
FIGURE 24.3

Altitudinal shifts in population ranges. During the glacial period 15,000 years ago, conditions were cooler than they are now. As the
climate has warmed, tree species that require colder temperatures have shifted their distributional range upward in altitude so that they live
in the climatic conditions to which they are adapted.

Range Expansions and
Contractions

Population ranges are not static, but,
rather, change through time. These
changes occur for two reasons. In some
cases, the environment changes. For
example, as the glaciers retreated at the
end of the last ice age, approximately
10,000 years ago, many North Ameri-
can plant and animal populations ex-
panded northward. At the same time,
as climates have warmed, species have
experienced shifts in the elevation at
which they are found on mountains
(figure 24.3).

In addition, populations can ex-
pand their ranges when they are able
to circumvent inhospitable habitat to
colonize suitable, previously unoccu-

Immigration
from Africa

pied areas. For example, the cattle
egret is native to Africa. Some time
in the late 1800s, these birds ap-
peared in northern South America,
having made the nearly 2000-mile
transatlantic crossing, perhaps aided
by strong winds. Since then, they

FIGURE 24.4

: : Range expansion of the cattle egret. Although the cattle egret—so-named because it
have steadily expanded their range folio eatde and other hoofed animals catching any insects or small vertebrae that they
such that they now can be found  gisturb—first arrived in South America in the late 1800s, the oldest preserved specimen dates
throughout most of the United States from the 1930s. Since then, the range expansion of this species has been well documented, as
(figure 24.4). it has moved westward and up into much of North America, as well as down the western side
of the Andes to near the southern tip of South America.

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 497
