| 24.2 Population dynamics depend critically upon age distribution.

One of the important features of any population is its
size. Population size has a direct bearing on the ability of
a given population to survive: for a variety of reasons dis-
cussed in chapter 31, smaller populations are at a greater
risk of disappearing than large populations. In addition,
the interactions that occur between members of a popu-
lation also depend critically on a population’s size and
density.

Demography

Demography (from the Greek demos, “the people,” +
graphos, “measurement”) is the statistical study of popula-
tions. How the size of a population changes through time
can be studied at two levels. At the most inclusive level, we
can study the population as a whole to determine whether
it is increasing, decreasing, or remaining constant. Popula-
tions grow if births outnumber deaths and shrink if deaths
outnumber births. Understanding these trends is often eas-
ier if we break a population down into its constituent parts
and analyze each separately.

Factors Affecting Population Growth Rates

The proportion of males and females in a population is
its sex ratio. The number of births in a population is
usually directly related to the number of females, but may
not be as closely related to the number of males in
species in which a single male can mate with several fe-
males. In many species, males compete for the opportu-
nity to mate with females (a situation we discuss in chap-
ter 27); consequently, a few males get many matings,
whereas many males do not mate at all. In such species, a
female-biased sex ratio would not affect population
growth rates; reduction in the number of males simply
changes the identities of the reproductive males without
reducing the number of births. Among monogamous
species like many birds, by contrast, in which pairs form
long-lasting reproductive relationships, a reduction in the
number of males can directly reduce the number of
births.

Generation time, defined as the average interval be-
tween the birth of an individual and the birth of its off-
spring, can also affect population growth rates. Species
differ greatly in generation time. Differences in body size
can explain much of this variation—mice go through ap-
proximately 100 generations during the course of one ele-
phant generation—but not all of it (figure 24.8). Newts,
for example, are smaller than mice, but have considerably
longer generation times. Everything else equal, popula-
tions with shorter generations can increase in size more
quickly than populations with long generations. Con-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m-| Sequoia
Fir, *
Whale *
Kelp, © Birch
*Balsam
tom— Dogwood
Rhino Elephant
Eke .Bear ,
tm Deer esnake
Foxe °Beaver
Salamander
Rate Crab *Horseshoe crab]
Toms Mousse vTutle
=e Scallop? «Frog
& Snail e ®Chameleon
& Bee * Oyster
ep cr “Horsefiy
= eHousefly © Clam
a Daphnia * Drosophila
1mm Stentore *
Parameciume
[100 pm + ® Didinium
Tetrahymena
ee Euglena
*Spirochaeta
10 pm
E coli
Pseudomonas
B. aureus
a ee
“4 O.
% &$%%% % %
ane) % %,
%
Generation time
FIGURE 24.8

The relationship between body size and generation time. In
general, larger animals have longer generation times, although
there are exceptions.

versely, because generation time and life span are usually
closely correlated, populations with short generation
times may also diminish in size more rapidly if birthrates
suddenly decrease.

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 501
