 

Population Ecology

 

Concept Outline

24.1 Populations are individuals of the same species
that live together.

Population Ecology. The borders of populations are
determined by areas in which individuals cannot survive
and reproduce. Population ranges expand and contract
through time as conditions change.

Population Dispersion. The distribution of individuals in
a population can be clumped, random, or even.
Metapopulations. Sometimes, populations are arranged in
networks connected by the exchange of individuals.

24.2 Population dynamics depend critically upon age
distribution.

Demography. The growth rate of a population is a
sensitive function of its age structure; populations with
many young individuals grow rapidly as these individuals
enter reproductive age.

24.3 Life histories often reflect trade-offs between
reproduction and survival.

The Cost of Reproduction. Evolutionary success is a
trade-off between investment in current reproduction and
in growth that promotes future reproduction.

24.4 Population growth is limited by the environment.

Biotic Potential. Populations grow if the birthrate exceeds
the death rate until they reach the carrying capacity of their
environment.

The Influence of Population Density. Some of the
factors that regulate a population’s growth depend upon the
size of the population; others do not.

Population Growth Rates and Life History Models. Some
species have adaptations for rapid, exponential population
growth, whereas other species exhibit slower population
growth and have intense competition for resources.

24.5 The human population has grown explosively in
the last three centuries.

The Advent of Exponential Growth. Human populations
have been growing exponentially since the 1700s and will
continue to grow in developing countries because of the
number of young people entering their reproductive years.

 

FIGURE 24.1

Life takes place in populations. This population of gannets is
subject to the rigorous effects of reproductive strategy,
competition, predation, and other limiting factors.

Ba’ the study of how organisms relate to one an-
other and to their environments, is a complex and
fascinating area of biology that has important implications
for each of us. In our exploration of ecological principles,
we will first consider the properties of populations, em-
phasizing population dynamics (figure 24.1). In chapter
25, we will discuss communities and the interactions that
occur in them. Chapter 26 moves on to focus on animals
and how and why they behave as they do. Chapter 27 then
deals with behavior in an environmental context, the ex-
tent to which natural selection has molded behaviors
adaptively.

495
