How Science Is Done

How do scientists establish which general principles are
true from among the many that might be true? They do
this by systematically testing alternative proposals. If these
proposals prove inconsistent with experimental observa-
tions, they are rejected as untrue. After making careful ob-
servations concerning a particular area of science, scien-
tists construct a hypothesis, which is a suggested
explanation that accounts for those observations. A hy-
pothesis is a proposition that might be true. Those hy-
potheses that have not yet been disproved are retained.
They are useful because they fit the known facts, but they
are always subject to future rejection if, in the light of new
information, they are found to be incorrect.

Testing Hypotheses

We call the test of a hypothesis an experiment (figure
1.4). Suppose that a room appears dark to you. To under-
stand why it appears dark, you propose several hypotheses.
The first might be, “There is no light in the room because

 

Observation

¥

Question

v

Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 4
Hypothesis 5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Potential
hypotheses

FIGURE 1.4

How science is done. This diagram il-
lustrates the way in which scientific in-
vestigations proceed. First, scientists
make observations that raise a
particular question. They develop a
number of potential explanations
(hypotheses) to answer the question.
Next, they carry out experiments in an
attempt to eliminate one or more of
these hypotheses. Then, predictions are
made based on the remaining
hypotheses, and further experiments

are carried out to test these predictions.
Asa result of this process, the least
unlikely hypothesis is selected.

the light switch is turned off.” An alternative hypothesis
might be, “There is no light in the room because the light-
bulb is burned out.” And yet another alternative hypothe-
sis might be, “I am going blind.” To evaluate these hy-
potheses, you would conduct an experiment designed to
eliminate one or more of the hypotheses. For example, you
might test your hypotheses by reversing the position of the
light switch. If you do so and the light does not come on,
you have disproved the first hypothesis. Something other
than the setting of the light switch must be the reason for
the darkness. Note that a test such as this does not prove
that any of the other hypotheses are true; it merely dem-
onstrates that one of them is not. A successful experiment
is one in which one or more of the alternative hypotheses
is demonstrated to be inconsistent with the results and is
thus rejected.

As you proceed through this text, you will encounter
many hypotheses that have withstood the test of experiment.
Many will continue to do so; others will be revised as new
observations are made by biologists. Biology, like all science,
is in a constant state of change, with new ideas appearing
and replacing old ones.

 

 

 

Hypothesis 2
Hypothesis 3
Hypothesis 5

 

 

 

Remaining
possible
hypotheses

 
    

 

Last remaining
possible hypothesis

 

 

 

Experiment 4

Chapter 1 The Science of Biology 7
