Investment per Offspring

In terms of natural selection, the number of offspring pro-
duced is not as important as how many of those offspring
ve to reproduce.

A key reproductive trade-off concerns how many re-
sources to invest in producing any single offspring. As-
suming that the amount of energy to be invested in off-

 

themselves surv

 

spring is limited, a trade-off must exist between the
number of offspring produced and the size of each off-
spring (figure 24.13). This trade-off has been experimen-
tally demonstrated in the side-blotched lizard, Uta stans-
buriana, which normally lays on average four and a half
eggs at a time. When some of the eggs are removed sur-
gically early in the reproductive cycle, the female lizard
produces only | to 3 eggs, but supplies each of these eggs
with greater amounts of yolk, producing eggs that are
much larger than normal.

In many species, the size of offspring critically affects
their survival prospects—larger offspring have a greater
chance of survival. Producing many offspring with little
chance of survival might not be the best strategy, but pro-
ducing only a single, extraordinarily robust offspring also
would not maximize the number of surviving offspring.
Rather, an intermediate situation, in which several fairly
large offspring are produced, should maximize the number
of surviving offspring. This example is fundamentally the
same as the trade-off between clutch size and parental in-
vestment discussed above; in this case, the parental invest-
ment is simply how many resources can be invested in each
offspring before they are born.

Reproductive Events per Lifetime

The trade-off between age and fecundity plays a key role
in many life histories. Annual plants and most insects
focus all of their reproductive resources on a single large
event and then die. This life history adaptation is called
semelparity (from the Latin semel, “once,” + parito, “to
beget”). Organisms that produce offspring several times
over many seasons exhibit a life history adaptation called
iteroparity (from the Latin itero, “to repeat”). Species
that reproduce yearly must avoid overtaxing themselves in
any one reproductive episode so that they will be able to
survive and reproduce in the future. Semelparity, or “big
bang” reproduction, is usually found in short-lived species
in which the probability of staying alive between broods is
low, such as plants growing in harsh climates. Semelparity
is also favored when fecundity entails large reproductive
cost, as when Pacific salmon migrate upriver to their
spawning grounds. In these species, rather than investing
some resources in an unlikely bid to survive until the next
breeding season, individuals place all their resources into
reproduction.

 

19.55

19.05

18.54

18.04

 

Nestling size (weight in grams)

17.5

 

T T T T T
8 10 12 14

 

 

6
Clutch size

 

FIGURE 24.13

The relationship between clutch size and offspring size. In
great tits, the size of nestlings is inversely related to the number of
eggs laid. The more mouths they have to feed, the less the parents
can provide to any one nestling.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ost Chipmunk
Otter, Cpe
Pa Sheep, ° “African elephant
@ 3 Hippo, ° Red squirrel
ge 00F Beavers ia, °° Cottontail rabbit
ae os ee &lmpala
a 2 ~%* |Warthog 0
fe P8epig  eLynx
08 F  *Mouse ® Kob
Vole
a mo
-12 08 04 00 04 08
Relative life expectancy
FIGURE 24.14

Age at first reproduction. Among mammals, compensating for the
effects of size, age at first reproduction increases with life
expectancy at birth. Each dot represents a species. Values are
relative to the species symbolized C1. (After Begon et al., 1996.)

Age at First Reproduction

Among mammals and many other animals, longer-lived
species reproduce later (figure 24.14). Birds, for example,
gain experience as juveniles before expending the high
costs of reproduction. In long-lived animals, the relative
advantage of juvenile experience outweighs the energy in-
vestment in survival and growth. In shorter-lived animals,
on the other hand, quick reproduction is more critical than
juvenile training, and reproduction tends to occur earlier.

 

Life history adaptations involve many trade-offs
between reproductive cost and investment in survival.
Different kinds of animals and plants employ quite
different approaches.

 

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 505
