 

Density-Independent Effects

 

. . . 160
Growth rates in populations sometimes

do not correspond to the logistic
growth equation. In many cases, such
patterns result because growth is under
the control of density-independent
effects. In other words, the rate of
growth of a population at any instant is
limited by something other than the
size of the population.

A variety of factors may affect popula-

120 +

Number of pelts (in thousands)

— Snowshoe hare
— Lynx

 

 

tions in a density-independent manner. 0
Most of these are aspects of the external
environment. Extremely cold winters,

 

1845 1855 1865 1875 1885 1895 1905 1915 1925 1935

 

Year

 

 

droughts, storms, volcanic eruptions.
individuals often will be affected by these
activities regardless of the size of the
population. Populations that occur in
areas in which such events occur rela-
tively frequently will display erratic pop-
ulation growth patterns in which the
populations increase rapidly when condi-
tions are benign, but suffer extreme reductions whenever
the environment turns hostile.

FIGURE 24.20

Population Cycles

Some populations exhibit another type of pattern incon-
sistent with simple logistic equations: they exhibit cyclic
patterns of increase and decrease. Ecologists have studied
cycles in hare populations since the 1920s. They have
found that the North American snowshoe hare (Lepus
americanus) follows a “10-year cycle” (in reality, it varies
from 8 to 11 years). Its numbers fall tenfold to 30-fold in
a typical cycle, and 100-fold changes can occur. Two fac-
tors appear to be generating the cycle: food plants and
predators.

Food plants. The preferred foods of snowshoe hares
are willow and birch twigs. As hare density increases, the
quantity of these twigs decreases, forcing the hares to
feed on high-fiber (low-quality) food. Lower birthrates,
low juvenile survivorship, and low growth rates follow.
The hares also spend more time searching for food, ex-
posing them more to predation. The result is a precipi-
tous decline in willow and birch twig abundance, and a
corresponding fall in hare abundance. It takes two to
three years for the quantity of mature twigs to recover.
Predators. A key predator of the snowshoe hare is the
Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis). The Canada lynx shows a
“10-year” cycle of abundance that seems remarkably en-
trained to the hare abundance cycle (figure 24.20). As
hare numbers increase, lynx numbers do, too, rising in
response to the increased availability of lynx food.
When hare numbers fall, so do lynx numbers, their food
supply depleted.

Linked population cycles of the snowshoe hare and the northern lynx. These data
are based on records of fur returns from trappers in the Hudson Bay region of Canada.
‘The lynx populations carefully track the snowshoe hares, but lag behind them slightly.

Which factor is responsible for the predator-prey oscil-
lations? Do increasing numbers of hares lead to overhar-
vesting of plants (a hare-plant cycle) or do increasing num-
bers of lynx lead to overharvesting of hares (a hare-lynx
cycle)? Field experiments carried out by C. Krebs and
coworkers in 1992 provide an answer. Krebs set up experi-
mental plots in Canada’s Yukon-containing hare popula-
tions. If food is added (no food effect) and predators ex-
cluded (no predator effect) from an experimental area, hare
numbers increase tenfold and stay there—the cycle is lost.
However, the cycle is retained if either of the factors is al-
lowed to operate alone: exclude predators but don’t add
food (food effect alone), or add food in presence of preda-
tors (predator effect alone). Thus, both factors can affect
the cycle, which, in practice, seems to be generated by the
interaction between the two factors.

Population cycles traditionally have been considered to
occur rarely. However, a recent review of nearly 700 long-
term (25 years or more) studies of trends within popula-
tions found that cycles were not uncommon; nearly 30% of
the studies—including birds, mammals, fish, and crus-
taceans—provided evidence of some cyclic pattern in popu-
lation size through time, although most of these cycles are
nowhere near as dramatic in amplitude as the snowshoe
hare and lynx cycles.

 

Density-dependent effects are caused by factors that
come into play particularly when the population size is
larger; density-independent effects are controlled by
factors that operate regardless of population size.

 

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 509
