Population Growth Rates and Life
History Models

As we have seen, some species usually have stable popula-
tion sizes maintained near the carrying capacity, whereas
the populations of other species fluctuate markedly and are
often far below carrying capacity. As we saw in our discus-
sion of life histories, the selective factors affecting such
species will differ markedly. Populations near their carrying
capacity may face stiff competition for limited resources.
By contrast, resources are abundant in populations far
below carrying capacity.

We have already seen the consequences of such differ-
ences. When resources are limited, the cost of reproduc-
tion often will be very high. Consequently, selection will
favor individuals that can compete effectively and utilize re-
sources efficiently. Such adaptations often come at the cost
of lowered reproductive rates. Such populations are termed
K-selected because they are adapted to thrive when the
population is near its carrying capacity (K). Table 24.2 lists
some of the typical features of K-selected populations. Ex-
amples of K-selected species include coconut palms,
whooping cranes, whales, and humans.

By contrast, in populations far below the carrying ca-
pacity, resources may be abundant. Costs of reproduction
will be low, and selection will favor those individuals that
can produce the maximum number of offspring. Selec-
tion here favors individuals with the highest reproductive
rates; such populations are termed r-selected. Examples
of organisms displaying r-selected life history adaptations
include dandelions, aphids, mice, and cockroaches
(figure 24.21).

Most natural populations show life history adaptations
that exist along a continuum ranging from completely r-
selected traits to completely K-selected traits. Although
these tendencies hold true as generalities, few populations
are purely r- or K-selected and show all of the traits listed
in table 24.2. These attributes should be treated as general-
ities, with the recognition that many exceptions do exist.

 

Some life history adaptations favor near-exponential
growth, others the more competitive logistic growth.
Most natural populations exhibit a combination of the
two.

 

510 Part VIT_ Ecology and Behavior

Table 24.2 _r-Selected and K-Selected Life

History Adaptations

r-Selected K-Selected
Adaptation Populations Populations
Age at first Early Late
reproduction
Life span Short Long
Maturation time Short Long
Mortality rate Often high Usually low
Number of offspring Many Few
produced per
reproductive episode
Number of Usually one Often several
reproductions per
lifetime
Parental care None Often extensive
Size of offspring Small Large
or eggs

Source: Data from E. R. Pianka, Evolutionary Ecology, 4th edition, 1987,
Harper & Row, New York.

 

FIGURE 24.21

The consequences of exponential growth. All organisms have
the potential to produce populations larger than those that
actually occur in nature. The German cockroach (Blatella
germanica), a major household pest, produces 80 young every six
months. If every cockroach that hatched survived for three
generations, kitchens might look like this theoretical culinary
nightmare concocted by the Smithsonian Museum of Natural
History.
