The Influence of Population
Density

The reason that population growth rates are affected by
population size is that many important processes are
density-dependent. When populations approach their
carrying capacity, competition for resources can be severe,
leading both to a decreased birthrate and an increased risk
of mortality (figure 24.18). In addition, predators often
focus their attention on particularly common prey, which
also results in increasing rates of mortality as populations
increase. High population densities can also lead to an ac-
cumulation of toxic wastes, a situation to which humans
are becoming increasingly accustomed.

Behavioral changes may also affect population growth
rates. Some species of rodents, for example, become antiso-
cial, fighting more, breeding less, and generally acting
stressed-out. These behavioral changes result from hor-
monal actions, but their ultimate cause is not yet clear;
most likely, they have evolved as adaptive responses to situ-
ations in which resources are scarce. In addition, in
crowded populations, the population growth rate may de-
crease because of an increased rate of emigration of indi-
viduals attempting to find better conditions elsewhere (fig-
ure 24.19).

However, not all density-dependent factors are nega-
tively related to population size. In some cases, growth
rates increase with population size. This phenomenon is re-
ferred to as the Allee effect (after Warder Allee, who first
described it). The Allee effect can take several forms. Most
obviously, in populations that are too sparsely distributed,
individuals may have difficulty finding mates. Moreover,
some species may rely on large groups to deter predators or
to provide the necessary stimulation for breeding activities.

 

508 Part VIT_ Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

Number of surviving young per female

 

 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Number of breeding females

 

 

0.9- °

0.8F

O7F

Juvenile mortality

05+

 

04-

 

 

L L
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Number of adults

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 24.18

Density dependence in the song sparrow (Melospiza melodia)
on Mandarte Island. Reproductive success decreases (a) and
mortality rates increase (}) as population size increases.

FIGURE 24.19

Density-dependent effects. Migratory
locusts, Locusta migratoria, are a legendary
plague of large areas of Africa and Eurasia.
At high population densities, the locusts have
different hormonal and physical
characteristics and take off as a swarm. The
most serious infestation of locusts in 30 years
occurred in North Africa in 1988.
