24.5 The human population has grown explosively in the last three centuries.

The Advent of Exponential Growth

Humans exhibit many K-selected life history traits, in-
cluding small brood size, late reproduction, and a high
degree of parental care. These life history traits evolved
during the early history of hominids, when the limited
resources available from the environment controlled pop-
ulation size. Throughout most of human history, our
populations have been regulated by food availability, dis-
ease, and predators. Although unusual disturbances, in-
cluding floods, plagues, and droughts no doubt affected
the pattern of human population growth, the overall size
of the human population grew only slowly during our
early history. Two thousand years ago, perhaps 130 mil-
lion people populated the earth. It took a thousand years
for that number to double, and it was 1650 before it had
doubled again, to about 500 million. For over 16 cen-
turies, the human population was characterized by very
slow growth. In this respect, human populations resem-
bled many other species with predominantly K-selected
life history adaptations.

Starting in the early 1700s, changes in technology have
given humans more control over their food supply, en-
abled them to develop superior weapons to ward off
predators, and led to the development of cures for many
diseases. At the same time, improvements in shelter and
storage capabilities have made humans less vulnerable to
climatic uncertainties. These changes allowed humans to
expand the carrying capacity of the habitats in which they
lived, and thus to escape the confines of logistic growth
and reenter the exponential phase of the sigmoidal growth
curve.

Responding to the lack of environmental constraints, the
human population has grown explosively over the last 300
years. While the birthrate has remained unchanged at
about 30 per 1000 per year over this period, the death rate
has fallen dramatically, from 20 per 1000 per year to its
present level of 13 per 1000 per year. The difference be-
tween birth and death rates meant that the population grew
as much as 2% per year, although the rate has now declined
to 1.4% per year.

A 14% annual growth rate may not seem large, but it
has produced a current human population of 6 billion peo-
ple (figure 24.22)! At this growth rate, 77 million people
are added to the world population annually, and the human
population will double in 39 years. As we will discuss in
chapter 30, both the current human population level and
the projected growth rate have potential consequences for
our future that are extremely grave.

 

 

 

 

 

 

ald
a
at Significant advances
in medicine through
2 science and technology
6
2 Industrial
= 3p Revolution
ao
ar Bubonic plague
"Black Death"
a
4000 Bc. 3000 Bc. 2000BC. 1000 Bc. 0 1000 2000
Year
FIGURE 24.22

History of human population size. Temporary increases in
death rate, even severe ones like the Black Death of the 1400s,
have little lasting impact. Explosive growth began with the
Industrial Revolution in the 1700s, which produced a significant
long-term lowering of the death rate. The current population is 6
billion, and at the current rate will double in 39 years.

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 511
