| 24.4 Population growth is limited by the environment.

Biotic Potential

Populations often remain at a relatively constant size, re-
gardless of how many offspring they produce. As you saw
in chapter 1, Darwin based his theory of natural selection
partly on this seeming contradiction. Natural selection oc-
curs because of checks on reproduction, with some individ-
uals reproducing less often than others. To understand
populations, we must consider how they grow and what
factors in nature limit population growth.

The Exponential Growth Model

The actual rate of population increase, 1, is defined as the
difference between the birth rate and the death rate cor-
rected for any movement of individuals in or out of the
population, whether net emigration (movement out of
the area) or net immigration (movement into the area).
Thus,

r=(b-d)+(i-0)

Movements of individuals can have a major impact on
population growth rates. For example, the increase in
human population in the United States during the closing
decades of the twentieth century is mostly due to immi-
grants. Less than half of the increase came from the repro-
duction of the people already living there.

The simplest model of population growth assumes a
population growing without limits at its maximal rate. This
rate, called the biotic potential, is the rate at which a pop-
ulation of a given species will increase when no limits are
placed on its rate of growth. In mathematical terms, this is
defined by the following formula:

aN 27,N
dt

where N is the number of individuals in the population,
dN/dt is the rate of change in its numbers over time, and 7;
is the intrinsic rate of natural increase for that population—
its innate capacity for growth.

The innate capacity for growth of any population is ex-
ponential (red line in figure 24.15). Even when the rate of
increase remains constant, the actual increase in the num-
ber of individuals accelerates rapidly as the size of the
population grows. The result of unchecked exponential
growth is a population explosion. A single pair of house-
flies, laying 120 eggs per generation, could produce more
than 5 trillion descendants in a year. In 10 years, their de-
scendants would form a swarm more than 2 meters thick
over the entire surface of the earth! In practice, such pat-
terns of unrestrained growth prevail only for short peri-
ods, usually when an organism reaches a new habitat with
abundant resources (figure 24.16). Natural examples in-
clude dandelions reaching the fields, lawns, and meadows

506 Part VIT_ Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

 

1250
ON -1.0N
Carrying
capacity
=
8
3
e
Ss
3
a aN _ 1000 — N
! at <son( tc)
5 10 15
Number of generations (t)
FIGURE 24.15

‘Two models of population growth. The red line illustrates the
exponential growth model for a population with an r of 1.0. The
blue line illustrates the logistic growth model in a population with
r= 1.0and K = 1000 individuals. At first, logistic growth
accelerates exponentially, then, as resources become limiting, the
death rate increases and growth slows. Growth ceases when the
death rate equals the birthrate. The carrying capacity (K)
ultimately depends on the resources available in the environment.

 

FIGURE 24.16

An example of a rapidly increasing population. European
purple loosestrife, Lythrum salicaria, became naturalized over
thousands of square miles of marshes and other wetlands in North
America. It was introduced sometime before 1860 and has had a
negative impact on many native plants and animals.
