Much can be learned from examination of life tables. In
this particular case, we see that the probability of dying
increases steadily with age, whereas the number of off-
spring produced increases with age. By adding up the
numbers in the last column, we get the total number of
offspring produced per individual in the initial cohort.
This number is almost 2, which means that for every orig-
inal member of the cohort, on average two individuals
have been produced. A figure of 1.0 would be the break-
even number, the point at which the population was nei-
ther growing nor shrinking. In this case, the population
appears to be growing rapidly.

In most cases, life table analysis is more complicated
than this. First, except for organisms with short life spans,
it is difficult to track the fate of a cohort from birth until
death of the last individual. An alternative approach is to
construct a cross-sectional study, examining the fate of all
cohorts over a single year. In addition, many factors—
such as offspring reproducing before all members of their
parental generation’s cohort have died—complicate the
interpretation of whether populations are growing or

shrinking.

Survivorship Curves

One way to express some aspects of the age distribution
characteristics of populations is through a survivorship
curve. Survivorship is defined as the percentage of an orig-
inal population that survives to a given age. Examples of
different kinds of survivorship curves are shown in figure
24.9. In hydra, animals related to jellyfish, individuals are
equally likely to die at any age, as indicated by the straight
survivorship curve (type II). Oysters, like plants, produce
vast numbers of offspring, only a few of which live to re-
produce. However, once they become established and grow
into reproductive individuals, their mortality rate is ex-
tremely low (type III survivorship curve). Finally, even
though human babies are susceptible to death at relatively
high rates, mortality rates in humans, as in many animals
and protists, rise steeply in the postreproductive years (type
I survivorship curve). Examination of the data for Poa
annua reveals that it approximates a type II survivorship
curve (figure 24.10).

 

The growth rate of a population is a sensitive function
of its age structure. The age structure of a population
and the manner in which mortality and birthrates vary
among different age cohorts determine whether a
population will increase or decrease in size.

 

 

 

  
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

1000
Hydra
(type I!)
z 100-4
£
5
a
3 Oyster
2 (type Ill)
gq ww
1
T T T
0 25 50 75 100
Percent of maximum life span
FIGURE 24.9

Survivorship curves. By convention, survival (the vertical axis) is
plotted on a log scale. Humans have a type I life cycle, the hydra
(an animal related to jellyfish) type II, and oysters type III.

 

Survival per thousand

 

 

 

—1—1—1—T T
3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27

 

Age (months)

 

 

FIGURE 24.10
Survivorship curve for a cohort of the meadow grass, Poa
annua. Mortality increases at a constant rate through time.

Chapter 24 Population Ecology 503
