24.3 Lif histories often reflect trade-offs between reproduction and survival

Natural selection favors traits that maximize the number
of surviving offspring left in the next generation. Two
factors affect this quantity: how long an individual lives
and how many young it produces each year. Why doesn’t
every organism reproduce immediately after its own
birth, produce large families of large offspring, care for
them intensively, and do this repeatedly throughout a
long life, while outcompeting others, escaping predators,
and capturing food with ease? The answer is that no one
organism can do all of this—there are simply not enough
resources available. Consequently, organisms allocate re-
sources either to current reproduction or to increase
their prospects of surviving and reproducing at later life
stages.

The Cost of Reproduction

The complete life cycle of an organism constitutes its life
history. All life histories involve significant trade-offs.
Because resources are limited, a change that increases re-
production may decrease survival and reduce future re-
production. Thus, a Douglas fir tree that produces more
cones increases its current reproductive success, but it
also grows more slowly; because the number of cones
produced is a function of how large a tree is, this dimin-
ished growth will decrease the number of cones it can
produce in the future. Similarly, birds that have more
offspring each year have a higher probability of dying
during that year or producing smaller clutches the fol-
lowing year (figure 24.11). Conversely, individuals that
delay reproduction may grow faster and larger, enhanc-
ing future reproduction.

In one elegant experiment, researchers changed the
number of eggs in nests of a bird, the collared flycatcher
(figure 24.12). Birds whose clutch size (the number of
eggs produced in one breeding event) was decreased laid
more eggs the next year, whereas those given more eggs
produced fewer eggs the following year. Ecologists refer
to the reduction in future reproductive potential result-
ing from current reproductive efforts as the cost of
reproduction.

Natural selection will favor the life history that maxi-
mizes lifetime reproductive success. When the cost of re-
production is low, individuals should invest in producing as
many offspring as possible because there is little cost. Low
costs of reproduction may occur when resources are abun-
dant, such that producing offspring does not impair sur-
vival or the ability to produce many offspring in subsequent
years. Costs of reproduction will also be low when overall
mortality rates are high. In such cases, individuals may be
unlikely to survive to the next breeding season anyway, so

 

the incremental effect of increased reproductive efforts may
not make a difference in future survival.

504 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

 

= 4

Annual fecundity rate
°
&

°
ib

 

01

0.05 0.1 0.2 05 1.0
Annual adult mortality rate

 

 

 

FIGURE 24.11

Reproduction has a price. Increased fecundity in birds
correlates with higher mortality in several populations of birds
ranging from albatross (low) to sparrow (high). Birds that raise
more offspring per year have a higher probability of dying during
that year.

 

 

 

 

 

 

5

> |

2? °

3 e

2 e e

o 6

WN

°

3 e

3 5}
l ! | ! |
2 A 0 41 42

Change in clutch size
FIGURE 24.12

Reproductive events per lifetime. Adding eggs to nests of
collared flycatchers (which increases the reproductive efforts of
the female rearing the young) decreases clutch size the following
year; removing eggs from the nest increases the next year’s clutch
size. This experiment demonstrates the tradeoff between current
reproductive effort and future reproductive success.

Alternatively, when costs of reproduction are high, life-
time reproductive success may be maximized by deferring
or minimizing current reproduction to enhance growth and
survival rates. This may occur when costs of reproduction
significantly affect the ability of an individual to survive or
decrease the number of offspring that can be produced in
the future.
