3.5 Carbohydrates store energy and provide building materials.

Simple Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates function as energy-storage molecules as well
as structural elements. Some are small, simple molecules,
while others form long polymers.

Sugars Are Simple Carbohydrates

The carbohydrates are a loosely defined group of mole-
cules that contain carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in the
molar ratio 1:2:1. Their empirical formula (which lists the
atoms in the molecule with subscripts to indicate how many
there are of each) is (CH)O)q, where n is the number of car-
bon atoms. Because they contain many carbon-hydrogen
(C—4) bonds, which release energy when they are broken,
carbohydrates are well suited for energy storage.

  

carbon 5-carbon sugars
sugar
H. 0
3c 5 CH,OH
|
we OH
H s —OH
H
OH OH OH H
Glyceraldehyde Ribose Deoxyribose

6-carbon sugars

 

6 CH,OH 6 CH,OH
5
5 °. °.
OH H OH H
HO H
2 3 2
HOH H OH
Glucose Galactose
FIGURE 3.21

Monosaccharides. Monosaccharides, or simple sugars, can
contain as few as three carbon atoms and are often used as
building blocks to form larger molecules. The five-carbon sugars
ribose and deoxyribose are components of nucleic acids (ee figure
3.15). The six-carbon sugar glucose is a component of large
energy-storage molecules.

 

Monosaccharides. The simplest of the carbohydrates
are the simple sugars, or monosaccharides (Greek mono,
“single” + Latin saccharum, “sugar”). Simple sugars may
contain as few as three carbon atoms, but those that play
the central role in energy storage have six (figure 3.21).
The empirical formula of six-carbon sugars is:

CoH 205, or (CH20)g

Six-carbon sugars can exist in a straight-chain form, but in
an aqueous environment they almost always form rings.
The most important of these for energy storage is glucose
(figure 3.22), a six-carbon sugar which has seven energy-
storing C—H bonds.

 

FIGURE 3.22

Structure of the glucose molecule. Glucose is a linear six-
carbon molecule that forms a ring shape in solution. The structure
of the ring can be represented in many ways; the ones shown here
are the most common, with the carbons conventionally numbered
(in green) so that the forms can be compared easily. The bold,
darker lines represent portions of the molecule that are projecting
out of the page toward you—remember, these are three-
dimensional molecules!

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 53
