25.1 Interactions among competing species shape ecological niches.

The Realized Niche

Each organism in an ecosystem confronts the challenge of
survival in a different way. The niche an organism occupies
is the sum total of all the ways it utilizes the resources of its
environment. A niche may be described in terms of space
utilization, food consumption, temperature range, appro-
priate conditions for mating, requirements for moisture,
and other factors. Niche is not synonymous with habitat,
the place where an organism lives. Habitat is a place, niche a
pattern of living.

Sometimes species are not able to occupy their entire
niche because of the presence or absence of other species.
Species can interact with each other in a number of ways,
and these interactions can either have positive or negative
effects. One type of interaction is interspecific competi-
tion, which occurs when two species attempt to utilize the
same resource when there is not enough of the resource to
satisfy both. Fighting over resources is referred to as inter-
ference competition; consuming shared resources is
called exploitative competition.

The entire niche that a species is capable of using,
based on its physiological requirements and resource
needs, is called the fundamental niche. The actual niche
the species occupies is called its realized niche. Because
of interspecific interactions, the realized niche of a
species may be considerably smaller than its fundamental
niche.

In a classic study, J. H. Connell of the University of
California, Santa Barbara investigated competitive inter-
actions between two species of barnacles that grow to-
gether on rocks along the coast of Scotland. Of the two
species Connell studied, Chthamalus stellatus lives in shal-
lower water, where tidal action often exposed it to air,
and Semibalanus balanoides (called Balanus balanoides prior
to 1995) lives lower down, where it is rarely exposed to
the atmosphere (figure 25.2). In the deeper zone, Semi-
balanus could always outcompete Chthamalus by crowding
it off the rocks, undercutting it, and replacing it even
where it had begun to grow, an example of interference
competition. When Connell removed Semibalanus from
the area, however, Chthamalus was easily able to occupy
the deeper zone, indicating that no physiological or other
general obstacles prevented it from becoming established
there. In contrast, Semibalanus could not survive in the
shallow-water habitats where Chthamalus normally oc-
curs; it evidently does not have the special adaptations
that allow Chthamalus to occupy this zone. Thus, the fun-
damental niche of the barnacle Chthamalus included both
shallow and deeper zones, but its realized niche was
much narrower because Chthamalus was outcompeted by
Semibalanus in parts of its fundamental niche. By con-
trast, the realized and fundamental niches of Semibalanus
appear to be identical.

516 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

Chthamalus

Semibalanus

sees a = >|

  

fee

vy y
Fundamental Realized
niches niches

FIGURE 25.2

Competition among two species of barnacles limits niche use.
Chthamalus can live in both deep and shallow zones (its
fundamental niche), but Semibalanus forces Chthamalus out of the
part of its fundamental niche that overlaps the realized niche of
Semibalanus.

Processes other than competition can also restrict the
realized niche of a species. For example, a plant, the St.
John’s-wort, was introduced and became widespread in
open rangeland habitats in California until a specialized
beetle was introduced to control it. Populations of the plant
quickly decreased and it is now only found in shady sites
where the beetle cannot thrive. In this case, the presence of
a predator limits the realized niche of a plant.

In some cases, the absence of another species leads to a
smaller realized niche. For example, many North American
plants depend on the American honeybee for pollination.
The honeybee’s population is currently declining for a vari-
ety of reasons. Conservationists are concerned that if the
honeybee disappears from some habitats, the niche of these
plant species will decrease or even disappear entirely. In
this case, then, the absence—rather than the presence—of
another species will be cause of a relatively small realized
niche.

 

Aniche may be defined as the way in which an organism
utilizes its environment. Interspecific interactions may
cause a species’ realized niche to be smaller than its
fundamental niche. If resources are limiting, two
species normally cannot occupy the same niche
indefinitely.

 
