Detecting Interspecific Competition

It is not simple to determine when two species are compet-
ing. The fact that two species use the same resources need
not imply competition if that resource is not in limited sup-
ply. If the population sizes of two species are negatively
correlated, such that where one species has a large popula-
tion, the other species has a small population and vice
versa, the two species need not be competing for the same
limiting resource. Instead, the two species might be inde-
pendently responding to the same feature of the environ-
ment—perhaps one species thrives best in warm conditions
and the other in cool conditions.

Experimental Studies of Competition

Some of the best evidence for the existence of competi-
tion comes from experimental field studies. By setting up
experiments in which two species either occur alone or
together, scientists can determine whether the presence
of one species has a negative effect on a population of a
second species. For example, a variety of seed-eating ro-
dents occur in the Chihuahuan Desert of the southwest-
ern part of North America. In 1988, researchers set up a
series of 50 meter X 50 meter enclosures to investigate
the effect of kangaroo rats on other, smaller seed-eating
rodents. Kangaroo rats were removed from half of the
enclosures, but not from the other enclosures. The walls
of all of the enclosures had holes in them that allowed ro-
dents to come and go, but in the kangaroo rat removal
plots, the holes were too small to allow the kangaroo rats
to enter. Over the course of the next three years, the re-
searchers monitored the number of the other, smaller
seed-eating rodents present in the plots. As figure 25.6 il-
lustrates, the number of other rodents was substantially
higher in the absence of kangaroo rats, indicating that
kangaroo rats compete with the other rodents and limit
their population sizes.

A great number of similar experiments have indicated
that interspecific competition occurs between many species
of plants and animals. Effects of competition can be seen in
aspects of population biology other than population size,
such as behavior and individual growth rates. For example,
two species of Anolis lizards occur on the island of St.
Maarten. When one of the species, A. gingivinus, is placed
in 12 m X 12 m enclosures without the other species, indi-
vidual lizards grow faster and perch lower than lizards of
the same species do when placed in enclosures in which A.
pogus is also present.

Caution Is Necessary

Although experimental studies can be a powerful means of
understanding the interactions that occur between coexist-
ing species, they have their limitations.

First, care is necessary in interpreting the results of field
experiments. Negative effects of one species on another do

 

 

 

 

 

 

© Kangaroo rats removed
e Kangaroo rats present
‘S 154
$e
q 5 10
Z. 4
88
f3
as 5
€
5
my
o-
T T
1988 1989 1990
FIGURE 25.6

Detecting interspecific competition. This experiment tests the
effect of removal of kangaroo rats on the population size of other
rodents. Immediately after kangaroo rats were removed, the
number of rodents increased relative to the enclosures that still
had kangaroo rats. Notice that population sizes (as estimated by
number of captures) increased and decreased in synchrony in the
two treatments, probably reflecting changes in the weather.

not automatically indicate the existence of competition. For
example, many similar-sized fish have a negative effect on
each other, but it results not from competition, but from
the fact that adults of each species will prey on juveniles of
the other species. In addition, the presence of one species
may attract predators, which then also prey on the second
species. In this case, the second species may have a lower
population size in the presence of the first species due to
the presence of predators, even if they are not competing at
all. Thus, experimental studies are most effective when
they are combined with detailed examination of the ecolog-
ical mechanism causing the negative effect of one species
on another species.

In addition, experimental studies are not always feasible.
For example, the coyote has increased its population in the
United States in recent years simultaneously with the de-
cline of the grey wolf. Is this trend an indication that the
species compete? Because of the size of the animals and the
large geographic areas occupied by each individual, manip-
ulative experiments involving fenced areas with only one or
both species—with each experimental treatment replicated
several times for statistical analysis—are not practical. Sim-
ilarly, studies of slow-growing trees might require many
centuries to detect competition between adult trees. In
such cases, detailed studies of the ecological requirements
of the species are our best bet to understanding interspe-
cific interactions.

 

Experimental studies can provide strong tests of the
hypothesis that interspecific competition occurs, but
such studies have limitations. Detailed ecological
studies are important regardless of whether
experiments are conducted.

 

Chapter 25. Community Ecology 519
