Resource Partitioning

Gause’s exclusion principle has a very important conse-
quence: persistent competition between two species is rare
in natural communities. Either one species drives the other
to extinction, or natural selection reduces the competition
between them. When the late Princeton ecologist Robert
MacArthur studied five species of warblers, small insect-
eating forest songbirds, he found that they all appeared to
be competing for the same resources. However, when he
studied them more carefully, he found that each species ac-
tually fed in a different part of spruce trees and so ate dif-
ferent subsets of insects. One species fed on insects near
the tips of branches, a second within the dense foliage, a
third on the lower branches, a fourth high on the trees and
a fifth at the very apex of the trees. Thus, each species of
warbler had evolved so as to utilize a different portion of
the spruce tree resource. They subdivided the niche, parti-
tioning the available resource so as to avoid direct competi-
tion with one another.

Resource partitioning is often seen in similar species
that occupy the same geographical area. Such sympatric
species often avoid competition by living in different por-
tions of the habitat or by utilizing different food or other
resources (figure 25.4). This pattern of resource partition-
ing is thought to result from the process of natural selec-
tion causing initially similar species to diverge in resource
use in order to reduce competitive pressures.

Evidence for the role of evolution comes from compari-
son of species whose ranges are only partially overlapping.
Where the two species co-occur, they tend to exhibit
greater differences in morphology (the form and structure
of an organism) and resource use than do their allopatric

 

G. fuliginosal

50-4
Los Hermanos ‘Allopatric

Islets
25 Ll |
04

Daphne Major
Isla

G. fortis
Ab nd Hic.
ol

San Cristobal and
Santa Maria Islands

      
 

G. fuliginosal

 

Individuals in each size class (%)
g
L

   

15 ‘Sympatric

 

 

9 1 13
Finch beak depth (mm)

 

FIGURE 25.5

Character displacement in Darwin’s finches. These two species
of finches (genus Geospiza) have bills of similar size when
allopatric, but different size when sympatric.

populations. Called character displacement, the differ-
ences evident between sympatric species are thought to
have been favored by natural selection as a mechanism to
facilitate habitat partitioning and thus reduce competition.
Thus, the two Darwin’s finches in figure 25.5 have bills of
similar size where the finches are allopatric, each living on
an island where the other does not occur. On islands where
they are sympatric, the two species have evolved beaks of
different sizes, one adapted to larger seeds, the other to
smaller ones.

 

Sympatric species partition available resources,
reducing competition between them.

 

 

FIGURE 25.4

Resource partitioning among sympatric lizard species. Species of Anolis lizards on Caribbean islands partition their tree habitats in a
variety of ways. Some species of anoles occupy the canopy of trees (2), others use twigs on the periphery (6), and still others are found at
the base of the trunk (0). In addition, some use grassy areas in the open (d). When two species occupy the same part of the tree, they either
utilize different-sized insects as food or partition the thermal microhabitat; for example, one might only be found in the shade, whereas the
other would only bask in the sun. Most interestingly, the same pattern of resource partitioning has evolved independently on different

Caribbean islands.

518 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior
