Community Ecology

 

Concept Outline

25.1 Interactions among competing species shape
ecological niches.

The Realized Niche. Interspecific interactions often limit
the portion of their niche that they can actually use.

Gause and the Principle of Competitive Exclusion. No
two species can occupy the same niche indefinitely without
competition driving one to extinction.

Resource Partitioning. Species that live together
partition the available resources, reducing competition.
Detecting Interspecific Competition. Experiments are
often the best way to detect competition, but they have

their limitations.

25.2 Predators and their prey coevolve.

Predation and Prey Populations. Predators can limit the
size of populations and sometimes even eliminate a species
from a community.

 

Plant Defenses against Herbivores. Plants use chemicals
to defend themselves against animals trying to eat them. FIGURE 25.1
Animal Defenses against Predators. Animals defend

; 0 1 Communities involve interactions between disparate groups.
themselves with camouflage, chemicals, and stings.

This clownfish is one of the few species that can nestle safely
among the stinging tentacles of the sea anemone—a classic
example of a symbiotic relationship.

Mimicry. Sometimes a species copies the appearance of
another protected one.

25.3 Evolution sometimes fosters cooperation.

Coevolution and Symbiosis. Organisms have evolved Il the organisms that live together in a place are called
many adjustments and accommodations to living together. a community. The myriad species that inhabit a tropi-
Commensalism. Some organisms use others, neither cal rain forest are a community. Indeed, every inhabited

hurting or helping their benefactors. place on earth supports its own particular array of organ-

isms. Over time, the different species have made many
complex adjustments to community living (figure 25.1),
evolving together and forging relationships that give the
community its character and stability. Both competition
and cooperation have played key roles; in this chapter, we
will look at these and other factors in community ecology.

Mutualism. Often species interact in ways that benefit
both.

Parasitism. Sometimes one organism serves as the food
supply of another much smaller one.

Interactions among Ecological Processes. Multiple
processes may occur simultaneously within a community.

25.4 Ecological succession may increase species
richness.
Succession. Communities change through time.
The Role of Disturbance. Disturbances can disrupt

successional change. In some cases, moderate amounts of
disturbance increase species diversity.

515
