25.2 Predators and their prey coevolve.

Predation is the consuming of one organism by another.
In this sense, predation includes everything from a leopard
capturing and eating an antelope, to a deer grazing on
spring grass. When experimental populations are set up
under simple laboratory conditions, the predator often ex-
terminates its prey and then becomes extinct itself, having
nothing left to eat (figure 25.7). However, if refuges are
provided for the prey, its population will drop to low levels
but not to extinction. Low prey population levels will then
provide inadequate food for the predators, causing the
predator population to decrease. When this occurs, the
prey population can recover.

Predation and Prey Populations

In nature, predators can often have large effects on prey
populations. Some of the most dramatic examples involve
situations in which humans have either added or elimi-
nated predators from an area. For example, the elimina-
tion of large carnivores from much of the eastern United
States has led to population explosions of white-tailed
deer, which strip the habitat of all edible plant life. Simi-
larly, when sea otters were hunted to near extinction on
the western coast of the United States, sea urchin popula-
tions exploded.

Conversely, the introduction of rats, dogs, and cats to
many islands around the world has led to the decimation
of native faunas. Populations of Galapagos tortoises on
several islands are endangered, for example, by intro-
duced rats, dogs, and cats, which eat eggs and young tor-
toises. Similarly, several species of birds and reptiles have
been eradicated by rat predation from New Zealand and
now only occur on a few offshore islands that the rats
have not reached. In addition, on Stephens Island, near
New Zealand, every individual of the now extinct
Stephen Island wren was killed by a single lighthouse
keeper’s cat!

A classic example of the role predation can play in a
community involves the introduction of prickly pear cac-
tus to Australia in the nineteenth century. In the absence
of predators, the cactus spread rapidly, by 1925 occupy-
ing 12 million hectares of rangeland in an impenetrable
morass of spines that made cattle ranching difficult. To
control the cactus, a predator from its natural habitat in
Argentina, the moth Cactoblastis cactorum, was introduced
beginning in 1926. By 1940, cactus populations had been
decimated, and it now generally occurs in small
populations.

 

 

Predation and Evolution

Predation provides strong selective pressures on prey popu-
lations. Any feature that would decrease the probability of

520 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Paramecium
2
§
3
2
6
5
3
€
5
Zz
0 1 2 3 4 5
Time (days)
FIGURE 25.7

Predator-prey in the microscopic world. When the predatory
Didinium is added to a Paramecium population, the numbers of
Didinium initially rise, while the numbers of Paramecium steadily
fall. When the Paramecium population is depleted, however, the
Didinium individuals also die.

capture should be strongly favored. In the next three pages,
we discuss a number of defense mechanisms in plants and
animals. In turn, the evolution of such features will cause
natural selection to favor counteradaptations in predator
populations. In this way, a coevolutionary arms race may
ensue in which predators and prey are constantly evolving
better defenses and better means of circumventing these
defenses.

One example comes from the fossil record of molluscs
and gastropods and their predators. During the Mesozoic
period (approximately 65 to 225 million years ago), new
forms of predatory fish and crustaceans evolved that were
able to crush or tear open shells. As a result, a variety of de-
fensive measures evolved in molluscs and gastropods, in-
cluding thicker shells, spines, and shells too smooth for
predators to be able to grasp. In turn, these adaptations
may have pressured predators to evolve ever more effective
predatory adaptations and tactics.

 

Predation can have substantial effects on prey
populations. As a result prey species often evolve
defensive adaptations.

 
