Animal Defenses against Predators

Some animals that feed on plants rich in secondary com-
pounds receive an extra benefit. When the caterpillars of
monarch butterflies feed on plants of the milkweed family,
they do not break down the cardiac glycosides that protect
these plants from herbivores. Instead, the caterpillars con-
centrate and store the cardiac glycosides in fat bodies; they
then pass them through the chrysalis stage to the adult and
even to the eggs of the next generation. The incorporation
of cardiac glycosides thus protects all stages of the monarch
life cycle from predators. A bird that eats a monarch but-
terfly quickly regurgitates it (figure 25.9) and in the future
avoids the conspicuous orange-and-black pattern that char-
acterizes the adult monarch. Some birds, however, appear
to have acquired the ability to tolerate the protective chem-
icals. These birds eat the monarchs.

Defensive Coloration

Many insects that feed on milkweed plants are brightly col-
ored; they advertise their poisonous nature using an eco-
logical strategy known as warning coloration, or apose-
matic coloration. Showy coloration is characteristic of
animals that use poisons and stings to repel predators,
while organisms that lack specific chemical defenses are sel-
dom brightly colored. In fact, many have cryptic col-
oration—color that blends with the surroundings and thus
hides the individual from predators (figure 25.10). Camou-
flaged animals usually do not live together in groups be-
cause a predator that discovers one individual gains a valu-
able clue to the presence of others.

Chemical Defenses

Animals also manufacture and use a startling array of sub-
stances to perform a variety of defensive functions. Bees,
wasps, predatory bugs, scorpions, spiders, and many other
arthropods use chemicals to defend themselves and to kill
their prey. In addition, various chemical defenses have
evolved among marine animals and the vertebrates, includ-
ing venomous snakes, lizards, fishes, and some birds. The
poison-dart frogs of the family Dendrobatidae produce
toxic alkaloids in the mucus that covers their brightly col-
ored skin (figure 25.11). Some of these toxins are so power-
ful that a few micrograms will kill a person if injected into
the bloodstream. More than 200 different alkaloids have
been isolated from these frogs, and some are playing im-
portant roles in neuromuscular research. There is an inten-
sive investigation of marine animals, algae, and flowering
plants for new drugs to fight cancer and other diseases, or
as sources of antibiotics.

 

Animals defend themselves against predators with
warning coloration, camouflage, and chemical defenses
such as poisons and stings.

 

522 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 25.9

A blue jay learns that monarch butterflies taste bad. (a) This
cage-reared jay had never seen a monarch butterfly before it tried
eating one. (b) The same jay regurgitated the butterfly a few
minutes later. This bird will probably avoid trying to capture all
orange-and-black insects in the future.

 

FIGURE 25.10
Cryptic coloration. An inchworm caterpillar (Necophora quernaria)
(hanging from the upper twig) closely resembles a twig.

 

FIGURE 25.11

Vertebrate chemical defenses. Frogs of the family
Dendrobatidae, abundant in the forests of Latin America, are
extremely poisonous to vertebrates. Dendrobatids advertise their
toxicity with aposematic coloration, as shown here.
