Gause and the Principle of
Competitive Exclusion

In classic experiments carried out in 1934 and 1935, Russ-
ian ecologist G. F. Gause studied competition among three
species of Paramecium, a tiny protist. All three species grew
well alone in culture tubes, preying on bacteria and yeasts
that fed on oatmeal suspended in the culture fluid (figure
25.32). However, when Gause grew P. aurelia together with
P. caudatum in the same culture tube, the numbers of P.
caudatum always declined to extinction, leaving P. aurelia
the only survivor (figure 25.3). Why? Gause found P. au-
relia was able to grow six times faster than its competitor P.
caudatum because it was able to better utilize the limited
available resources, an example of exploitative competition.

From experiments such as this, Gause formulated what
is now called the principle of competitive exclusion.
This principle states that if two species are competing for a
limited resource, the species that uses the resource more ef-
ficiently will eventually eliminate the other locally—no two
species with the same niche can coexist when resources are
limiting.

Niche Overlap

In a revealing experiment, Gause challenged Paramecium
caudatum—the defeated species in his earlier experiments—
with a third species, P. bursaria. Because he expected these
two species to also compete for the limited bacterial food
supply, Gause thought one would win out, as had happened
in his previous experiments. But that’s not what happened.
Instead, both species survived in the culture tubes; the

paramecia found a way to divide the food resources. How
did they do it? In the upper part of the culture tubes, where
the oxygen concentration and bacterial density were high,
P. caudatum dominated because it was better able to feed on
bacteria. However, in the lower part of the tubes, the lower
oxygen concentration favored the growth of a different po-
tential food, yeast, and P. bursaria was better able to eat this
food. The fundamental niche of each species was the whole
culture tube, but the realized niche of each species was only
a portion of the tube. Because the niches of the two species
did not overlap too much, both species were able to sur-
vive. However, competition did have a negative effect on
the participants (figure 25.3c). When grown without a com-
petitor, both species reached densities three times greater
than when they were grown with a competitor.

Competitive Exclusion

Gause’s principle of competitive exclusion can be restated
to say that mo two species can occupy the same niche indefinitely
when resources are limiting. Certainly species can and do co-
exist while competing for some of the same resources. Nev-
ertheless, Gause’s theory predicts that when two species
coexist on a long-term basis, either resources must not be
limited or their niches will always differ in one or more fea-
tures; otherwise, one species will outcompete the other and
the extinction of the second species will inevitably result, a
process referred to as competitive exclusion.

 

If resources are limiting, no two species can occupy the
same niche indefinitely without competition driving one
to extinction.

 

 

FIGURE 25.3
Competitive exclusion
among three species of
Paramecium. In the
microscopic world,
Paramecium is a ferocious
predator. Paramecia eat by

 

200:

150.

100.

   

 

50 P. bursaria

 

 

 

Population density
(measured by volume)

ingesting their prey; their
cell membranes surround
bacterial or yeast cells,

TTTTTTITTITTT
0 4 8 12 16 20 24
Days

 

=

 

   

easel ei eal T
8 12.16 20 24 o 4
Days

ie ee ea
12.16 20 24
Days

je
TT
4

ee

 

forming a food vacuole

 

containing the prey cell.

(a) In his experiments, Gause found that three species
of Paramecium grew well alone in culture tubes. (b)
But Paramecium caudatum would decline to extinction
when grown with P. aurelia because they shared the
same realized niche, and P. aurelia outcompeted P.
caudatum for food resources. (c) However, P. candatum
and P. bursaria were able to coexist because the two
have different realized niches and thus avoided
competition.

Population density
(measured by volume)

 

iS

 

e P.caudatum
e P. bursaria

e P. caudatum
e P. aurelia

 

 

 

 

Chapter 25. Community Ecology 517
