Disaccharides. Many familiar sugars like sucrose are
“double sugars,” two monosaccharides joined by a covalent
bond (figure 3.23). Called disaccharides, they often play a
role in the transport of sugars, as we will discuss shortly.

Polysaccharides. Polysaccharides are macromolecules
made up of monosaccharide subunits. Starch is a polysac-
charide used by plants to store energy. It consists entirely of
glucose molecules, linked one after another in long chains.
Cellulose is a polysaccharide that serves as a structural
building material in plants. It too consists entirely of glucose
molecules linked together into chains, and special enzymes
are required to break the links.

Sugar Isomers

Glucose is not the only sugar with the formula CsH20¢.
Other common six-carbon sugars such as fructose and ga-
lactose also have this same empirical formula (figure 3.24).
These sugars are isomers, or alternative forms, of glucose.
Even though isomers have the same empirical formula,
their atoms are arranged in different ways; that is, their
three-dimensional structures are different. These structural
differences often account for substantial functional differ-
ences between the isomers. Glucose and fructose, for exam-
ple, are structural isomers. In fructose, the double-bonded
oxygen is attached to an internal carbon rather than to a
terminal one. Your taste buds can tell the difference, as
fructose tastes much sweeter than glucose, despite the fact
that both sugars have the same chemical composition. This
structural difference also has an important chemical conse-
quence: the two sugars form different polymers.

Unlike fructose, galactose has the same bond structure as
glucose; the only difference between galactose and glucose
is the orientation of one hydroxyl group. Because the hy-
droxyl group positions are mirror images of each other,

CH,OH CHZOH
°. ro}
HAY H H
OH HAoKH HO
HO CH,OH
HOH OH H
Glucose Fructose
Sucrose
CH,OH
CH,OH HA, OOH
OH oO.
‘i OH HAL
OH oH
H H HOH
HOH Glucose
Galactose
Lactose

FIGURE 3.23
Disaccharides. Sugars like sucrose and lactose are disaccharides,
composed of two monosaccharides linked by a covalent bond.

galactose and glucose are called stereoisomers. Again, this
seemingly slight difference has important consequences, as
this hydroxyl group is often involved in creating polymers
with distinct functions, such as starch (energy storage) and
cellulose (structural support).

 

Sugars are among the most important energy-storage
molecules in organisms, containing many energy-storing
C—H bonds. The structural differences among sugar
isomers can confer substantial functional differences
upon the molecules.

 

Fructose
4
H—C—OH
FIGURE 3.24 |
Isomers and stereoisomers. Glucose, c=o0
fructose, and galactose are isomers with the en
empirical formula CoFi20.. A structural |
isomer of glucose, such as fructose, has H mi —OH
identical chemical groups bonded to different H—c—oH
carbon atoms, while a stereoisomer of glucose, I
such as galactose, has identical chemical groups i= § —OH
bonded to the same carbon atoms but in H

different orientations.

54 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

Glucose Galactose
'
c=o c=o
Structural H —b—on H—G—0n
on SMeteaisomer od
oer oe
n—b—cx ae
H—¢—on ror
y y
