Plant Defenses against
Herbivores

Plants have evolved many mecha-
nisms to defend themselves from her-
bivores. The most obvious are mor-
phological defenses: thorns, spines,
and prickles play an important role in
discouraging browsers, and plant
hairs, especially those that have a
glandular, sticky tip, deter insect her-

Re.

bivores. Some plants, such as grasses, ®)

deposit silica in their leaves, both
strengthening and protecting them-
selves. If enough silica is present in
their cells, these plants are simply too
tough to eat.

FIGURE 25.8

cabbage butterfly.
Chemical Defenses

Significant as these morphological adaptations are, the
chemical defenses that occur so widely in plants are even
more crucial. Best known and perhaps most important in
the defenses of plants against herbivores are secondary
chemical compounds. These are distinguished from pri-
mary compounds, which are regular components of the
major metabolic pathways, such as respiration. Many
plants, and apparently many algae as well, contain very
structurally diverse secondary compounds that are either
toxic to most herbivores or disturb their metabolism
greatly, preventing, for example, the normal development
of larval insects. Consequently, most herbivores tend to
avoid the plants that possess these compounds.

The mustard family (Brassicaceae) is characterized by a
group of chemicals known as mustard oils. These are the
substances that give the pungent aromas and tastes to
such plants as mustard, cabbage, watercress, radish, and
horseradish. The same tastes we enjoy signal the presence
of chemicals that are toxic to many groups of insects. Sim-
ilarly, plants of the milkweed family (Asclepiadaceae) and
the related dogbane family (Apocynaceae) produce a
milky sap that deters herbivores from eating them. In ad-
dition, these plants usually contain cardiac glycosides,
molecules named for their drastic effect on heart function
in vertebrates.

The Evolutionary Response of Herbivores

Certain groups of herbivores are associated with each fam-
ily or group of plants protected by a particular kind of sec-
ondary compound. These herbivores are able to feed on
these plants without harm, often as their exclusive food
source. For example, cabbage butterfly caterpillars (sub-
family Pierinae) feed almost exclusively on plants of the
mustard and caper families, as well as on a few other small
families of plants that also contain mustard oils (figure

 

(b)

Insect herbivores are well suited to their hosts. (a) The green caterpillars of the cabbage
butterfly, Pieris rapae, are camouflaged on the leaves of cabbage and other plants on which
they feed. Although mustard oils protect these plants against most herbivores, the cabbage
butterfly caterpillars are able to break down the mustard oil compounds. (0) An adult

25.8). Similarly, caterpillars of monarch butterflies and
their relatives (subfamily Danainae) feed on plants of the
milkweed and dogbane families. How do these animals
manage to avoid the chemical defenses of the plants, and
what are the evolutionary precursors and ecological conse-
quences of such patterns of specialization?

We can offer a potential explanation for the evolution
of these particular patterns. Once the ability to manufac-
ture mustard oils evolved in the ancestors of the caper and
mustard families, the plants were protected for a time
against most or all herbivores that were feeding on other
plants in their area. At some point, certain groups of in-
sects—for example, the cabbage butterflies—evolved the
ability to break down mustard oils and thus feed on these
plants without harming themselves. Having developed
this ability, the butterflies were able to use a new resource
without competing with other herbivores for it. Often, in
groups of insects such as cabbage butterflies, sense organs
have evolved that are able to detect the secondary com-
pounds that their food plants produce. Clearly, the rela-
tionship that has formed between cabbage butterflies and
the plants of the mustard and caper families is an example
of coevolution.

 

‘The members of many groups of plants are protected
from most herbivores by their secondary compounds.
Once the members of a particular herbivore group
evolve the ability to feed on them, these herbivores gain
access to a new resource, which they can exploit
without competition from other herbivores.

 

Chapter 25 Community Ecology 521
