 

@ (b)
FIGURE 25.23

(2)

Primary succession at Alaska’s Glacier Bay. (a) The sides of the glacier have been retreating at a rate of some 8 meters a year, leaving
behind exposed soil from which nitrogen and other minerals have been leached out. The first invaders of these exposed sites are pioneer
moss species with nitrogen-fixing mutualistic microbes. Within 20 years, young alder shrubs take hold. (b) Rapidly fixing nitrogen, they
soon form dense thickets. As soil nitrogen levels rise, (¢) spruce crowd out the mature alders, forming a forest.

The Role of Disturbance

Disturbances often interrupt the succession of plant com-
munities. Depending on the magnitude of the disturbance,
communities may revert to earlier stages of succession or
even, in extreme cases, begin at the earliest stages of pri-
mary succession. Disturbances severe enough to disrupt
succession include calamities such as forest fires, drought,
and floods. Animals may also cause severe disruptions.
Gypsy moths can devastate a forest by consuming its trees.
Unregulated deer populations may grow explosively, the
deer overgrazing and so destroying the forest they live in,
in the same way too many cattle overgraze a pasture by eat-
ing all available grass down to the ground.

 

Intermediate Disturbance Hypothesis

In some cases, disturbance may act to increase the species
richness of an area. According to the intermediate disturbance
hypothesis, communities experiencing moderate amounts of
disturbance will have higher levels of species richness than
communities experiencing either little or great amounts of
disturbance. Two factors could account for this pattern. First,
in communities in which moderate amounts of disturbance
occur, patches of habitat will exist at different successional
stages. Thus, within the area as a whole, species diversity will
be greatest because the full range of species—those character-
istic of all stages of succession—will be present. For example,
a pattern of intermittent episodic disturbance that produces
gaps in the rain forest (like when a tree falls) allows invasion
of the gap by other species (figure 25.24). Eventually, the
species inhabiting the gap will go through a successional se-
quence, one tree replacing another, until a canopy tree species
comes again to occupy the gap. But if there are lots of gaps of
different ages in the forest, many different species will coexist,
some in young gaps, others in older ones.

Second, moderate levels of disturbance may prevent
communities from reaching the final stages of succession,

FIGURE 25.24
Intermediate
disturbance. A
single fallen tree
creates a small
light gap in the
tropical rain forest
of Panama. Such
gaps play a key
role in maintaining
the high species
diversity of the
rain forest.

 

in which a few dominant competitors eliminate most of the
other species. On the other hand, too much disturbance
might leave the community continually in the earliest
stages of succession, when species richness is relatively low.

Ecologists are increasingly realizing that disturbance is
the norm, rather than the exception, in many communities.
As a result, the idea that communities inexorably move
along a successional trajectory culminating in the develop-
ment of a climax community is no longer widely accepted.
Rather, predicting the state of a community in the future
may be difficult because the unpredictable occurrence of
disturbances will often counter successional changes. Un-
derstanding the role that disturbances play in structuring
communities is currently an important area of investigation
in ecology.

 

Succession is often disrupted by natural or human
causes. In some cases, intermediate levels of
disturbance may maximize the species richness of a
community.

 

Chapter 25 Community Ecology 531
