 

   

 

 

 

 

 

7 * Rodents removed
Rodents not removed
60-]
°
@
2
2
8 404
=
5
S
3g =I
8 20
5
Zz |
T T T T T
Oct74. May75 Sep75 May76 Aug76 Jul 77
Sampling periods
FIGURE 25.19

Change in ant population size after the removal of rodents.
Ants initially increased in population size relative to ants in the
enclosures from which rodents weren’t removed, but then these
ant populations declined.

the enclosure walls, so once removed, rodents couldn’t get
back in), ant populations first increased, but then declined
(figure 25.19). The initial increase was the expected result
of removing a competitor; why did it reverse? The answer
reveals the intricacies of natural ecosystems (figure 25.20).
Rodents prefer large seeds, whereas ants prefer smaller
seeds. Further, in this system plants with large seeds are
competitively superior to plants with small seeds. Thus, the
removal of rodents leads to an increase in the number of
plants with large seeds, which reduces the number of small
seeds available to ants, which thus leads to a decline in ant
populations. Thus, the effect of rodents on ants is compli-
cated: a direct negative effect of resource competition and
an indirect, positive effect mediated by plant competition.

Keystone Species

Species that have particularly strong effects on the compo-
sition of communities are termed keystone species.
Predators, such as the starfish, can often serve as keystone
species by preventing one species from outcompeting oth-
ers, thus maintaining high levels of species richness in a
community.

There are, however, a wide variety of other types of key-
stone species. Some species manipulate the environment in
ways that create new habitats for other species. Beavers, for
example, change running streams into small impound-
ments, changing the flow of water and flooding areas (fig-
ure 25.21). Similarly, alligators excavate deep holes at the
bottoms of lakes. In times of drought, these holes are the
only areas in which water remains, thus allowing aquatic
species that otherwise would perish to persist until the

drought ends and the lake refills.

Small seeds

 

FIGURE 25.20

Rodent-ant interactions. Rodents and ants both eat seeds, so the
presence of rodents has a negative effect on ants and vice versa.
However, the presence of rodents has a negative effect on large
seeds. In turn, the number of plants with large seeds has a negative
effect on plants that produce small seeds. Hence, the presence of
rodents should increase the number of small seeds. In turn, the
number of small seeds has a positive effect on ant populations.
Thus, indirectly, the presence of rodents has a positive effect on
ant population size.

 

FIGURE 25.21

Example of a keystone species. Beavers, by constructing dams
and transforming flowing streams into ponds, create new habitats
for many plant and animal species.

 

Many different processes are likely to be occurring
simultaneously within communities. Only by
understanding how these processes interact will we be
able to understand how communities function.

 

Chapter 25 Community Ecology 529
