Parasitism

Parasitism may be regarded as a special form of symbiosis
in which the predator, or parasite, is much smaller than the
prey and remains closely associated with it. Parasitism is
harmful to the prey organism and beneficial to the parasite.
The concept of parasitism seems obvious, but individual in-
stances are often surprisingly difficult to distinguish from
predation and from other kinds of symbiosis.

External Parasites

Parasites that feed on the exterior surface of an organism
are external parasites, or ectoparasites. Many instances of
external parasitism are known (figure 25.16). Lice, which
live on the bodies of vertebrates—mainly birds and mam-
mals—are normally considered parasites. Mosquitoes are
not considered parasites, even though they draw food from
birds and mammals in a similar manner to lice, because
their interaction with their host is so brief.

Parasitoids are insects that lay eggs on living hosts.
This behavior is common among wasps, whose larvae feed
on the body of the unfortunate host, often killing it.

Internal Parasites

Vertebrates are parasitized internally by endoparasites,
members of many different phyla of animals and protists.
Invertebrates also have many kinds of parasites that live
within their bodies. Bacteria and viruses are not usually
considered parasites, even though they fit our definition
precisely.

Internal parasitism is generally marked by much more
extreme specialization than external parasitism, as shown
by the many protist and invertebrate parasites that infect
humans. The more closely the life of the parasite is linked
with that of its host, the more its morphology and behavior
are likely to have been modified during the course of its
evolution. The same is true of symbiotic relationships of all
sorts. Conditions within the body of an organism are dif-
ferent from those encountered outside and are apt to be
much more constant. Consequently, the structure of an in-
ternal parasite is often simplified, and unnecessary arma-
ments and structures are lost as it evolves.

Brood Parasitism

Not all parasites consume the body of their host. In brood
parasitism, birds like cowbirds and European cuckoos lay
their eggs in the nests of other species. The host parents
raise the brood parasite as if it were one of their own
clutch, in many cases investing more in feeding the im-
poster than in feeding their own offspring (figure 25.17).
The brood parasite reduces the reproductive success of the
foster parent hosts, so it is not surprising that in some cases
natural selection has fostered the hosts’ ability to detect

 

FIGURE 25.16

An external parasite. The flowering plant dodder (Cuscuta) is a
parasite and has lost its chlorophyll and its leaves in the course of
its evolution. Because it is heterotrophic, unable to manufacture
its own food, dodder obtains its food from the host plants it
grows on.

 

FIGURE 25.17

Brood parasitism. This bird is feeding a cuckoo chick in its nest.
The cuckoo chick is larger than the adult bird, but the bird does
not recognize that the cuckoo is not its own offspring. Cuckoo
mothers sneak into the nests of other birds and lay an egg,
entrusting the care of their offspring to an unwitting bird of
another species.

parasite eggs and reject them. What is more surprising is
that in many other species, the ability to detect parasite
eggs has not evolved.

 

In parasitism, one organism serves as a host to another
organism, usually to the host’s disadvantage.

 

Chapter 25 Community Ecology 527
