Commensalism

Commensalism is a symbiotic rela-
tionship that benefits one species
and neither hurts nor helps the
other. In nature, individuals of one
species are often physically attached
to members of another. For example,
epiphytes are plants that grow on the
branches of other plants. In general,
the host plant is unharmed, while the
epiphyte that grows on it benefits.
Similarly, various marine animals,
such as barnacles, grow on other,
often actively moving sea animals
like whales and thus are carried pas-
sively from place to place. These
“passengers” presumably gain more
protection from predation than they
would if they were fixed in one place,
and they also reach new sources of
food. The increased water circulation

FIGURE 25.14

that such animals receive as their
host moves around may be of great
importance, particularly if the pas-
sengers are filter feeders. The ga-
metes of the passenger are also more
widely dispersed than would be the
case otherwise.

Examples of Commensalism

The best-known examples of commensalism involve the re-
lationships between certain small tropical fishes and sea
anemones, marine animals that have stinging tentacles (see
chapter 44). These fish have evolved the ability to live
among the tentacles of sea anemones, even though these
tentacles would quickly paralyze other fishes that touched
them (figure 25.14). The anemone fishes feed on the detri-
tus left from the meals of the host anemone, remaining un-
injured under remarkable circumstances.

On land, an analogous relationship exists between birds
called oxpeckers and grazing animals such as cattle or rhi-
noceros. The birds spend most of their time clinging to the
animals, picking off parasites and other insects, carrying
out their entire life cycles in close association with the host
animals.

When Is Commensalism Commensalism?

In each of these instances, it is difficult to be certain
whether the second partner receives a benefit or not;
there is no clear-cut boundary between commensalism

 

Commensalism in the sea. Clownfishes, such as this Amphiprion perideraion in Guam,
often form symbiotic associations with sea anemones, gaining protection by remaining
among their tentacles and gleaning scraps from their food. Different species of anemones
secrete different chemical mediators; these attract particular species of fishes and may be
toxic to the fish species that occur symbiotically with other species of anemones in the same
habitat. There are 26 species of clownfishes, all found only in association with sea
anemones; 10 species of anemones are involved in such associations, so that some of the
anemone species are host to more than one species of clownfish.

and mutualism. For instance, it may be advantageous to
the sea anemone to have particles of food removed from
its tentacles; it may then be better able to catch other
prey. Similarly, while often thought of as commensalism,
the association of grazing mammals and gleaning birds is
actually an example of mutualism. The mammal benefits
by having parasites and other insects removed from its
body, but the birds also benefit by gaining a dependable
source of food.

On the other hand, commensalism can easily transform
itself into parasitism. For example, oxpeckers are also
known to pick not only parasites, but also scabs off their
grazing hosts. Once the scab is picked, the birds drink the
blood that flows from the wound. Occasionally, the cumu-
lative effect of persistent attacks can greatly weaken the
herbivore, particularly when conditions are not favorable,
such as during droughts.

 

Commensalism is the benign use of one organism by
another.

 

Chapter 25. Community Ecology 525
