Linking Sugars Together

Transport Disaccharides

Most organisms transport sugars within their bodies. In
humans, the glucose that circulates in the blood does so as
a simple monosaccharide. In plants and many other or-
ganisms, however, glucose is converted into a transport
form before it is moved from place to place within the or-
ganism. In such a form it is less readily metabolized (used
for energy) during transport. Transport forms of sugars
are commonly made by linking two monosaccharides to-
gether to form a disaccharide (Greek di, “two”). Disaccha-
rides serve as effective reservoirs of glucose because the
normal glucose-utilizing enzymes of the organism cannot
break the bond linking the two monosaccharide subunits.
Enzymes that can do so are typically present only in the
tissue where the glucose is to be used.

Transport forms differ depending on which monosac-
charides link to form the disaccharide. Glucose forms
transport disaccharides with itself and many other mono-
saccharides, including fructose and galactose. When glu-
cose forms a disaccharide with its structural isomer, fruc-
tose, the resulting disaccharide is sucrose, or table sugar
(figure 3.25). Sucrose is the form in which most plants
transport glucose and the sugar that most humans (and
other animals) eat. Sugarcane is rich in sucrose, and so are
sugar beets.

When glucose is linked to its stereoisomer, galactose,
the resulting disaccharide is /actose, or milk sugar. Many
mammals supply energy to their young in the form of lac-
tose. Adults have greatly reduced levels of lactase, the en-
zyme required to cleave lactose into its two monosaccha-
ride components, and thus cannot metabolize lactose as
efficiently. Most of the energy that is channeled into lac-
tose production is therefore reserved for their offspring.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Storage Polysaccharides

Organisms store the metabolic energy contained in
monosaccharides by converting them into disaccharides,
such as maltose (figure 3.25), which are then linked togeth-
er into insoluble forms that are deposited in specific storage
areas in their bodies. These insoluble polysaccharides are
long polymers of monosaccharides formed by dehydration
synthesis. Plant polysaccharides formed from glucose are
called starches. Plants store starch as granules within chlo-
roplasts and other organelles. Because glucose is a key met-
abolic fuel, the stored starch provides a reservoir of energy
available for future needs. Energy for cellular work can be
retrieved by hydrolyzing the links that bind the glucose
subunits together.

The starch with the simplest structure is amylose, which
is composed of many hundreds of glucose molecules linked
together in long, unbranched chains. Each linkage occurs
between the number 1 carbon of one glucose molecule and
the number 4 carbon of another, so that amylose is, in ef-
fect, a longer form of maltose. The long chains of amylose
tend to coil up in water (figure 3.264), a property that ren-
ders amylose insoluble. Potato starch is about 20% amy-
lose. When amylose is digested by a sprouting potato plant
(or by an animal that eats a potato), enzymes first break it
into fragments of random length, which are more soluble
because they are shorter. Baking or boiling potatoes has the
same effect, breaking the chains into fragments. Another
enzyme then cuts these fragments into molecules of mal-
tose. Finally, the maltose is cleaved into two glucose mole-
cules, which cells are able to metabolize.

Most plant starch, including the remaining 80% of po-
tato starch, is a somewhat more complicated variant of
amylose called amylopectin (figure 3.26b). Pectins are
branched polysaccharides. Amylopectin has short, linear
amylose branches consisting of 20 to 30 glucose subunits.

 

 

 

 

CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH
}—_o, O. \—o. 0.
OH * ~ OH
HO OH HO CHOH |, HO ° CH,OH
0
OH OH OH OH
Glucose Fructose Sucrose FIGURE 325
@) How disaccharides form.
Some disaccharides are used
CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH to transport glucose from one
a) }—_o )—_o9 0. part of an organism’s body to
+ another; one example is
HoNGH OH HO Niel Dw \gNOH o-\QH OH sucrose (a), which is found in
1 1 1,0 1 sugarcane. Other
ciucose Glucose OH OH disaccharides, such as maltose
lucose ucose Maltose in grain (6), are used for
(b)

storage.

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 55
