25.3

Coevolution and Symbiosis

The plants, animals, protists, fungi, and bacteria that live
together in communities have changed and adjusted to
one another continually over a period of millions of
years. For example, many features of flowering plants
have evolved in relation to the dispersal of the plant’s ga-
metes by animals (figure 25.13). These animals, in turn,
have evolved a number of special traits that enable them
to obtain food or other resources efficiently from the
plants they visit, often from their flowers. While doing
so, the animals pick up pollen, which they may deposit on
the next plant they visit, or seeds, which may be left else-
where in the environment, sometimes a great distance
from the parental plant.

Such interactions, which involve the long-term, mutual
evolutionary adjustment of the characteristics of the mem-
bers of biological communities, are examples of coevolu-
tion, a phenomenon we have already seen in predator-prey
interactions.

Symbiosis Is Widespread

Another type of coevolution involves symbiotic relation-
ships in which two or more kinds of organisms live to-
gether in often elaborate and more-or-less permanent re-
lationships. All symbiotic relationships carry the potential
for coevolution between the organisms involved, and in
many instances the results of this coevolution are fascinat-
ing. Examples of symbiosis include Jichens, which are asso-
ciations of certain fungi with green algae or cyanobacte-
ria. Lichens are discussed in more detail in chapter 36.
Another important example are mycorrbizae, the associa-
tion between fungi and the roots of most kinds of plants.
The fungi expedite the plant’s absorption of certain nutri-
ents, and the plants in turn provide the fungi with carbo-
hydrates. Similarly, root nodules that occur in legumes
and certain other kinds of plants contain bacteria that fix
atmospheric nitrogen and make it available to their host
plants.

In the tropics, leafcutter ants are often so abundant
that they can remove a quarter or more of the total leaf
surface of the plants in a given area. They do not eat
these leaves directly; rather, they take them to under-
ground nests, where they chew them up and inoculate
them with the spores of particular fungi. These fungi are
cultivated by the ants and brought from one specially
prepared bed to another, where they grow and repro-
duce. In turn, the fungi constitute the primary food of
the ants and their larvae. The relationship between leaf-
cutter ants and these fungi is an excellent example of
symbiosis.

524 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

Evolution sometimes fosters cooperation.

 

FIGURE 25.13

Pollination by bat. Many flowers have coevolved with other
species to facilitate pollen transfer. Insects are widely known as
pollinators, but they’re not the only ones. Notice the cargo of
pollen on the bat’s snout.

Kinds of Symbiosis

The major kinds of symbiotic relationships include (1)
commensalism, in which one species benefits while the
other neither benefits nor is harmed; (2) mutualism, in
which both participating species benefit; and (3) para-
sitism, in which one species benefits but the other is
harmed. Parasitism can also be viewed as a form of preda-
tion, although the organism that is preyed upon does not
necessarily die.

 

Coevolution is a term that describes the long-term
evolutionary adjustments of species to one another. In
symbiosis two or more species interact closely, with at
least one species benefitting.

 
