Mimicry

During the course of their evolution, many species have
come to resemble distasteful ones that exhibit aposematic
coloration. The mimic gains an advantage by looking like

the distasteful model. Two types of mimicry have been
identified: Batesian and Miillerian mimicry.

Batesian Mimicry

Batesian mimicry is named for Henry Bates, the British
naturalist who first brought this type of mimicry to gen-
eral attention in 1857. In his journeys to the Amazon re-
gion of South America, Bates discovered many instances
of palatable insects that resembled brightly colored, dis-
tasteful species. He reasoned that the mimics would be
avoided by predators, who would be fooled by the dis-
guise into thinking the mimic actually is the distasteful
model.

Many of the best-known examples of Batesian mimicry
occur among butterflies and moths. Obviously, predators in
systems of this kind must use visual cues to hunt for their
prey; otherwise, similar color patterns would not matter to
potential predators. There is also increasing evidence indi-
cating that Batesian mimicry can also involve nonvisual
cues, such as olfaction, although such examples are less ob-
vious to humans.

The kinds of butterflies that provide the models in Bate-
sian mimicry are, not surprisingly, members of groups
whose caterpillars feed on only one or a few closely related
plant families. The plant families on which they feed are
strongly protected by toxic chemicals. The model butter-
flies incorporate the poisonous molecules from these plants
into their bodies. The mimic butterflies, in contrast, belong
to groups in which the feeding habits of the caterpillars are
not so restricted. As caterpillars, these butterflies feed on a
number of different plant families unprotected by toxic
chemicals.

One often-studied mimic among North American but-
terflies is the viceroy, Limenitis archippus (figure 25.122).
This butterfly, which resembles the poisonous monarch,
ranges from central Canada through much of the United
States and into Mexico. The caterpillars feed on willows
and cottonwoods, and neither caterpillars nor adults were
thought to be distasteful to birds, although recent findings
may dispute this. Interestingly, the Batesian mimicry seen
in the adult viceroy butterfly does not extend to the cater-
pillars: viceroy caterpillars are camouflaged on leaves, re-
sembling bird droppings, while the monarch’s distasteful
caterpillars are very conspicuous.

Miillerian Mimicry
Another kind of mimicry, Miillerian mimicry, was named
for German biologist Fritz Miiller, who first described it in

1878. In Miillerian mimicry, several unrelated but pro-
tected animal species come to resemble one another (figure

 

Danaus plexippus Limenitis archippus

(a) Batesian mimicry: Monarch (Danaus) is poisonous; viceroy
(Limenitis) is palatable mimic

 

a A

 

Heliconius erato Heliconius melpomene

‘,

   

Sh

Heliconius cydno

Ge ©
Heliconius sapho
(b) Miillerian mit

 

cry: two pairs of mimics; all are distasteful

FIGURE 25.12

Mimicry. (a) Batesian mimicry. Monarch butterflies (Danaus
plexippus) are protected from birds and other predators by the
cardiac glycosides they incorporate from the milkweeds and
dogbanes they feed on as larvae. Adult monarch butterflies
advertise their poisonous nature with warning coloration. Viceroy
butterflies (Limenitis archippus) are Batesian mimics of the
poisonous monarch. (b) Pairs of Miillerian mimics. Heliconius erato
and H. melpomene are sympatric, and H. sapho and H. cydno are
sympatric. All of these butterflies are distasteful. They have
evolved similar coloration patterns in sympatry to minimize
predation; predators need only learn one pattern to avoid.

25.120). If animals that resemble one another are all poiso-
nous or dangerous, they gain an advantage because a preda-
tor will learn more quickly to avoid them. In some cases,
predator populations even evolve an innate avoidance of
species; such evolution may occur more quickly when mul-
tiple dangerous prey look alike.

In both Batesian and Miillerian mimicry, mimic and
model must not only look alike but also act alike if preda-
tors are to be deceived. For example, the members of sev-
eral families of insects that closely resemble wasps behave
surprisingly like the wasps they mimic, flying often and ac-
tively from place to place.

 

In Batesian mimicry, unprotected species resemble
others that are distasteful. Both species exhibit
aposematic coloration. In Miillerian mimicry, two or
more unrelated but protected species resemble one
another, thus achieving a kind of group defense.

 

Chapter 25. Community Ecology 523
