Interactions among Ecological
Processes

We have seen the different ways in which species within a
community can interact with each other. In nature, how-
ever, more than one type of interaction usually occurs at
the same time. In many cases, the outcome of one type of
interaction is modified or even reversed when another type
of interaction is also occurring.

Predation Reduces Competition

When resources are limiting, a superior competitor can
eliminate other species from a community. However,
predators can prevent or greatly reduce competitive ex-
clusion by reducing the numbers of individuals of compet-
ing species. A given predator may often feed on two,
three, or more kinds of plants or animals in a given com-
munity. The predator’s choice depends partly on the rela-
tive abundance of the prey options. In other words, a
predator may feed on species A when it is abundant and
then switch to species B when A is rare. Similarly, a given
prey species may be a primary source of food for increas-
ing numbers of species as it becomes more abundant. In
this way, superior competitors may be prevented from
outcompeting other species.

Such patterns are often characteristic of biological
communities in marine intertidal habitats. For example,
in preying selectively on bivalves, sea stars prevent bi-
valves from monopolizing such habitats, opening up
space for many other organisms (figure 25.18). When sea
stars are removed from a habitat, species diversity falls
precipitously, the seafloor community coming to be dom-
inated by a few species of bivalves. Because predation
tends to reduce competition in natural communities, it is
usually a mistake to attempt to eliminate a major preda-
tor such as wolves or mountain lions from a community.
The result is to decrease rather than increase the biologi-
cal diversity of the community, the opposite of what is
intended.

Parasitism May Counter Competition

Parasites may effect sympatric species differently and thus
influence the outcome of interspecific interactions. In a
classic experiment, Thomas Park of the University of
Chicago investigated interactions between two flour bee-
tles, Tribolium castaneum and T. confusum with a parasite,
Adelina. In the absence of the parasite, T. castaneum is dom-
inant and T. confusum normally goes extinct. When the par-
asite is present, however, the outcome is reversed and T.
castaneum perishes. Similar effects of parasites in natural
systems have been observed in many species. For example,
in the Anolis lizards of St. Maarten mentioned previously,
the competitively inferior species is resistant to malaria,
whereas the other species is highly susceptible. Only in

528 Part VIT_ Ecology and Behavior

 

(b)

FIGURE 25.18

Predation reduces competition. (a) In a controlled experiment
in a coastal ecosystem, an investigator removed a key predator
(Pisaster). (b) In response, fiercely competitive mussels exploded in
growth, effectively crowding out seven other indigenous species.

areas in which the malaria parasite occurs are the two
species capable of coexisting.

Indirect Effects

In some cases, species may not directly interact, yet the
presence of one species may effect a second species by way
of interactions with a third species. Such effects are termed
indirect effects. For example, in the Chihuahuan Desert,
rodents and ants both eat seeds. Thus, one might expect
them to compete with each other. However, when all ro-
dents were completely removed from large enclosures (un-
like the experiment discussed above, there were no holes in
