25.4 Ecological succession may increase species richness.

Even when the climate of an area remains stable year after
year, ecosystems have a tendency to change from simple to
complex in a process known as succession. This process is
familiar to anyone who has seen a vacant lot or cleared
woods slowly become occupied by an increasing number of
plants, or a pond become dry land as it is filled with vegeta-
tion encroaching from the sides.

Succession

If a wooded area is cleared and left alone, plants will
slowly reclaim the area. Eventually, traces of the clearing
will disappear and the area will again be woods. This kind
of succession, which occurs in areas where an existing
community has been disturbed, is called secondary
succession.

In contrast, primary succession occurs on bare, lifeless
substrate, such as rocks, or in open water, where organisms
gradually move into an area and change its nature. Primary
succession occurs in lakes left behind after the retreat of
glaciers, on volcanic islands that rise above the sea, and on
land exposed by retreating glaciers (figure 25.22). Primary
succession on glacial moraines provides an example (figure
25.23). On bare, mineral-poor soil, lichens grow first,
forming small pockets of soil. Acidic secretions from the
lichens help to break down the substrate and add to the ac-
cumulation of soil. Mosses then colonize these pockets of
soil, eventually building up enough nutrients in the soil for
alder shrubs to take hold. Over a hundred years, the alders
build up the soil nitrogen levels until spruce are able to
thrive, eventually crowding out the alder and forming a
dense spruce forest.

Ina similar example, an oligotrophic lake—one poor in
nutrients—may gradually, by the accumulation of organic
matter, become eutrophic—rich in nutrients. As this oc-
curs, the composition of communities will change, first in-
creasing in species richness and then declining.

Primary succession in different habitats often eventually
arrives at the same kinds of vegetation—vegetation charac-
teristic of the region as a whole. This relationship led
American ecologist F. E. Clements, at about the turn of the
century, to propose the concept of a final climax commu-
nity. With an increasing realization that (1) the climate
keeps changing, (2) the process of succession is often very
slow, and (3) the nature of a region’s vegetation is being de-
termined to an increasing extent by human activities, ecol-
ogists do not consider the concept of “climax community”
to be as useful as they once did.

Why Succession Happens

Succession happens because species alter the habitat and
the resources available in it in ways that favor other species.

530 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

 

 

5
oe
in
ae
as Nitrogen
te in forest floor
e
SE
>
a
ge
Zz Nitrogen
in mineral soil
Pioneer mosses Invading aider Spruce
alders thickets forest
FIGURE 25.22

Plant succession produces progressive changes in the soil.
Initially, the glacial moraine at Glacier Bay, Alaska, portrayed in
figure 25.23, had little soil nitrogen, but nitrogen-fixing alders led
to a buildup of nitrogen in the soil, encouraging the subsequent
growth of the conifer forest. Letters in the graph correspond to
photographs in parts / and ¢ of figure 25.23.

Three dynamic concepts are of critical importance in the
) P' P
process: tolerance, inhibition, and facilitation.

1. Tolerance. Early successional stages are character-
ized by weedy r-selected species that are tolerant of
the harsh, abiotic conditions in barren areas.

2. Facilitation. The weedy early successional stages in-
troduce local changes in the habitat that favor other,
less weedy species. Thus, the mosses in the Glacier
Bay succession convert nitrogen to a form that allows
alders to invade. The alders in turn lower soil pH as
their fallen leaves decompose, and spruce and hem-
lock, which require acidic soil, are able to invade.

3. Inhibition. Sometimes the changes in the habitat
caused by one species, while favoring other species,
inhibit the growth of the species that caused them.
Alders, for example, do not grow as well in acidic soil
as the spruce and hemlock that replace them.

Over the course of succession, the number of species
typically increases as the environment becomes more hos-
pitable. In some cases, however, as ecosystems mature,
more K-selected species replace r-selected ones, and supe-
rior competitors force out other species, leading ultimately
to a decline in species richness.

 

Communities evolve to have greater total biomass and
species richness in a process called succession.

 
