Mutualism

Mutualism is a symbiotic relationship among organisms in
which both species benefit. Examples of mutualism are of
fundamental importance in determining the structure of bi-
ological communities. Some of the most spectacular exam-
ples of mutualism occur among flowering plants and their
animal visitors, including insects, birds, and bats. As we will
see in chapter 37, during the course of their evolution, the
characteristics of flowers have evolved in large part in rela-
tion to the characteristics of the animals that visit them for
food and, in doing so, spread their pollen from individual
to individual. At the same time, characteristics of the ani-
mals have changed, increasing their specialization for ob-
taining food or other substances from particular kinds of
flowers.

Another example of mutualism involves ants and aphids.
Aphids, also called greenflies, are small insects that suck
fluids from the phloem of living plants with their piercing
mouthparts. They extract a certain amount of the sucrose
and other nutrients from this fluid, but they excrete much
of it in an altered form through their anus. Certain ants
have taken advantage of this—in effect, domesticating the
aphids. The ants carry the aphids to new plants, where they
come into contact with new sources of food, and then con-
sume as food the “honeydew” that the aphids excrete.

 
  

 

Ants and Acacias

A particularly striking example of mutualism involves ants
and certain Latin American species of the plant genus Aca-
cia. In these species, certain leaf parts, called stipules, are
modified as paired, hollow thorns. The thorns are inhab-
ited by stinging ants of the genus Pseudomyrmex, which do
not nest anywhere else (figure 25.15). Like all thorns that
occur on plants, the acacia horns serve to deter herbivores.

At the tip of the leaflets of these acacias are unique, pro-
tein-rich bodies called Beltian bodies, named after the
nineteenth-century British naturalist Thomas Belt. Beltian
bodies do not occur in species of Acacia that are not inhab-
ited by ants, and their role is clear: they serve as a primary
food for the ants. In addition, the plants secrete nectar
from glands near the bases of their leaves. The ants con-
sume this nectar as well, feeding it and the Beltian bodies
to their larvae.

Obviously, this association is beneficial to the ants, and
one can readily see why they inhabit acacias of this grou
The ants and their larvae are protected within the swollen
thorns, and the trees provide a balanced diet, including the
sugar-rich nectar and the protein-rich Beltian bodies.
What, if anything, do the ants do for the plants?

Whenever any herbivore lands on the branches or leaves
of an acacia inhabited by ants, the ants, which continually
patrol the acacia’s branches, immediately attack and devour
the herbivore. The ants that live in the acacias also help
their hosts to compete with other plants. The ants cut away

526 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 25.15

Mutualism: ants and acacias. Ants of the genus Psendomyrmex
live within the hollow thorns of certain species of acacia trees in
Latin America. The nectaries at the bases of the leaves and the
Beltian bodies at the ends of the leaflets provide food for the ants.
‘The ants, in turn, supply the acacias with organic nutrients and
protect the acacia from herbivores.

any branches of other plants that touch the acacia in which
they are living. They create, in effect, a tunnel of light
through which the acacia can grow, even in the lush decid-
uous forests of lowland Central America. In fact, when an
ant colony is experimentally removed from a tree, the aca-
cia is unable to compete successfully in this habitat. Finally,
the ants bring organic material into their nests. The parts
they do not consume, together with their excretions, pro-
vide the acacias with an abundant source of nitrogen.

As with commensalism, however, things are not always
as they seem. Ant-acacia mutualisms also occur in Africa. In
Kenya, several species of acacia ants occur, but only one
species occurs on any tree. One species, Crematogaster ni-
griceps, is competitively inferior to two of the other species.
To prevent invasion by other ant species, C. nigriceps
prunes the branches of the acacia, preventing it from com-
ing into contact with branches of other trees, which would
serve as a bridge for invaders. Although this behavior is
beneficial to the ant, it is detrimental to the tree, as it de-
stroys the tissue from which flowers are produced, essen-
tially sterilizing the tree. In this case, what has initially
evolved as a mutualistic interaction has instead become a
parasitic one.

 

Mutualism involves cooperation between species, to the
mutual benefit of both.

 
