26.2 Comparative psychology focuses on how learning influences behavior.

Learning

While cthologists were attempting to explain behavior as
an instinctive process, comparative psychologists focused
heavily on learning as the major element that shapes behav-
ior. These behavioral scientists, working primarily on rats
in laboratory settings, identified the ways in which animals
learn. Learning is any modification of behavior that results
from experience rather than maturation.

The simplest type of learning, nonassociative learn-
ing, does not require an animal to form an association
between two stimuli or between a stimulus and a re-
sponse. One form of nonassociative learning is habitua-
tion, which can be defined as a decrease in response to a
repeated stimulus that has no positive or negative conse-
quences (that is, no reinforcement). In many cases, the
stimulus evokes a strong response when it is first encoun-
tered, but the magnitude of the response gradually de-
clines with repeated exposure. For example, young birds
see many types of objects moving overhead. At first, they
may respond by crouching down and remaining still.
Some of the objects, like falling leaves or members of
their own species flying by, are seen very frequently and
have no positive or negative consequence to the
nestlings. Over time, the young birds may habituate to
such stimuli and stop responding. Thus, habituation can
be thought of as learning not to respond to a stimulus.
Being able to ignore unimportant stimuli is critical to an
animal confronting a barrage of stimuli in a complex en-
vironment. Another form of nonassociative learning is
sensitization, characterized by an increased responsive-
ness to a stimulus. Sensitization is essentially the opposite
of habituation.

A change in behavior that involves an association be-
tween two stimuli or between a stimulus and a response is
termed associative learning (figure 26.7). The behavior
is modified, or conditioned, through the association.
This form of learning is more complex than habituation
or sensitization. The two major types of associative learn-
ing are called classical conditioning and operant con-

ditioning; they differ in the way the associations are
established.

Classical Conditioning

In classical conditioning, the paired presentation of two
different kinds of stimuli causes the animal to form an asso-
ciation between the stimuli. Classical conditioning is also
called Pavlovian conditioning, after Russian psychologist
Ivan Pavlov, who first described it. Pavlov presented meat
powder, an unconditioned stimulus, to a dog and noted that
the dog responded by salivating, an unconditioned response. If
an unrelated stimulus, such as the ringing of a bell, was

538 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

 

(b)

 

(2)

FIGURE 26.7

Learning what is edible. Associative learning is involved in
predator-prey interactions. (@) A naive toad is offered a
bumblebee as food. (}) The toad is stung, and (c) subsequently
avoids feeding on bumblebees or any other insects having their
black-and-yellow coloration. The toad has associated the
appearance of the insect with pain, and modifies its behavior.
