26.1

Approaches to the Study of Behavior

During the past two decades, the study of animal behavior
has emerged as an important and diverse science that
bridges several disciplines within biology. Evolution, ecol-
ogy, physiology, genetics, and psychology all have natural
and logical linkages with the study of behavior, each disci-
pline adding a different perspective and addressing differ-
ent questions.

Research in animal behavior has made major contribu-
tions to our understanding of nervous system organization,
child development, and human communication, as well as
the process of speciation, community organization, and the
mechanism of natural selection itself. The study of the be-
havior of nonhuman animals has led to the identification of
general principles of behavior, which have been applied,
often controversially, to humans. This has changed the way
we think about the origins of human behavior and the way
we perceive ourselves.

Behavior can be defined as the way an organism re-
sponds to stimuli in its environment. These stimuli might
be as simple as the odor of food. In this sense, a bacterial
cell “behaves” by moving toward higher concentrations of
sugar. This behavior is very simple and well-suited to the
life of bacteria, allowing these organisms to live and repro-
duce. As animals evolved, they occupied different environ-
ments and faced diverse problems that affected their sur-
vival and reproduction. Their nervous systems and
behavior concomitantly became more complex. Nervous
systems perceive and process information concerning envi-
ronmental stimuli and trigger adaptive motor responses,
which we see as patterns of behavior.

When we observe animal behavior, we can explain it in
two different ways. First, we might ask how it all works,
that is, how the animal’s senses, nerve networks, or inter-
nal state provide a physiological basis for the behavior. In
this way, we would be asking a question of proximate
causation. To analyze the proximate cause of behavior,
we might measure hormone levels or record the impulse
activity of neurons in the animal. We could also ask why
the behavior evolved, that is, what is its adaptive value?
This is a question concerning ultimate causation. To
study the ultimate cause of a behavior, we would attempt
to determine how it influenced the animal’s survival or re-
productive success. Thus, a male songbird may sing dur-
ing the breeding season because it has a level of the
steroid sex hormone, testosterone, which binds to hor-
mone receptors in the brain and triggers the production
of song; this would be the proximate cause of the male
bird’s song. But the male sings to defend a territory from

534 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

Ethology focuses on the natural history of behavior.

other males and to attract a female to reproduce; this is
the ultimate, or evolutionary, explanation for the male’s
vocalization.

The study of behavior has had a long history of contro-
versy. One source of controversy has been the question of
whether behavior is determined more by an individual’s
genes or its learning and experience. In other words, is be-
havior the result of nature (instinct) or nurture (experi-
ence)? In the past, this question has been considered an “ei-
ther/or” proposition, but we now know that instinct and
experience both play significant roles, often interacting in
complex ways to produce the final behavior. The scientific
study of instinct and learning, as well as their interrelation-
ship, has led to the growth of several scientific disciplines,
including ethology, behavioral genetics, behavioral neuro-
science, and comparative psychology.

Ethology

Ethology is the study of the natural history of behavior.
Farly ethologists (figure 26.2) were trained in zoology and
evolutionary biology, fields that emphasize the study of an-
imal behavior under natural conditions. As a result of this
training, they believed that behavior is largely instinctive,
or innate—the product of natural selection. Because behav-
ior is often stereotyped (appearing in the same way in dif-
ferent individuals of a species), they argued that it must be
based on preset paths in the nervous system. In their view,
these paths are structured from genetic blueprints and
cause animals to show a relatively complete behavior the
first time it is produced.

The early ethologists based their opinions on behav-
iors such as egg retrieval by geese. Geese incubate their
eggs in a nest. If a goose notices that an egg has been
knocked out of the nest, it will extend its neck toward the
egg, get up, and roll the egg back into the nest with a
side-to-side motion of its neck while the egg is tucked
beneath its bill. Even if the egg is removed during re-
trieval, the goose completes the behavior, as if driven by
a program released by the initial sight of the egg outside
the nest. According to ethologists, egg retrieval behavior
is triggered by a sign stimulus (also called a key stimu-
lus), the appearance of an egg out of the nest; a compo-
nent of the goose’s nervous system, the innate releasing
mechanism, provides the neural instructions for the
motor program, or fixed action pattern (figure 26.3).
More generally, the sign stimulus is a “signal” in the en-
vironment that triggers a behavior. The innate releasing
mechanism is the sensory mechanism that detects the sig-
nal, and the fixed action pattern is the stereotyped act.
