FIGURE 26.6
Genetically caused
defect in maternal
care. (2) In mice,
normal mothers take
very good care of their
offspring, retrieving

them if they move iat he
away and crouching pes
over them. (6) Mothers oe
with the mutant fosB 1 te

allele perform neither
of these behaviors,
leaving their pups
exposed. () Amount of
time female mice were
observed crouching in
a nursing posture over
offspring.

(@ Proportion of pups
retrieved when they ¢
were experimentally ~
moved. =

 

Single Gene Effects on Behavior

The maze-learning, hybrid, and identical twins studies just
described suggest genes play a role in behavior, but recent
research has provided much greater detail on the genetic
basis of behavior. In the fruit fly Drosophila, and in mice,
many mutations have been associated with particular be-
havioral abnormalities.

In fruit flies, for example, individuals that possess alter-
native alleles for a single gene differ greatly in their feeding
behavior as larvae; larvae with one allele move around a
great deal as they eat, whereas individuals with the alterna-
tive allele move hardly at all. A wide variety of mutations at
other genes are now known in Drosophila which affect al-
most every aspect of courtship behavior.

The ways in which genetic differences affect behavior
have been worked out for several mouse genes. For example,
some mice with one mutation have trouble remembering in-
formation that they learned two days earlier about where ob-
jects are located. This difference appears to result because
the mutant mice do not produce the enzyme ©-calcium-
calmodulin-dependent kinase II, which plays an important
role in the functioning of a part of the brain, the hippocam-
pus, that is important for spatial learning.

Modern molecular biology techniques allow the role of
genetics in behavior to be investigated with ever greater
precision. For example, male mice genetically engineered
(as “knock-outs”) to lack the ability to synthesize nitric
oxide, a brain neurotransmitter, show increased aggressive
behavior.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

144
2
Em 12
$2 104
ae
oe 64
25
ge 4
S 24
0 |
()
1.0
os
0.64
o44
0.24

 

 

 

 

 

fosBalleles present

[By fosBalleles absent

 

 

 

 

 

 

A particularly fascinating breakthrough occurred in
1996, when scientists using the knock-out technique dis-
covered a new gene, fosB, that seems to determine whether
or not female mice will nurture their young. Females with
both fosB alleles knocked out will initially investigate their
newborn babies, but then ignore them, in stark contrast to
the caring and protective maternal behavior provided by
normal females (figure 26.6).

The cause of this inattentiveness appears to result from a
chain reaction. When mothers of new babies initially in-
spect them, information from their auditory, olfactory, and
tactile senses are transmitted to the hypothalamus, where
‘fosB alleles are activated, producing a particular protein,
which in turn activates other enzymes and genes that affect
the neural circuitry within the hypothalamus. These modi-
fications within the brain cause the female to react mater-
nally toward her offspring. In contrast, in mothers lacking
the fosB alleles, this reaction is stopped midway. No protein
is activated, the brain’s neural circuitry is not rewired, and
maternal behavior does not result.

As these genetic techniques are becoming used more
widely, the next few years should see similar dramatic ad-
vances in our knowledge of how genes affect behavior in
many varieties of humans.

 

The genetic basis of behavior is supported by artificial
selection experiments, hybridization studies, and
studies on the behavior of mutants. Research has also
identified specific genes that control behavior.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 537
