Interaction between Instinct and Learning

The work of Peter Marler and his colleagues on the ac-
quisition of courtship song by white-crowned sparrows
provides an excellent example of the interaction between
instinct and learning in the development of behavior.
Courtship songs are sung by mature males and are
species-specific. By rearing male birds in soundproof in-
cubators provided with speakers and microphones, Marler
could control what a bird heard as it matured and record
the song it produced as an adult. He found that white-
crowned sparrows that heard no song at all during devel-
opment, or that heard only the song of a different species,
the song sparrow, sang a poorly developed song as adults
(figure 26.11). But birds that heard the song of their own
species, or that heard the songs of both the white-crowned
sparrow and the song sparrow, sang a fully developed,
white-crowned sparrow song as adults. These results sug-
gest that these birds have a genetic template, or instinc-
tive program, that guides them to learn the appropriate
song. During a critical period in development, the tem-
plate will accept the correct song as a model. Thus, song
acquisition depends on learning, but only the song of the
correct species can be learned. The genetic template for
learning is selective. However, learning plays a prominent
role as well. If a young white-crowned sparrow is surgi-
cally deafened after it hears its species’ song during the
critical period, it will also sing a poorly developed song as
an adult. Therefore, the bird must “practice” listening to
himself sing, matching what he hears to the model his
template has accepted.

Although this explanation of song development stood
unchallenged for many years, recent research has shown
that white-crowned sparrow males can learn another
species’ song under certain conditions. If a live male
strawberry finch is placed in a cage next to a young male
sparrow, the young sparrow will learn to sing the straw-
berry finch’s song! This finding indicates that social
stimuli may be more effective than a tape-recorded song
in overriding the innate program that guides song devel-
opment. Furthermore, the males of some bird species
have no opportunity to hear the song of their own
species. In such cases, it appears that the males instinc-
tively “know” their own species’ song. For example, cuck-
oos are brood parasites; females lay their eggs in the nest
of another species of bird, and the young that hatch are
reared by the foster parents (figure 26.12). When the
cuckoos become adults, they sing the song of their own
species rather than that of their foster parents. Because
male brood parasites would most likely hear the song of
their host species during development, it is adaptive for
them to ignore such “incorrect” stimuli. They hear no
adult males of their own species singing, so no correct
song models are available. In these species, natural selec-
tion has programmed the male with a genetically guided
song.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aL
_ 3 ann WW
= 1b . . . .
ze @
z of 7
ft iY 9
“Yas arene cans uo
° o 05 1.0 15 2.0
Time (s)
FIGURE 26.11

Song development in birds. (2) The sonograms of songs
produced by male white-crowned sparrows that had been exposed
to their own species’ song during development are different from
()) those of male sparrows that heard no song during rearing. This
difference indicates that the genetic program itself is insufficient
to produce a normal song.

 

FIGURE 26.12

Brood parasite. Cuckoos lay their eggs in the nests of other
species of birds. Because the young cuckoos (large bird to the
right) are raised by a different species (like this meadow pipit,
smaller bird to the left), they have no opportunity to /earn the
cuckoo song; the cuckoo song they later sing is innate.

 

Interactions that occur during sensitive phases of
imprinting are critical to normal behavioral
development. Physical contact plays an important role
in the development of psychological well-being and
growth.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 541
