The Physiology of

Behavior

The early ethologists’ emphasis on in-
stinct sometimes overlooked the internal
factors that control behavior. If asked
why a male bird defends a territory and
sings only during the breeding season,
they would answer that a bird sings
when it is in the right motivational state
or mood and has the appropriate drive.
But what do these phrases mean in terms
of physiological control mechanisms?

Part of our understanding of the
physiological control of behavior has
come from the study of reproductive
behavior. Animals show reproductive
behaviors such as courtship only during
the breeding season. Research on
lizards, birds, rats, and other animals
has revealed that hormones play an im-
portant role in these behaviors. Changes
in day length trigger the secretion of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone by the
hypothalamus, which stimulates the re-
lease of the gonadotropins, follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone, by the anterior pi-
tuitary gland. These hormones cause
the development of reproductive tissues
to ready the animal for breeding. The
gonadotropins, in turn, stimulate the se-
cretion of the steroid sex hormones, es-
trogens and progesterone in females and
testosterone in males. The sex hor-
mones act on the brain to trigger behav-
iors associated with reproduction. For
example, birdsong and territorial behav-
ior depend upon the level of testos-
terone in the male, and the receptivity
of females to male courtship depends
upon estrogen levels.

Hormones have both organizational
and activational effects. In the example
of birdsong given above, estrogen in the
male causes the development of the
song system, which is composed of
neural tissue in the forebrain and its
connections to the spinal cord and the

syrinx (a structure like our larynx that allows the bird to
sing). Early in a male’s development, the gonads produce
estrogen, which stimulates neuron growth in the brain. In

Research on the physiology of repro-
ductive behavior shows that there are
important interactions among hor-
mones, behavior, and stimuli in both the
physical and social environments of an
individual. Daniel Lehrman’s work on
reproduction in ring doves provides an
excellent example of how these factors
interact (figure 26.13). Male courtship
behavior is controlled by testosterone
and related steroid hormones. The
male’s behavior causes the release of
FSH in the female, and FSH promotes
the growth of the ovarian follicles (see
chapter 59). The developing follicles re-
lease estrogens, which affect other re-
productive tissues. Nest construction
follows after one or two days. The pres-
ence of the nest then triggers the secre-
tion of progesterone in the female, initi-
ating incubation behavior after the egg
is laid. Feeding occurs once the eggs
hatch, and this behavior is also hormon-
ally controlled.

The research of Lehrman and his
colleagues paved the way for many addi-
tional investigations in behavioral en-
docrinology, the study of the hormonal
regulation of behavior. For example,
male Anolis lizards begin courtship after
a seasonal rise in temperature, and the
male’s courtship is needed to stimulate
the growth of ovarian follicles in the fe-
male. These and other studies demon-
strate the interactive effects of the phys-
ical environment (for example,
temperature and day length) and the so-

 

 

(5) cial environment (such as the presence
of a nest and the courtship display of a

FIGURE 26.13 mate) on the hormonal condition of an
Hormonal control of reproductive animal. Hormones are, therefore, a
behavior. Reproduction in the ring dove proximate cause of behavior. To control
involves a sequence of behaviors reproductive behavior, they must be re-

regulated by hormones: (7) courtship
and copulation; (2) nest building; (3) egg
laying; (4) incubation; and (5) feeding
crop milk to the young after they hatch.

leased when the conditions are most fa-
vorable for the growth of young. Other
behaviors, such as territoriality and
dominance behavior, also have hormonal
correlates.

Hormones may interact with neuro-
transmitters to alter behavior. Estrogen affects the neuro-
transmitter serotonin in female mice, and may be in part
responsible for the “mood swings” experienced by some

the mature male, the testes produce testosterone, which human females during the menstrual cycle.

activates song. Thus, the development of the neural sys-
tems that are responsible for behavior is first organized,

then activated by hormones.

542 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

Hormones have important influences on reproductive
and social behavior.

 
