presented at the same time as the meat powder, over re-
peated trials the dog would salivate in response to the
sound of the bell alone. The dog had learned to associate
the unrelated sound stimulus with the meat powder stimu-
lus. Its response to the sound stimulus was, therefore, con-
ditioned, and the sound of the bell is referred to as a condi-
tioned stimulus.

Operant Conditioning

In operant conditioning, an animal learns to associate its
behavioral response with a reward or punishment. Ameri-
can psychologist B. F. Skinner studied operant condition-
ing in rats by placing them in an apparatus that came to be
called a “Skinner box.” As the rat explored the box, it
would occasionally press a lever by accident, causing a pel-
let of food to appear. At first, the rat would ignore the
lever, eat the food pellet, and continue to move about.
Soon, however, it learned to associate pressing the lever
(the behavioral response) with obtaining food (the reward).
When it was hungry, it would spend all its time pressing
the lever. This sort of trial-and-error learning is of major
importance to most vertebrates.

Comparative psychologists used to believe that any two
stimuli could be linked in classical conditioning and that
animals could be conditioned to perform any learnable
behavior in response to any stimulus by operant condi-
tioning. As you will see below, this view has changed.
Today, it is thought that instinct guides learning by deter-
mining what type of information can be learned through
conditioning.

Instinct

It is now clear that some animals have innate predisposi-
tions toward forming certain associations. For example, if a
rat is offered a food pellet at the same time it is exposed to
X rays (which /ater produces nausea), the rat will remember
the taste of the food pellet but not its size. Conversely, if a
rat is given a food pellet at the same time an electric shock
is delivered (which immediately causes pain), the rat will re-
member the size of the pellet but not its taste. Similarly, pi-
geons can learn to associate food with colors but not with
sounds; on the other hand, they can associate danger with
sounds but not with colors.

These examples of learning preparedness demon-
strate that what an animal can learn is biologically influ-
enced—that is, learning is possible only within the bound-
aries set by instinct. Innate programs have evolved
because they underscore adaptive responses. Rats, which
forage at night and have a highly developed sense of
smell, are better able to identify dangerous food by its
odor than by its size or color. The seed a pigeon eats may
have a distinctive color that the pigeon can see, but it
makes no sound the pigeon can hear. The study of learn-

 

FIGURE 26.8

‘The Clark’s nutcracker has an extraordinary memory. A
Clark’s nutcracker can remember the locations of up to 2000 seed
caches months after hiding them. After conducting experiments,
scientists have concluded that the birds use features of the
landscape and other surrounding objects as spatial references to
memorize the locations of the caches.

ing has expanded to include its ecological significance, so
that we are now able to consider the “evolution of learn-
ing.” An animal’s ecology, of course, is key to understand-
ing what an animal is capable of learning. Some species of
birds, like Clark’s nutcracker, feed on seeds. Birds store
seeds in caches they bury when seeds are abundant so they
will have food during the winter. Thousands of seed
caches may be buried and then later recovered. One
would expect the birds to have an extraordinary spatial
memory, and this is indeed what has been found (figure
26.8). Clark’s nutcracker, and other seed-hoarding birds,
have an unusually large hippocampus, the center for
memory storage in the brain (see chapter 54).

 

Habituation and sensitization are simple forms of
learning in which there is no association between
stimuli and responses. In contrast, associative learning
(classical and operant conditioning) involves the
formation of an association between two stimuli or
between a stimulus and a response.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 539
