The Development of
Behavior

Behavioral biologists now recognize
that behavior has both genetic and
learned components, and the schools
of ethology and psychology are less
polarized than they once were. Thus
far in this chapter we have discussed
the influence of genes and learning
separately. As we will see, these factors
interact during development to shape
behavior.

Parent-Offspring Interactions

As an animal matures, it may form so-
cial attachments to other individuals or
form preferences that will influence
behavior later in life. This process,
called imprinting, is sometimes con-
sidered a type of learning. In filial im-
printing, social attachments form be-
tween parents and offspring. For
example, young birds of some species
begin to follow their mother within a
few hours after hatching, and their fol-
lowing response results in a bond be-
tween mother and young. However,
the young birds’ initial experience de-
termines how this imprint is estab-
lished. The German ethologist Kon-
rad Lorenz showed that birds will follow the first object
they see after hatching and direct their social behavior to-
ward that object. Lorenz raised geese from eggs, and when
he offered himself as a model for imprinting, the goslings
treated him as if he were their parent, following him duti-
fully (figure 26.9). Black boxes, flashing lights, and water-
ing cans can also be effective imprinting objects (figure
26.10). Imprinting occurs during a sensitive phase, or a
critical period (roughly 13 to 16 hours after hatching in
geese), when the success of imprinting is highest.

Several studies demonstrate that the social interactions
that occur between parents and offspring during the critical
period are key to the normal development of behavior. The
psychologist Harry Harlow gave orphaned rhesus monkey
infants the opportunity to form social attachments with two
surrogate “mothers,” one made of soft cloth covering a
wire frame and the other made only of wire. The infants
chose to spend time with the cloth mother, even if only the
wire mother provided food, indicating that texture and tac-
tile contact, rather than providing food, may be among the
key qualities in a mother that promote infant social attach-
ment. If infants are deprived of normal social contact, their
development is abnormal. Greater degrees of deprivation
lead to greater abnormalities in social behavior during

FIGURE 26.9

540 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

An unlikely parent. The eager goslings
following Konrad Lorenz think he is their
mother. He is the first object they saw
when they hatched, and they have used
him as a model for imprinting.

 

(b)

FIGURE 26.10

How imprinting is studied. Ducklings
will imprint on the first object they see,
even (q) a black box or (J) a white sphere.

childhood and adulthood. Studies on orphaned human in-
fants suggest that a constant “mother figure” is required for
normal growth and psychological development.

Recent research has revealed a biological need for the
stimulation that occurs during parent-offspring interactions
early in life. Female rats lick their pups after birth, and this
stimulation inhibits the release of an endorphin (see chap-
ter 56) that can block normal growth. Pups that receive
normal tactile stimulation also have more brain receptors
for glucocorticoid hormones, longer-lived brain neurons,
and a greater tolerance for stress. Premature human infants
who are massaged gain weight rapidly. These studies indi-
cate that the need for normal social interaction is based in
the brain and that touch and other aspects of contact be-
tween parents and offspring are important for physical as
well as behavioral development.

Sexual imprinting is a process in which an individual
learns to direct its sexual behavior at members of its own
species. Cross-fostering studies, in which individuals of
one species are raised by parents of another species, reveal
that this form of imprinting also occurs early in life. In
most species of birds, these studies have shown that the fos-
tered bird will attempt to mate with members of its foster
species when it is sexually mature.
