 

FIGURE 26.2

‘The founding fathers of ethology: Karl von Frisch, Konrad Lorenz, and Niko Tinbergen pioneered the study of behavioral
science. In 1973, they received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their path-making contributions. Von Frisch led the study
of honeybee communication and sensory biology. Lorenz focused on social development (imprinting) and the natural history of
aggression. Tinbergen examined the functional significance of behavior and was the first behavioral ecologist.

Similarly, a frog unfolds its long, sticky tongue at the
sight of a moving insect, and a male stickleback fish will
attack another male showing a bright red underside. Such
responses certainly appear to be programmed and in-
stinctive, but what evidence supports the ethological view
that behavior has an underlying neural basis?

Behavior as a Response to Stimuli in the
Environment

In the example of egg retrieval behavior in geese, a goose
must first perceive that an egg is outside of the nest. To re-
spond to this stimulus, it must convert one form of energy
which is an input to its visual system—the energy of pho-
tons of light—into a form of energy its nervous system can
understand and use to respond—the electrical energy of a
nerve impulse. Animals need to respond to other stimuli in
the environment as well. For an animal to orient from a
food source back to its nest, it might rely on the position of
the sun. To find a mate, an animal might use a particular
chemical scent. The electromagnetic energy of light and
the chemical energy of an odor must be converted to the
electrical energy of a nerve impulse. This is done through
transduction, the conversion of energy in the environment
to an action potential, and the first step in the processing of
stimuli perceived by the senses. For example, rhodopsin is
responsible for the transduction of visual stimuli.
Rhodopsin is made of cis-retinal and the protein opsin.
Light is absorbed by the visual pigment cis-retinal causing it

 

FIGURE 26.3

Lizard prey capture. The complex series of movements of the
tongue this chameleon uses to capture an insect represents a fixed
action pattern.

to change its shape to trans-retinal (see chapter 55). This in
turn changes the shape of the companion protein opsin,
and induces the first step in a cascade of molecular events
that finally triggers a nerve impulse. Sound, odor, and
tastes are transduced to nerve impulses by similar
processes.

 

Ethologists study behavior from an evolutionary
perspective, focusing on the neural basis of behaviors.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 535
