26

Animal Behavior

Concept Outline

26.1 Ethology focuses on the natural history of
behavior.

Approaches to the Study of Behavior. Field biologists
focus on evolutionary aspects of behavior.

Behavioral Genetics. At least some behaviors are
genetically determined.

26.2 Comparative psychology focuses on how learning
influences behavior.

Learning. Association plays a major role in learning.
The Development of Behavior. Parent-offspring
interactions play a key role in the development of behavior.
The Physiology of Behavior. Hormones influence many
behaviors, particularly reproductive ones.

Behavioral Rhythms. Many behaviors are governed by
innate biological clocks.

26.3 Communication is a key element of many animal
behaviors.
Courtship. Animals use many kinds of signals to court
one another.
Communication in Social Groups. Bees and other social
animals communicate in complex ways.

26.4 Migratory behavior presents many puzzles.
Orientation and Migration. Animals use many cues
from the environment to navigate during migrations.

26.5 To what degree animals “think” is a subject of
lively dispute.

Animal Cognition. It is not clear to what degree animals
“think.”

 

FIGURE 26.1

Rearing offspring involves complex behaviors. Living in groups
called prides makes lions better mothers. Females share the
responsibilities of nursing and protecting the pride’s young,
increasing the probability that the youngsters will survive into
adulthood.

rganisms interact with their environment in many

ways. To understand these interactions, we need to
appreciate both the internal factors that shape the way an
animal behaves, as well as aspects of the external environ-
ment that affect individuals and organisms. In this chapter,
we explore the mechanisms that determine an animal’s be-
havior (figure 26.1), as well as the ways in which behavior
develops in an individual. In the next chapter, we will con-
sider the field of behavioral ecology, which investigates
how natural selection has molded behavior through evolu-
tionary time.

533
