In some plants these chains are cross-
linked. The cross-links create an insol-
uble mesh of glucose, which can be de-
graded only by another kind of
enzyme. The size of the mesh differs
from plant to plant; in rice about 100
amylose chains, each with one or two
cross-links, forms the mesh.

The animal version of starch is gly-
cogen. Like amylopectin, glycogen is an
insoluble polysaccharide containing
branched amylose chains. In glycogen,
the average chain length is much
greater and there are more branches
than in plant starch (figure 3.262). Hu-
mans and other vertebrates store ex-
cess food energy as glycogen in the liv-
er and in muscle cells; when the
demand for energy in a tissue increas-
es, glycogen is hydrolyzed to release
glucose.

Nonfattening Sweets

Imagine a kind of table sugar that
looks, tastes, and cooks like the real
thing, but has no calories or harmful
side effects. You could eat mountains
of candy made from such sweeteners
without gaining weight. As Louis Pas-
teur discovered in the late 1800s, most
sugars are “right-handed” molecules,
in that the hydroxyl group that binds a
critical carbon atom is on the right
side. However, “left-handed” sugars,
in which the hydroxyl group is on the
left side, can be made readily in the
laboratory. These synthetic sugars are
mirror-image chemical twins of the
natural form, but the enzymes that
break down sugars in the human di-
gestive system can tell the difference.
To digest a sugar molecule, an enzyme
must first grasp it, much like a shoe
fitting onto a foot, and all of the
body’s enzymes are right-handed! A
left-handed sugar doesn’t fit, any more
than a shoe for the right foot fits onto
a left foot.

  

(b) Amylopectin

 

(0) Glycogen

FIGURE 3.26

Storage polysaccharides. Starches are long glucose polymers that store energy in plants.
(a) The simplest starches are long chains of maltose called amylose, which tend to coil up
in water. ()) Most plants contain more complex starches called amylopectins, which are
branched. (c) Animals store glucose in glycogen, which is more extensively branched than
amylopectin and contains longer chains of amylose.

The Latin word for “left” is /evo, and left-handed sugars
are called levo-, or 1-sugars. They do not occur in nature

except for trace amounts in red algae, snail eggs, and sea-
weed. Because they pass through the body without being
used, they can let diet-conscious sweet-lovers have their
cake and eat it, too. Nor will they contribute to tooth
decay because bacteria cannot metabolize them, either.

56 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

 

Starches are glucose polymers. Most starches are
branched and some are cross-linked. The branching
and cross-linking render the polymer insoluble and
protect it from degradation.

 
