Behavioral Genetics

In a famous experiment carried out in the 1940s, Robert
Tryon studied the ability of rats to find their way through
a maze with many blind alleys and only one exit, where a
reward of food awaited. Some rats quickly learned to zip
right through the maze to the food, making few incorrect
turns, while other rats took much longer to learn the cor-
rect path (figure 26.4). Tryon bred the fast learners with
one another to establish a “maze-bright” colony, and he
similarly bred the slow learners with one another to estab-
lish a “maze-dull” colony. He then tested the offspring in
each colony to see how quickly they learned the maze.
The offspring of maze-bright rats learned even more
quickly than their parents had, while the offspring of
maze-dull parents were even poorer at maze learning.
After repeating this procedure over several generations,
Tryon was able to produce two behaviorally distinct types
of rat with very different maze-learning abilities. Clearly
the ability to learn the maze was to some degree heredi-
tary, governed by genes passed from parent to offspring.
Furthermore, those genes were specific to this behavior,
as the two groups of rats did not differ in their ability to
perform other behavioral tasks, such as running a com-
pletely different kind of maze. Tryon’s research demon-
strates how a study can reveal that behavior has a herita-
ble component.

Further support for the genetic basis of behavior has
come from studies of hybrids. William Dilger of Cornell
University has examined two species of lovebird (genus
Agapornis), which differ in the way they carry twigs, paper,
and other materials used to build a nest. A. personata holds
nest material in its beak, while A. roseicollis carries material
tucked under its flank feathers (figure 26.5). When Dilger
crossed the two species to produce hybrids, he found that
the hybrids carry nest material in a way that seems inter-
mediate between that of the parents: they repeatedly shift
material between the bill and the flank feathers. Other
studies conducted on courtship songs in crickets and tree
frogs also demonstrate the intermediate nature of hybrid
behavior.

The role of genetics can also be seen in humans by
comparing the behavior of identical twins. Identical twins
are, as their name implies, genetically identical. How-
ever, most sets of identical twins are raised in the same
environment, so it is not possible to determine whether
similarities in behavior result from their genetic similar-
ity or from experiences shared as they grew up (the clas-
sic nature versus nurture debate). However, in some
cases, twins have been separated at birth. A recent study
of 50 such sets of twins revealed many similarities in per-
sonality, temperament, and even leisure-time activities,
even though the twins were often raised in very different
environments. These similarities indicate that genetics
plays a role in determining behavior even in humans, al-
though the relative importance of genetics versus envi-
ronment is still hotly debated.

536 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parental
generation
First
generation
Second ——
generation >
Fifth >
generation >»
Seventh [
generation
. 39 64 114 214
Quicker rats Total number of errors in
[J Slower rats negotiating the maze
(fourteen trials)
FIGURE 26.4

The genetics of learning. Tryon selected rats for their ability to
learn to run a maze and demonstrated that this ability is
influenced by genes. He tested a large group of rats, selected
those that ran the maze in the shortest time, and let them breed
with one another. He then tested their progeny and again selected
those with the quickest maze-running times for breeding. After
seven generations, he had succeeded in halving the average time
an inexperienced rat required to negotiate the maze. Parallel
“artificial selection” for slow running time more than doubled the
average running time.

 

FIGURE 26.5

Genetics of lovebird behavior. Lovebirds inherit the tendency to
carry nest material, such as these paper strips, under their flank
feathers.
