26.3 Communication is a key element of many animal behaviors.

Much of the research in animal behavior is devoted to ana-
lyzing the nature of communication signals, determining
how they are perceived, and identifying the ecological roles
they play and their evolutionary origins.

Courtship

During courtship, animals produce signals to communicate
with potential mates and with other members of their own
sex. A stimulus-response chain sometimes occurs, in
which the behavior of one individual in turn releases a be-
havior by another individual (figure 26.15).

Courtship Signaling

A male stickleback fish will defend the nest it builds on the
bottom of a pond or stream by attacking conspecific males
(that is, males of the same species) that approach the nest.
Niko Tinbergen studied the social releasers responsible for
this behavior by making simple clay models. He found that
a model’s shape and degree of resemblance to a fish were

ay
5

 

  

 

 

fe }
fies @ Female gives
head-up display
to male
J @ Male swims zigzag
i. to female and then
Sy leads her to nest
eh
a
@ Male shows ‘
»” female entrance ‘
i: os to nest “

  

FIGURE 26.15

@Female enters nest

 

unimportant; any model with a red underside (like the un-
derside of a male stickleback) could release the attack be-
havior. Tinbergen also used a series of clay models to
demonstrate that a male stickleback recognizes a female by
her abdomen, swollen with eggs.

Courtship signals are often species-specific, limiting com-
munication to members of the same species and thus play-
ing a key role in reproductive isolation. The flashes of fire-
flies (which are actually beetles) are such species-specific
signals. Females recognize conspecific males by their flash
pattern (figure 26.16), and males recognize conspecific fe-
males by their flash response. This series of reciprocal re-
sponses provides a continuous “check” on the species iden-
tity of potential mates.

Visual courtship displays sometimes have more than one
component. The male Anolis lizard extends and retracts his
fleshy and often colorful dewlap while perched on a branch
in his territory (figure 26.17). The display thus involves
both color and movement (the extension of the dewlap as
well as a series of lizard “push-ups”). To which component
of the display does the female respond? Experiments in
which the dewlap color is altered with ink show that color is
unimportant for some species; that is, a female can be
courted successfully by a male with an atypically colored
dewlap.

 

 

and spawns while
male stimulates tail

 

©Male enters nest a
and fertlizes eggs

   

A stimulus-response chain. Stickleback courtship involves a sequence of behaviors leading to the fertilization of eggs.

544 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior
