Structural
Carbohydrates

While some chains of sugars store en-
ergy, others serve as structural material
for cells.

Cellulose

For two glucose molecules to link to-
gether, the glucose subunits must be
the same form. Glucose can form a
ring in two ways, with the hydroxyl
group attached to the carbon where the

ring closes being locked into place ei- CH,OH

ther below or above the plane of the Oy

ring. If below, it is called the alpha «KB 4, 1
form, and if above, the beta form. All HO OH
of the glucose subunits of the starch HOH

chain are alpha-glucose. When a chain _ «. form of glucose
of glucose molecules consists of all (by
beta-glucose subunits, a polysaccharide

with very different properties results.

 

This structural polysaccharide is ce/- CH,OH

Iulose, the chief component of plant cell {OX 9H

walls (figure 3.27). Cellulose is chemi- “Kon 4 A’
ae : : HO. H

cally similar to amylose, with one im-

portant difference: the starch-degrading HOH

enzymes that occur in most organisms _# form of glucose

cannot break the bond between two (©)

beta-glucose sugars. This is not because

the bond is stronger, but rather be-

cause its cleavage requires an enzyme

most organisms lack. Because cellulose

cannot be broken down readily, it works well as a biological
structural material and occurs widely in this role in plants.
Those few animals able to break down cellulose find it a
rich source of energy. Certain vertebrates, such as cows, can
digest cellulose by means of bacteria and protists they har-
bor in their intestines which provide the necessary enzymes.

Chitin

The structural building material in insects, many fungi, and
certain other organisms is called chitin (figure 3.28). Chitin
is a modified form of cellulose with a nitrogen group added
to the glucose units. When cross-linked by proteins, it
forms a tough, resistant surface material that serves as the
hard exoskeleton of arthropods such as insects and crusta-
ceans (see chapter 46). Few organisms are able to digest
chitin.

 

Structural carbohydrates are chains of sugars that are
not easily digested. They include cellulose in plants and
chitin in arthropods and fungi.

 

 

FIGURE 3.27

A journey into wood. This jumble of cellulose
fibers (a) is from a yellow pine (Pinus ponderosa)
(20x). (0) While starch chains consist of alpha-
glucose subunits, () cellulose chains consist of
beta-glucose subunits. Cellulose fibers can be
very strong and are quite resistant to metabolic
breakdown, which is one reason why wood is such
a good building material.

Starch: chain of o-glucose subunits

Cellulose: chain of B-glucose subunits

 

FIGURE 3.28

Chitin. Chitin, which might be considered to be a modified
form of cellulose, is the principal structural element in the
external skeletons of many invertebrates, such

as this lobster.

Chapter 3 The Chemical Building Blocks of Life 57
