FIGURE 26.25
Problem solving by a
chimpanzee. Unable to
get the bananas by
jumping, the chimpanzee
devises a solution.

 

In any case, some examples, particularly those involving
problem-solving, are hard to explain in any way other than
as a result of some sort of mental process. For example, in a
series of classic experiments conducted in the 1920s, a
chimpanzee was left in a room with a banana hanging from
the ceiling out of reach. Also in the room were several
boxes, each lying on the floor. After unsuccessful attempts
to jump up and grab the bananas, the chimpanzee suddenly
looks at the boxes and immediately proceeds to move them
underneath the banana, stack one on top of another, and
climb up to claim its prize (figure 26.25).

Perhaps it is not so surprising to find obvious intelli-
gence in animals as closely related to us as chimpanzees.
But recent studies have found that other animals also
show evidence of cognition. Ravens have always been con-
sidered among the most intelligent of birds. Bernd Hein-
rich of the University of Vermont recently conducted an
experiment using a group of hand-reared crows that lived
in an outdoor aviary. Heinrich placed a piece of meat on
the end of a string and hung it from a branch in the
aviary. The birds liked to eat meat, but had never seen
string before and were unable to get at the meat. After
several hours, during which time the birds periodically
looked at the meat but did nothing else, one bird flew to
the branch, reached down, grabbed the string, pulled it
up, and placed it under his foot. He then reached down
and grabbed another piece of the string, repeating this ac-
tion over and over, each time bringing the meat closer
(figure 26.26). Eventually, the meat was within reach and
was grasped. The raven, presented with a completely
novel problem, had devised a solution. Eventually, three
of the other five ravens also figured out how to get to the
meat. Heinrich has conducted other similarly creative ex-
periments that can leave little doubt that ravens have ad-
vanced cognitive abilities.

 

Research on the cognitive behavior of animals is in its
infancy, but some examples are compelling.

 

 

FIGURE 26.26

Problem solving by a raven. Confronted with a problem it had
never previously confronted, the raven figures out how to get the
meat at the end of the string by repeatedly pulling up a bit of
string and stepping on it.

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 551
