Communication in
Social Groups

Many insects, fish, birds, and mam-
mals live in social groups in which in-
formation is communicated between
group members. For example, some
individuals in mammalian societies
serve as “guards.” When a predator
appears, the guards give an alarm call,
and group members respond by seek-
ing shelter. Social insects, such as ants
and honeybees, produce alarm
pheromones that trigger attack be-
havior. Ants also deposit trail
pheromones between the nest and a
food source to induce cooperation
during foraging (figure 26.18). Honey-
bees have an extremely complex dance
language that directs nestmates to
rich nectar sources.

FIGURE 26.18

The Dance Language of the
Honeybee

The European honeybee, Apis mellifera,
lives in hives consisting of 30,000 to
40,000 individuals whose behaviors are
integrated into a complex colony.
Worker bees may forage for miles from
the hive, collecting nectar and pollen
from a variety of plants and switching
between plant species and popula-
tions on the basis of how energeti-
cally rewarding their food is. The
food sources used by bees tend to
occur in patches, and each patch of-
fers much more food than a single
bee can transport to the hive. A
colony is able to exploit the resources
of a patch because of the behavior of
scout bees, which locate patches and
communicate their location to hivemates through a dance
Janguage. Over many years, Nobel laureate Karl von
Frisch was able to unravel the details of this communica-
tion system.

After a successful scout bee returns to the hive, she per-
forms a remarkable behavior pattern called a waggle dance
on a vertical comb (figure 26.19). The path of the bee dur-
ing the dance resembles a figure-cight. On the straight part
of the path, the bee vibrates or waggles her abdomen while
producing bursts of sound. She may stop periodically to
give her hivemates a sample of the nectar she has carried
back to the hive in her crop. As she dances, she is followed
closely by other bees, which soon appear as foragers at the
new food source.

FIGURE 26.19

546 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

 

 

 

The chemical control of fire ant foraging. Trial pheromones, produced in an accessory
gland near the fire ant’s sting, organize cooperative foraging. The trails taken by the first
ants to travel to a food source (4) are soon followed by most of the other ants (#).

 

(b)

‘The waggle dance of honeybees. (a) A scout bee dances on a comb in the hive. (b) The
angle between the food source and the nest is represented by a dancing bee as the angle
between the straight part of the dance and vertical. The food is 20° to the right of the sun,
and the straight part of the bee’s dance on the hive is 20° to the right of vertical.

Von Frisch and his colleagues claimed that the other
bees use information in the waggle dance to locate the food
source. According to their explanation, the scout bee indi-
cates the direction of the food source by representing the
angle between the food source and the hive in reference to
the sun as the angle between the straight part of the dance
and vertical in the hive. The distance to the food source is
indicated by the tempo, or degree of vigor, of the dance.

Adrian Wenner, a scientist at the University of Califor-
nia, did not believe that the dance language communicated
anything about the location of food, and he challenged von
Frisch’s explanation. Wenner maintained that flower odor
was the most important cue allowing recruited bees to ar-
rive at a new food source. A heated controversy ensued as
