26.5 To what degree animals “think” is a subject of lively dispute.

Animal Cognition

Itis likely each of us could tell an anecdotal story about the
behavior of a pet cat or dog that would seem to suggest that
the animal had a degree of reasoning ability or was capable
of thinking. For many decades, however, students of animal
behavior flatly rejected the notion that nonhuman animals
can think. In fact, behaviorist Lloyd Morgan stated that
one should never assume a behavior represents conscious
thought if there is any other explanation that precludes the
assumption of consciousness. The prevailing approach was
to treat animals as though they responded to the environ-
ment through reflexlike behaviors.

In recent years, serious attention has been given to the
topic of animal awareness. The central question is
whether animals show cognitive behavior—that is, do
they process information and respond in a manner that
suggests thinking (figure 26.24)? What kinds of behavior
would demonstrate cognition? Some birds in urban areas
remove the foil caps from nonhomogenized milk bottles
to get at the cream beneath, and this behavior is known to

 

FIGURE 26.24

have spread within a population to other birds. Japanese
macaques learned to wash potatoes and float grain to sep-
arate it from sand. A chimpanzee pulls the leaves off of a
tree branch and uses the stick to probe the entrance to a
termite nest and gather termites. As we saw earlier, vervet
monkeys have a vocabulary that identifies specific preda-
tors.

Only a few experiments have tested the thinking ability
of nonhuman animals. Some of these studies suggest that
animals may give false information (that is, they “lie”).
Currently, researchers are trying to determine if some pri-
mates deceive others to manipulate the behavior of the
other members of their troop. There are many anecdotal
accounts that appear to support the idea that deception oc-
curs in some nonhuman primate species such as baboons
and chimpanzees, but it has been difficult to devise field-
based experiments to test this idea. Much of this type of re-
search on animal cognition is in its infancy, but it is sure to
grow and to raise controversy. In any case, there is nothing
to be gained by a dogmatic denial of the possibility of animal
consciousness.

 

(b)

Animal thinking? (a) This chimpanzee is stripping the leaves from a twig, which it will then use to probe a termite nest. This behavior
strongly suggests that the chimpanzee is consciously planning ahead, with full knowledge of what it intends to do. (6) This sea otter is
using a rock as an “anvil,” against which it bashes a clam to break it open. A sea otter will often keep a favorite rock for a long time, as
though it has a clear idea of what it is going to use the rock for. Behaviors such as these suggest that animals have cognitive abilities.

550 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior
