Behavioral Rhythms

Many animals exhibit behaviors that vary at regular inter-
vals of time. Geese migrate south in the fall, birds sing in
the early morning, bats fly at night rather than during the
day, and most humans sleep at night and are active in the
daytime. Some behaviors are timed to occur in concert
with lunar or tidal cycles (figure 26.14). Why do regular re-
peating patterns of behavior occur, and what determines
when they occur? The study of questions like these has re-
vealed that rhythmic animal behaviors are based on both
endogenous (internal) rhythms and exogenous (external)
timers.

Most studies of behavioral rhythms have focused on be-
haviors that appear to be keyed to a daily cycle, such as
sleeping. Rhythms with a period of about 24 hours are
called circadian (“about a day”) rhythms. Many of these
behaviors have a strong endogenous component, as if they
were driven by a biological clock. Such behaviors are said
to be free-running, continuing on a regular cycle even in the
absence of any cues from the environment. Almost all fruit
fly pupae hatch in the early morning, for example, even if
they are kept in total darkness throughout their week-long
development. They keep track of time with an internal
clock whose pattern is determined by a single gene, called
the per (for period) gene. Different mutations of the per
gene shorten or lengthen the daily rhythm. The per gene
produces a protein in a regular 24-hour cycle in the brain,
serving as the fly’s pacemaker of activity. The protein prob-
ably affects the expression of other genes that ultimately
regulate activity. As the per protein accumulates, it seems
to turn off the gene. In mice, the clock gene is responsible
for regulating the animal’s daily rhythm.

Most biological clocks do not exactly match the rhythms
of the environment. Therefore, the behavioral rhythm of
an individual deprived of external cues gradually drifts out
of phase with the environment. Exposure to an environ-
mental cue resets the biological clock and keeps the behav-
ior properly synchronized with the environment. Light is
the most common cue for resetting circadian rhythms.

The most obvious circadian rhythm in humans is the
sleep-activity cycle. In controlled experiments, humans
have lived for months in underground apartments, where
all light is artificial and there are no external cues whatso-
ever indicating day length. Left to set their own schedules,
most of these people adopt daily activity patterns (one
phase of activity plus one phase of sleep) of about 25 hours,
although there is considerable variation. Some individuals
exhibit 50-hour clocks, active for as long as 36 hours during
each period! Under normal circumstances, the day-night
cycle resets an individual's free-running clock every day to
a cycle period of 24 hours.

What constitutes an animal’s biological clock? In some
insects, the clock is thought to be located in the optic lobes
of the brain, and timekeeping appears to be based on hor-
mones. In mammals, including humans, the biological

 

FIGURE 26.14

Tidal rhythm. Oysters open their shells for feeding when the
tide is in and close them when the tide is out.

clock lies in a specific region of the hypothalamus called
the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The SCN is a self-
sustaining oscillator, which means it undergoes sponta-
neous, cyclical changes in activity. This oscillatory activity
helps the SCN to act as a pacemaker for circadian rhythms,
but in order for the rhythms to be entrained to external
light-dark cycles, the SCN must be influenced by light. In
fact, there are both direct and indirect neural projections
from the retina to the SCN.

The SCN controls circadian rhythms by regulating the
secretion of the hormone melatonin by the pineal gland.
During the daytime, the SCN suppresses melatonin secre-
tion. Consequently, more melatonin is secreted over a 24-
hour period during short days than during long days. Vari-
ations in melatonin secretion thus serve as an indicator of
seasonal changes in day length, and these variations partici-
pate in timing the seasonal reproductive behavior of many
mammals. Disturbances in melatonin secretion may be par-
tially responsible for the “jet-lag” people experience when
air travel suddenly throws their internal clocks out of regis-
ter with the day-night cycle.

Many important behavioral rhythms have cycle periods
longer than 24 hours. For example, circannual behaviors
such as breeding, hibernation, and migration occur on a
yearly cycle. These behaviors seem to be largely timed by
hormonal and other physiological changes keyed to ex-
ogenous factors such as day length. The degree to which
endogenous biological clocks underlie circannual rhythms
is not known, as it is very difficult to perform constant-
environment experiments of several years’ duration. The
mechanism of the biological clock remains one of the
most tantalizing puzzles in biology today.

 

Endogenous circadian rhythms have free-running cycle
periods of approximately 24 hours; they are entrained
to a more exact 24-hour cycle period by environmental
cues.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 543
