 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 8
8 7 8 74
B66 S64
se 5 se 54
B58 35
28 28
= 3 4 = 3 44
e? e.
53 3 5 5 34
se se
B 2 B24
co cm 14
0 SS) 0 ne in
0.5 seconds 0.5 seconds
Eagle Leopard
(b)
FIGURE 26.20

Primate semantics. (a) Predators, like this leopard, attack and feed on vervet
monkeys. ()) The monkeys give different alarm calls when eagles, leopards, and
snakes are sighted by troupe members. Each distinctive call elicits a different and

adaptive escape behavior.

the two groups of researchers published articles supporting
their positions.

The “dance language controversy” was resolved (in the
minds of most scientists) in the mid-1970s by the creative
research of James L. Gould. Gould devised an experiment
in which hive members were tricked into misinterpreting
the directions given by the scout bee’s dance. As a result,
Gould was able to manipulate where the hive members
would go if they were using visual signals. If odor were the
cue they were using, hive members would have appeared at
the food source, but instead they appeared exactly where
Gould predicted. This confirmed von Frisch’s ideas.

Recently, researchers have extended the study of the
honeybee dance language by building robot bees whose
dances can be completely controlled. Their dances are pro-
grammed by a computer and perfectly reproduce the nat-
ural honeybee dance; the robots even stop to give food
samples! The use of robot bees has allowed scientists to de-
termine precisely which cues direct hivemates to food
sources.

Primate Language

Some primates have a “vocabulary” that allows individuals
to communicate the identity of specific predators. The vo-
calizations of African vervet monkeys, for example, distin-
guish eagles, leopards, and snakes (figure 26.20). Chim-
panzees and gorillas can learn to recognize a large number
of symbols and use them to communicate abstract con-
cepts. The complexity of human language would at first ap-
pear to defy biological explanation, but closer examination
suggests that the differences are in fact superficial—all lan-
guages share many basic structural similarities. All of the
roughly 3000 languages draw from the same set of 40 con-

sonant sounds (English uses two dozen of them), and any
human can learn them. Researchers believe these similari-
ties reflect the way our brains handle abstract information,
a genetically determined characteristic of all humans.

Language develops at an early age in humans. Human
infants are capable of recognizing the 40 consonant sounds
characteristic of speech, including those not present in the
particular language they will learn, while they ignore other
sounds. In contrast, individuals who have not heard certain
consonant sounds as infants can only rarely distinguish or
produce them as adults. That is why English speakers have
difficulty mastering the throaty French “r,” French speak-
ers typically replace the English “th” with “z,” and native
Japanese often substitute “I” for the unfamiliar English “r.”
Children go through a “babbling” phase, in which they
learn by trial and error how to make the sounds of lan-
guage. Even deaf children go through a babbling phase
using sign language. Next, children quickly and easily learn
a vocabulary of thousands of words. Like babbling, this
phase of rapid learning seems to be genetically pro-
grammed. It is followed by a stage in which children form
simple sentences which, though they may be grammatically
incorrect, can convey information. Learning the rules of
grammar constitutes the final step in language acquisition.

While language is the primary channel of human com-
munication, odor and other nonverbal signals (such as
“body language”) may also convey information. However,
it is difficult to determine the relative importance of these
other communication channels in humans.

 

The study of animal communication involves analysis of
the specificity of signals, their information content, and
the methods used to produce and receive them.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 547
