Pheromones

Chemical signals also mediate interactions between males
and females. Pheromones, chemical messengers used for
communication between individuals of the same species,
serve as sex attractants among other functions in many ani-
mals. Even the human egg produces a chemical attractant
to communicate with sperm! Female silk moths (Bombyx
mori) produce a sex pheromone called bombykol in a gland
associated with the reproductive system. Neurophysiologi-
cal studies show that the male’s antennae contain numerous
sensory receptors specific for bombykol. These receptors
are extraordinarily sensitive, enabling the male to respond
behaviorally to concentrations of bombykol as low as one
molecule in 10!” molecules of oxygen in the air!

Many insects, amphibians, and birds produce species-
specific acoustic signals to attract mates. Bullfrog males call
to females by inflating and discharging air from their vocal
sacs, located beneath the lower jaw. The female can distin-
guish a conspecific male’s call from the call of other frogs
that may be in the same habitat and mating at the same
time. Male birds produce songs, complex sounds composed
of notes and phrases, to advertise their presence and to at-
tract females. In many bird species, variations in the males’
songs identify particular males in a population. In these
species, the song is individually specific as well as species-
specific.

Level of Specificity

Why should different signals have different levels of speci-
ficity? The level of specificity relates to the function of
the signal. Many courtship signals are species-specific to
help animals avoid making errors in mating that would
produce inviable hybrids or otherwise waste reproductive
effort. A male bird’s song is individually specific because it
allows his presence (as opposed to simply the presence of
an unidentifiable member of the species) to be recognized
by neighboring birds. When territories are being estab-
lished, males may sing and aggressively confront neighbor-
ing conspecifics to defend their space. Aggression carries
the risk of injury, and it is energetically costly to sing.
After territorial borders have been established, intrusions
by neighbors are few because the outcome of the contests
have already been determined. Each male then “knows”
his neighbor by the song he sings, and also “knows” that
male does not constitute a threat because they have already
settled their territorial contests. So, all birds in the popula-
tion can lower their energy costs by identifying their
neighbors through their individualistic songs. In a similar
way, mammals mark their territories with pheromones that
signal individual identity, which may be encoded as a
blend of a number of chemicals. Other signals, such as the
mobbing and alarm calls of birds, are anonymous, convey-
ing no information about the identity of the sender. These
signals may permit communication about the presence of a
predator common to several bird species.

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 26.16
Firefly fireworks. The bioluminescent displays of these lampyrid
beetles are species-specific and serve as behavioral mechanisms of
reproductive isolation. Each number represents the flash pattern
of a male ofa different species.

Se

FIGURE 26.17
Dewlap display of a male Anolis lizard. Under hormonal
stimulation, males extend their fleshy, colored dewlaps to court
females. This behavior also stimulates hormone release and egg-
laying in the female.

 

Courtship behaviors are keyed to species-specific visual,
chemical, and acoustic signals.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 545
