26.4 Migratory behavior presents many puzzles.

Orientation and Migration

Animals may travel to and from a nest to feed or move reg-
ularly from one place to another. To do so, they must ori-
ent themselves by tracking stimuli in the environment.

Movement toward or away from some stimulus is called
taxis. The attraction of flying insects to outdoor lights is an
example of positive phototaxis. Insects that avoid light, such
as the common cockroach, exhibit negative phototaxis. Other
stimuli may be used as orienting cues. For example, trout
orient themselves in a stream so as to face against the cur-
rent. However, not all responses involve a specific orienta-
tion. Some animals just become more active when stimulus
intensity increases, a responses called kineses.

Long-range, two-way movements are known as migra-
tions. In many animals, migrations occur circannually.
Ducks and geese migrate along flyways from Canada across
the United States each fall and return each spring.
Monarch butterflies migrate each fall from central and
eastern North America to several small, geographically iso-
lated areas of coniferous forest in the mountains of central
Mexico (figure 26.21). Each August, the butterflies begin a
flight southward to their overwintering sites. At the end of
winter, the monarchs begin the return flight to their sum-
mer breeding ranges. What is amazing about the migration
of the monarch, however, is that two to five generations
may be produced as the butterflies fly north. The butter-
flies that migrate in the autumn to the precisely located
overwintering grounds in Mexico have never been there
before.

Overwintering
aggregation

@ (b)
FIGURE 26.21

When colonies of bobolinks became established in the
western United States, far from their normal range in the
Midwest and East, they did not migrate directly to their
winter range in South America. Instead, they migrated east
to their ancestral range and then south along the original
flyway (figure 26.22). Rather than changing the original
migration pattern, they simply added a new pattern.

How Migrating Animals Navigate

Biologists have studied migration with great interest, and
we now have a good understanding of how these feats of
navigation are achieved. It is important to understand the
distinction between orientation (the ability to follow a
bearing) and navigation (the ability to set or adjust a bear-
ing, and then follow it). The former is analogous to using a
compass, while the latter is like using a compass in con-
junction with a map. Experiments on starlings indicate that
inexperienced birds migrate by orientation, while older
birds that have migrated previously use true navigation
(figure 26.23).

Birds and other animals navigate by looking at the sun
and the stars. The indigo bunting, which flies during the
day and uses the sun as a guide, compensates for the
movement of the sun in the sky as the day progresses by
reference to the north star, which does not move in the
sky. Buntings also use the positions of the constellations
and the position of the pole star in the night sky, cues
they learn as young birds. Starlings and certain other
birds compensate for the sun’s apparent movement in the

 

(°)

Migration of monarch butterflies. (@) Monarchs from western North America overwinter in areas of mild climate along the Pacific
Coast. Those from the eastern United States and southeastern Canada migrate to Mexico, a journey of over 3000 kilometers that takes
from two to five generations to complete. (») Monarch butterflies arriving at the remote fir forests of the overwintering grounds and (c)

forming aggregations on the tree trunks.

548 Part VI Ecology and Behavior
