FIGURE 26.22

Birds on the move. (2) The
summer range of bobolinks
recently extended to the far West
from their more established range
in the Midwest. When they
migrate to South America in the
winter, bobolinks that nested in
the West do not fly directly to the
winter range; instead, they fly to
the Midwest first and then use the
ancestral flyway. ()) The golden
plover has an even longer
migration route that is circular.
These birds fly from Arctic
breeding grounds to wintering (a)
areas in southeastern South

America, a distance of some 13,000
kilometers.

Bobolink

sky by using an internal clock. If such birds are shown an
experimental sun in a fixed position while in captivity,
they will change their orientation to it at a constant rate
of about 15° per hour.

Many migrating birds also have the ability to detect the
earth’s magnetic field and to orient themselves with respect
to it. In a closed indoor cage, they will attempt to move in
the correct geographical direction, even though there are
no visible external cues. However, the placement of a pow-
erful magnet near the cage can alter the direction in which
the birds attempt to move. Magnetite, a magnetized iron
ore, has been found in the heads of some birds, but the sen-
sory receptors birds employ to detect magnetic fields have
not been identified.

It appears that the first migration of a bird is innately
guided by both celestial cues (the birds fly mainly at
night) and the earth’s magnetic field. These cues give the
same information about the general direction of the mi-
gration, but the information about direction provided by
the stars seems to dominate over the magnetic informa-
tion when the two cues are experimentally manipulated to
give conflicting directions. Recent studies, however, indi-
cate that celestial cues tell northern hemisphere birds to
move south when they begin their migration, while mag-
netic cues give them the direction for the specific migra-
tory path (perhaps a southeast turn the bird must make
midroute). In short, these new data suggest that celestial
and magnetic cues interact during development to fine-
tune the bird’s navigation.

We know relatively little about how other migrating
animals navigate. For instance, green sea turtles migrate
from Brazil halfway across the Atlantic Ocean to Ascen-
sion Island, where the females lay their eggs. How do
they find this tiny island in the middle of the ocean,
which they haven’t seen for perhaps 30 years? How do
the young that hatch on the island know how to find
their way to Brazil? Recent studies suggest that wave ac-
tion is an important cue.

    

Summer

  
  
  

Summer
nesting
range

nesting
range

Winter
range

Golden plover

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 26.23

Migratory behavior of starlings. The navigational abilities of
inexperienced birds differ from those of adults who have made the
migratory journey before. Starlings were captured in Holland,
halfway along their full migratory route from Baltic breeding
grounds to wintering grounds in the British Isles; these birds were
transported to Switzerland and released. Experienced older birds
compensated for the displacement and flew toward the normal
wintering grounds (blue arrow). Inexperienced young birds kept
flying in the same direction, on a course that took them toward
Spain (red arrow). These observations imply that inexperienced
birds fly by orientation, while experienced birds learn true
navigation.

 

Many animals migrate in predictable ways, navigating
by looking at the sun and stars, and in some cases by
detecting magnetic fields.

 

Chapter 26 Animal Behavior 549
