Chapter 26

Summary

   

www.biocourse.com

www.mhhe.comraven6e

Questions Media Resources

26.1 Ethology focuses on the natural history of behavior.

 

*¢ Behavior is an adaptive response to stimuli in the
environment. An animal’s sensory systems detect and
process information about these stimuli.

1. How does a hybrid lovebird’s
method of carrying nest
materials compare with that of
its parents? What does this
comparison suggest about
whether the behavior is
instinctive or learned?

26.2 Comparative psychology focuses on how learning influences behavior.

 

* Behavior is both instinctive (influenced by genes) and
learned through experience. Genes are thought to
limit the extent to which behavior can be modified
and the types of associations that can be made.

* The simplest forms of learning involve habituation
and sensitization. More complex associative learning,
such as classical and operant conditioning, may be
due to the strengthening or weakening of existing
synapses as well as the formation of entirely new
synapses.

¢ An animal’s internal state influences when and how a
behavior will occur. Hormones can change an ani-
mal’s behavior and perception of stimuli in a way that
facilitates reproduction.

2. How does associative learning
differ from nonassociative
learning? How does classical
conditioning differ from operant
conditioning?

3. What is filial imprinting?
What is sexual imprinting? Why
do some young animals imprint
on objects like a moving box?

4. How does Marler’s work on
song development in white-
crowned sparrows indicate that
behavior is shaped by learning?
How does it indicate that
behavior is shaped by instinct?

26.3 Communication is a key element of many animal behaviors.

 

¢ Animals communicate by producing visual, acoustic,
and chemical signals. These signals are involved in
mating, finding food, defense against predators, and
other social situations.

26.4 Migratory behavior presents many puzzles.

 

* On Science Article:
Polyandry in Hawks

5. How do communication

signals participate in t
reproductive isolation? Give one
example of a signal that is
species-specific. Why are some
signals individually specific?

 

 

 

¢ Animals use cues such as the position of the sun and
stars to orient during daily activities and to navigate
during long-range migrations.

 

6. What is the definition of
taxis? What are kineses? What
cues do migrating birds use to
orient and navigate during their
migrations?

26.5 To what degree animals “think” is a subject of lively dispute.

 

¢ Many anecdotal accounts point to animal cognition,
but research is in its infancy.

552 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

7. What evidence would you
accept that an animal is
“thinking”?
