27.1

27.2

27.3

27.4

27

Behavioral Ecology

Concept Outline

Evolutionary forces shape behavior.

Behavioral Ecology. Behavior is shaped by natural
selection.

Foraging Behavior. Natural selection favors the most
efficient foraging behavior.

Territorial Behavior. Animals defend territory to
increase reproductive advantage and foraging efficiency.

Reproductive behavior involves many choices
influenced by natural selection.

Parental Investment and Mate Choice. The degree of
parental investment strongly influences other reproductive
behaviors.

Reproductive Competition and Sexual Selection.

Mate choice affects reproductive success, and so is a target
of natural selection.

Mating Systems. Mating systems are reproductive
solutions to particular ecological challenges.

There is considerable controversy about the
evolution of social behavior.

Factors Favoring Altruism and Group Living. Many
explanations have been put forward to explain the evolution
of altruism.

Examples of Kin Selection. One explanation for altruism
is that individuals can increase the extent to which their
genes are passed on to the next generation by aiding their
relatives.

Group Living and the Evolution of Social Systems.
Insect societies exhibit extreme cooperation and altruism,
perhaps as a result of close genetic relationship of society
members.

Vertebrates exhibit a broad range of social
behaviors.

Vertebrate Societies. Many vertebrate societies exhibit
altruism.

Human Sociobiology. Human behavior, like that of
other vertebrates, is influenced by natural selection.

 

FIGURE 27.1

Assnake in the throes of death—or is it? When threatened,
many organisms feign death, as this snake is doing—foaming at
the mouth and going limp or looking paralyzed.

nimal behavior can be investigated in a variety of

ways. An investigator can ask, how did the behavior
develop? What is the physiology behind the behavior? Or
what is the function of the behavior (figure 27.1), and does
it confer an advantage to the animal? The field of behav-
ioral ecology deals with the last two questions. Specifically,
behavioral ecologists study the ways in which behavior may be
adaptive by allowing an animal to increase or even maxi-
mize its reproductive success. This chapter examines both
of these aspects of behavioral ecology.

553
