27.3

Factors Favoring Altruism and
Group Living

Altruism—the performance of an action that benefits an-
other individual at a cost to the actor—occurs in many
guises in the animal world. In many bird species, for exam-
ple, parents are assisted in raising their young by other
birds, which are called helpers at the nest. In species of
both mammals and birds, individuals that spy a predator
will give an alarm call, alerting other members of their
group, even though such an act would seem to call the
predator’s attention to the caller. Finally, lionesses with
cubs will allow all cubs in the pride to nurse, including cubs
of other females.

The existence of altruism has long perplexed evolution-
ary biologists. If altruism imposes a cost to an individual,
how could an allele for altruism be favored by natural selec-
tion? One would expect such alleles to be at a disadvantage
and thus their frequency in the gene pool should decrease
through time.

A number of explanations have been put forward to ex-
plain the evolution of altruism. One suggestion often
heard on television documentaries is that such traits
evolve for the good of the species. The problem with such
explanations is that natural selection operates on individu-
als within species, not on species themselves. Thus, it is
even possible for traits to evolve that are detrimental to
the species as a whole, as long as they benefit the individ-
ual. In some cases, selection can operate on groups of in-
dividuals, but this is rare. For example, if an allele for su-
percannibalism evolved within a population, individuals
with that allele would be favored, as they would have
more to eat; however, the group might eventually eat it-
self to extinction, and the allele would be removed from
the species. In certain circumstances, such group selec-
tion can occur, but the conditions for it to occur are
rarely met in nature. In most cases, consequently, the
“good of the species” cannot explain the evolution of al-
truistic traits.

Another possibility is that seemingly altruistic acts aren’t
altruistic after all. For example, helpers at the nest are often
young and gain valuable parenting experience by assisting
established breeders. Moreover, by hanging around an
area, such individuals may inherit the territory when the es-
tablished breeders die. Similarly, alarm callers may actually
be beneficial by causing other animals to panic. In the en-
suing confusion, the caller may be able to slip off unde-
tected. Detailed field studies in recent years have demon-
strated that some acts truly are altruistic, but others are not
as they seemed.

562 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

There is considerable controversy about the evolution of social behavior.

Reciprocity

Robert Trivers, now of Rutgers University, proposed that
individuals may form “partnerships” in which mutual ex-
changes of altruistic acts occur, because it benefits both
participants to do so. In the evolution of such reciprocal
altruism, “cheaters” (nonreciprocators) are discriminated
against and are cut off from receiving future aid. Accord-
ing to Trivers, if the altruistic act is relatively inexpensive,
the small benefit a cheater receives by not reciprocating is
far outweighed by the potential cost of not receiving fu-
ture aid. Under these conditions, cheating should not
occur.

Vampire bats roost in hollow trees in groups of 8 to 12
individuals. Because these bats have a high metabolic
rate, individuals that have not fed recently may die. Bats
that have found a host imbibe a great deal of blood; giv-
ing up a small amount presents no great energy cost to
the donor, and it can keep a roostmate from starvation.
Vampire bats tend to share blood with past reciprocators.
If an individual fails to give blood to a bat from which it
had received blood in the past, it will be excluded from
future bloodsharing.

Kin Selection

The most influential explanation for the origin of altru-
ism was presented by William D. Hamilton in 1964. It is
perhaps best introduced by quoting a passing remark
made in a pub in 1932 by the great population geneticist
J. B. S. Haldane. Haldane said that he would willingly lay
down his life for two brothers or eight first cousins. Evolu-
tionarily speaking, Haldane’s statement makes sense, be-
cause for each allele Haldane received from his parents,
his brothers each had a 50% chance of receiving the same
allele (figure 27.11). Consequently, it is statistically ex-
pected that two of his brothers would pass on as many of
Haldane’s particular combination of alleles to the next
generation as Haldane himself would. Similarly, Haldane
and a first cousin would share an eighth of their alleles
(see figure 27.11). Their parents, which are siblings,
would each share half their alleles, and each of their chil-
dren would receive half of these, of which half on the av-
erage would be in common: one-half x one-half x one-
half = one-eighth. Eight first cousins would therefore
pass on as many of those alleles to the next generation as
Haldane himself would. Hamilton saw Haldane’s point
clearly: natural selection will favor any strategy that in-
creases the net flow of an individual’s alleles to the next
generation.
