Reproductive Competition and
Sexual Selection

In chapter 20, we learned that the reproductive success of
an individual is determined by a number of factors: how
long the individual lives, how successful it is in obtaining
matings, and how many offspring it produces per mating.
The second of these factors, competition for mating oppor-
tunities, has been termed sexual selection. Some people
consider sexual selection to be distinctive from natural se-
lection, but others see it as a subset of natural selection, just
one of a number of ways in which organisms can increase
their fitness.

Sexual selection involves both intrasexual selection, or
interactions between members of one sex (“the power to
conquer other males in battle,” as Darwin put it), and in-
tersexual selection, essentially mate choice (“the power to
charm”). Sexual selection thus leads to the evolution of
structures used in combat with other males, such as a deer’s
antlers and a ram’s horns, as well as ornamentation used to
“persuade” members of the opposite sex to mate, such as
long tail feathers and bright plumage (figure 27.7). These
traits are called secondary sexual characteristics.

Intrasexual Selection

In many species, individuals of one sex—usually males—
compete with each other for the opportunity to mate with
individuals of the other sex. These competitions may take
place over ownership of a territory in which females reside
or direct control of the females themselves. The latter case
is exemplified by many species, such as impala, in which fe-

   

(a)
FIGURE 27.7

(b)

with greater numbers of eyespots in their tail feathers.

558 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior

 

males travel in large groups with a single male that gets ex-
clusive rights to mate with the females and thus strives vig-
orously to defend these rights against other males which
would like to supplant him.

In mating systems such as these, a few males may get an
inordinate number of matings and most males do not mate
at all. In elephant seals, in which males control territories
on the breeding beaches, a few dominant males do most of
the breeding. On one beach, for example, eight males im-
pregnated 348 females, while the remaining males got very
little action (or, we could say, while the remaining males
mated rarely, if at all).

For this reason, selection will strongly favor any trait
that confers greater ability to outcompete other males. In
many cases, size determines mating success: the larger male
is able to dominate the smaller one. As a result, in many
territorial species, males have evolved to be considerably
larger than females, for the simple reason that the largest
males are the ones that get to mate. Such differences be-
tween the sexes are referred to as sexual dimorphism. In
other species, males have evolved structures used for fight-
ing, such as horns, antlers, and large canine teeth. These
traits are also often sexually dimorphic and may have
evolved because of the advantage they give in intrasexual
conflicts.

Intersexual Selection

Peahens prefer to mate with peacocks that have more spots
in their long tail feathers (figure 27.70,c). Similarly, female
frogs prefer to mate with males with more complex calls.
Why did such mating preferences evolve?

 

Number of mates
L

 

 

 

Tel ae eee
150 160

Number of eyespots in tail feathers

T
140

 

 

 

(°)

Products of sexual selection. Attracting mates with long feathers is common in bird species such as the African paradise
whydah (a) and the peacock (b), which show pronounced sexual dimorphism. (0 Female peahens prefer to mate with males
