[ 27.1 Evolutionary forces shape behavior.

Behavioral Ecology

In an important essay, Nobel laureate Niko Tinbergen
outlined the different types of questions biologists can ask
about animal behavior. In essence, he divided the investi-
gation of behavior into the study of its development,
physiological basis, and function (evolutionary signifi-
cance). One type of evolutionary analysis pioneered by
Tinbergen himself was the study of the survival value of
behavior. That is, how does an animal’s behavior allow it
to stay alive or keep its offspring alive? For example, Tin-
bergen observed that after gull nestlings hatch, the par-
ents remove the eggshells from the nest. To understand
why this behavior occurs, he camouflaged chicken eggs by
painting them to resemble the natural background where
they would lie and distributed them throughout the area
in which the gulls were nesting (figure 27.2). He placed
broken eggshells next to some of the eggs, and as a con-
trol, he left other camouflaged eggs alone without
eggshells. He then noted which eggs were found more
easily by crows. Because the crows could use the white in-
terior of a broken eggshell as a cue, they ate more of the
camouflaged eggs that were near eggshells. Thus, Tinber-
gen concluded that eggshell removal behavior is adaptive:
it reduces predation and thus increases the offspring’s
chances of survival.

Tinbergen is credited with being one of the founders of
the field of behavioral ecology, the study of how natural
selection shapes behavior. This branch of ecology examines
the adaptive significance of behavior, or how behavior
may increase survival and reproduction. Current research
in behavioral ecology focuses on the contribution behavior
makes to an animal’s reproductive success, or fitness. As
we saw in chapter 26, differences in behavior among indi-
viduals often result from genetic differences. Thus, natural
selection operating on behavior has the potential to pro-
duce evolutionary change. To study the relation between
behavior and fitness, then, is to study the process of adapta-
tion itself.

Consequently, the field of behavioral ecology is con-
cerned with two questions. First, is behavior adaptive?
Although it is tempting to assume that the behavior pro-
duced by individuals must in some way represent an
adaptive response to the environment, this need not be
the case. As we saw in chapter 20, traits can evolve for
many reasons other than natural selection, such as ge-
netic drift or gene flow. Moreover, traits may be present
in a population because they evolved as adaptations in the
past, but no longer are useful. These possibilities hold
true for behavioral traits as much as they do for any other
kind of trait.

Ifa trait is adaptive, the question then becomes: how is it
adaptive? Although the ultimate criterion is reproductive

554 Part VI Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 27.2

The adaptive value of egg coloration. Niko Tinbergen painted
chicken eggs to resemble the mottled brown camouflage of gull
eggs. The eggs were used to test the hypothesis that camouflaged
eggs are more difficult for predators to find and thus increase the
young’s chances of survival...

success, behavioral ecologists are interested in how a trait
can lead to greater reproductive success. By enhancing en-
ergy intake, thus increasing the number of offspring pro-
duced? By improving success in getting more matings? By
decreasing the chance of predation? The job of a behav-
ioral ecologist is to determine the effect of a behavioral
trait on each of these activities and then to discover
whether increases in, for example, foraging efficiency,
translate into increased fitness.

 

Behavioral ecology is the study of how natural selection
shapes behavior.

 
