Territorial Behavior

Animals often move over a large area, or home range,
during their daily course of activity. In many animal
species, the home ranges of several individuals may over-
lap in time or in space, but each individual defends a por-
tion of its home range and uses it exclusively. This behav-
ior, in which individual members of a species maintain
exclusive use of an area that contains some limiting re-
source, such as foraging ground, food, or potential mates,
is called territoriality (figure 27.4). The critical aspect of
territorial behavior is defense against intrusion by other in-
dividuals. Territories are defended by displays that adver-
tise that the territories are occupied and by overt aggres-
sion. A bird sings from its perch within a territory to
prevent a takeover by a neighboring bird. If an intruder is
not deterred by the song, it may be attacked. However,
territorial defense has its costs. Singing is energetically
expensive, and attacks can lead to injury. In addition, ad-
vertisement through song or visual display can reveal
one’s position to a predator.

Why does an animal bear the costs of territorial de-
fense? Over the past two decades, it has become increas-
ingly clear that an economic approach can be useful in an-
swering this question. Although there are costs to
defending a territory, there are also benefits; these benefits
may take the form of increased food intake, exclusive ac-
cess to mates, or access to refuges from predators. Studies
of nectar-feeding birds like hummingbirds and sunbirds
provide an example (figure 27.5). A bird benefits from hav-
ing the exclusive use of a patch of flowers because it can
efficiently harvest the nectar they produce. In order to
maintain exclusive use, however, the bird must actively de-
fend the flowers. The benefits of exclusive use outweigh
the costs of defense only under certain conditions. Sun-
birds, for example, expend 3000 calories per hour chasing
intruders from a territory. Whether or not the benefit of
defending a territory will exceed this cost depends upon
the amount of nectar in the flowers and how efficiently the
bird can collect it. If flowers are very scarce or nectar lev-
els are very low, for example, a nectar-feeding bird may
not gain enough energy to balance the energy used in de-
fense. Under this circumstance, it is not advantageous to
be territorial. Similarly, if flowers are very abundant, a
bird can efficiently meet its daily energy requirements
without behaving territorially and adding the costs of de-
fense. From an energetic standpoint, defending abundant
resources isn’t worth the cost. Territoriality thus only oc-
curs at intermediate levels of flower availability and higher
levels of nectar production, where the benefits of defense
outweigh the costs.

In many species, exclusive access to females is a more
important determinant of territory size of males than is
food availability. In some lizards, for example, males
maintain enormous territories during the breeding sea-
son. These territories, which encompass the territories of

 

556 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 27.4

Competition for space. Territory size in birds is adjusted
according to the number of competitors. When six pairs of great
tits (Parus major) were removed from their territories (indicated
by R in the left figure), their territories were taken over by other
birds in the area and by four new pairs (indicated by N in the

right figure). Numbers correspond to the birds present before and
after.

 

FIGURE 27.5
The benefit of territoriality. Sunbirds increase nectar
availability by defending flowers.

several females, are much larger than what is required to
supply enough food and are defended vigorously. In the
nonbreeding season, by contrast, male territory size de-
creases dramatically, as does aggressive territorial
behavior.

 

An economic approach can be used to explain the
evolution and ecology of reproductive behaviors such as
territoriality. This approach assumes that animals that
gain more energy from a behavior than they expend will
have an advantage in survival and reproduction over
animals that behave in less efficient ways.

 
