iD
selection.

Searching for a place to nest, finding a mate, and rearing
young involve a collection of behaviors loosely referred
to as reproductive behavior. These behaviors often in-
volve seeking and defending a particular territory, mak-
ing choices about mates and about the amount of energy
to devote to the rearing of young. Mate selection, in par-
ticular, often involves intense natural selection. We will
look briefly at each of these components of reproductive
behavior.

During the breeding season, animals make several im-
portant “decisions” concerning their choice of mates, how
many mates to have, and how much time and energy to
devote to rearing offspring. These decisions are all aspects
of an animal’s reproductive strategy, a set of behaviors
that presumably have evolved to maximize reproductive
success. Reproductive strategies have evolved partly in re-
sponse to the energetic costs of reproduction and the way
food resources, nest sites, and members of the opposite
sex are spatially distributed in the environment.

Parental Investment and
Mate Choice

Males and females usually differ in their reproductive
strategies. Darwin was the first to observe that females
often do not simply mate with the first male they en-
counter, but instead seem to evaluate a male’s quality and
then decide whether to mate. This behavior, called mate
choice, has since been described in many invertebrate and
vertebrate species.

By contrast, mate choice by males is much less common.
Why should this be? Many of the differences in reproduc-
tive strategies between the sexes can be understood by
comparing the parental investment made by males and fe-
males. Parental investment refers to the contributions
each sex makes in producing and rearing offspring; it is, in
effect, an estimate of the energy expended by males and fe-
males in each reproductive event.

Many studies have shown that parental investment is
high in females. One reason is that eggs are much larger
than sperm—195,000 times larger in humans! Eggs contain
proteins and lipids in the yolk and other nutrients for the
developing embryo, but sperm are little more than mobile
DNA. Furthermore, in some groups of animals, females are
responsible for gestation and lactation, costly reproductive
functions only they can carry out.

The consequence of such great disparities in reproduc-
tive investment is that the sexes should face very different
selective pressures. Because any single reproductive event is
relatively cheap for mates, they can best increase their fit-
ness by mating with as many females as possible—male fit-

Reproductive behavior involves many choices influenced by natural

 

120 -
100 |

Number of mature eggs
bo @
8 88
T T T

iM
3
T

 

°

 

 

Female body weight

 

 

 

FIGURE 27.6

The advantage of male mate choice. Male mormon crickets
choose heavier females as mates, and larger females have more
eggs. Thus, male mate selection increases fitness.

ness is rarely limited by the amount of sperm they can pro-
duce. By contrast, each reproductive event for females is
much more costly and the number of eggs that can be pro-
duced often does limit reproductive success. For this rea-
son, females have an incentive to be choosy, trying to pick
the male the can provide the greatest benefit to her off-
spring. As we shall see, this benefit can take a number of
different forms.

These conclusions only hold when female reproductive
investment is much greater than that of males. In species
with parental care, males may contribute equally to the cost
of raising young; in this case, the degree of mate choice
should be equal between the sexes.

Furthermore, in some cases, male investment exceeds
that of females. For example, male mormon crickets
transfer a protein-containing spermatophore to females
during mating. Almost 30% of a male’s body weight is
made up by the spermatophore, which provides nutrition
for the female, and helps her develop her eggs. As one
might expect, in this case it is the females that compete
with each other for access to males, and the males that are
the choosy sex. Indeed, males are quite selective, favoring
heavier females. The selective advantage of this strategy
results because heavier females have more eggs; thus,
males that choose larger females leave more offspring

(figure 27.6).

 

Reproductive investment by the sexes is strongly
influenced by differences in the degree of parental
investment.

 

Chapter 27. Behavioral Ecology 557
