Mating Systems

The number of individuals with which an animal mates
during the breeding season varies throughout the animal
kingdom. Mating systems such as monogamy (one male
mates with one female); polygyny (one male mates with
more than one female; figure 27.9), and polyandry (one
female mates with more than one male) are aspects of
male and female reproductive strategy that concern how
many mates an individual has during the breeding season.
Like mate choice, mating systems have evolved to maxi-
mize reproductive fitness. Much research has shown that
mating systems are strongly influenced by ecology. For
instance, a male may defend a territory that holds nest
sites or food sources necessary for a female to reproduce,
and the territory might have resources sufficient for more
than one female. If males differ in the quality of the terri-
tories they hold, a female’s fitness will be maximized if
she mates with a male holding a high-quality territory.
Such a male may already have a mate, but it is still more
advantageous for the female to breed with that male than
with an unmated male that defends a low-quality terri-
tory. In this way, natural selection would favor the evolu-
tion of polygyny.

Mating systems are also constrained by the needs of off-
spring. If the presence of both parents is necessary for
young to be reared successfully, then monogamy may be
favored. This is generally the case in birds, in which over
90% of all species are monogamous. A male may either re~
main with his mate and provide care for the offspring or
desert that mate to search for others; both strategies may
increase his fitness. The strategy that natural selection will
favor depends upon the requirement for male assistance in
feeding or defending the offspring. In some species, off-
spring are altricial—they require prolonged and extensive
care. In these species, the need for care by two parents will
reduce the tendency for the male to desert his mate and
seck other matings. In species where the young are preco-
cial (requiring little parental care), males may be more
likely to be polygynous.

Although polygyny is much more common, polyandrous
systems—in which one female mates with several males—
are known in a variety of animals. For example, in spotted
sandpipers, males take care of all incubation and parenting,
and females mate and leave eggs with two or more males.

In recent years, researchers have uncovered many unex-
pected aspects of animal reproductive systems. Some of
these discoveries have resulted from the application of new
technologies, whereas others have come from detailed and
intensive field studies.

Extra-Pair Copulations

In chapter 19, we saw how DNA fingerprinting can be used
to identify blood samples. Another common use of this
technology is to establish paternity. DNA fingerprints are

560 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 27.9

Female defense polygyny in bats. The male at the lower right is
guarding a group of females.

so variable that each individual’s is unique. Thus, by com-
paring the DNA of a man and a child, experts can establish
with a relatively high degree of confidence whether the
man is the child’s father.

This approach is now commonly used in paternity law-
suits, but it has also become a standard weapon in the arse-
nal of behavioral ecologists. By establishing paternity, re-
searchers can precisely quantify the reproductive success of
individual males and thus assess how successful their partic-
ular reproductive strategies have been (figure 27.102). In
one classic study of red-winged blackbirds (figure 27.100),
researchers established that half of all nests contained at
least one bird fertilized by a male other than the territory
owner; overall, 20% of the offspring were the result of such
extra-pair copulations (EPCs).

Studies such as this have established that EPCs—‘“cheat-
ing”—are much more pervasive in the bird world than
originally suspected. Even in some species that were be-
lieved to be monogamous on the basis of behavioral obser-
vations, the incidence of offspring being fathered by a male
other than the female’s mate is sometimes surprisingly
high.

Why do individuals have extra-pair copulations? For
males, the answer is obvious: increased reproductive suc-
cess. For females, it is less clear, as in most cases, it does
not result in an increased number of offspring. One possi-
