Foraging Behavior

The best introduction to behavioral ecology is the exami-
nation of one well-defined behavior in detail. While
many behaviors might be chosen, we will focus on forag-
ing behavior. For many animals, food comes in a variety
of sizes. Larger foods may contain more energy but may
be harder to capture and less abundant. In addition, some
types of food may be farther away than other types.
Hence, foraging for these animals involves a trade-off be-
tween a food’s energy content and the cost of obtaining
it. The met energy (in calories or Joules) gained by feeding
on each size prey is simply the energy content of the prey
minus the energy costs of pursuing and handling it. Ac-
cording to optimal foraging theory, natural selection
favors individuals whose foraging behavior is as energeti-
cally efficient as possible. In other words, animals tend to
feed on prey that maximize their net energy intake per
unit of foraging time.

A number of studies have demonstrated that foragers
do preferentially utilize prey that maximize the energy
return. Shore crabs, for example, tend to feed primarily
on intermediate-sized mussels which provide the greatest
energetic return; larger mussels provide more energy, but
also take considerably more energy to crack open
(figure 27.3).

This optimal foraging approach makes two assump-
tions. First, natural selection will only favor behavior that
maximizes energy acquisition if increased energy reserves
lead to increases in reproductive success. In some cases,
this is true. For example, in both Columbian ground
squirrels and captive zebra finches, a direct relationship
exists between net energy intake and the number of off-
spring raised; similarly, the reproductive success of orb-
weaving spiders is related to how much food they can
capture.

However, animals have other needs beside energy acqui-
sition, and sometimes these needs come in conflict. One
obvious alternative is avoiding predators: oftentimes the
behavior that maximizes energy intake is not the one that
minimizes predation risk. Thus, the behavior that maxi-
mizes fitness often may reflect a trade-off between obtain-
ing the most energy at the least risk of being eaten. Not
surprisingly, many studies have shown that a wide variety
of animal species alter their foraging behavior when preda-
tors are present. Still another alternative is finding mates:
males of many species, for example, will greatly reduce
their feeding rate in order to enhance their ability to attract
and defend females.

The second assumption of optimal foraging theory is
that it has resulted from natural selection. As we have
seen, natural selection can lead to evolutionary change
only when differences among individuals have a genetic
basis. Few studies have investigated whether differences
among individuals in their ability to maximize energy in-

 

cy
4
(ae
cS
°8
ar
af
25
1g

10 20 30 40

Length of mussel (mm)

 

FIGURE 27.3

Optimal diet. The shore crab selects a diet of energetically
profitable prey. The curve describes the net energy gain (equal to
energy gained minus energy expended) derived from feeding on
different sizes of mussels. The bar graph shows the numbers of
mussels of each size in the diet. Shore crabs most often feed on
those mussels that provide the most energy.

take is the result of genetic differences, but there are some
exceptions. For example, one study found that female
zebra finches that were particularly successful in maximiz-
ing net energy intake tended to have offspring that were
similarly successful. Because birds were removed from
their mothers before they left the nest, this similarity
likely reflected a genetic basis for foraging behavior,
rather than being a result of young birds learning to for-
age from their mothers.

Differences among individuals in foraging behavior may
also be a function of age. Inexperienced yellow-eyed juncos
(a small North American bird), for example, have not
learned how to handle large prey items efficiently. As a re-
sult, the energetic costs of eating such prey are higher than
the benefits, and as a result they tend to focus on smaller
prey. Only when the birds are older and more experienced
do they learn to easily dispatch these prey, which are then
included in the diet.

 

Natural selection may favor the evolution of foraging
behaviors that maximize the amount of energy gained
per unit time spent foraging. Animals that acquire
energy efficiently during foraging may increase their
fitness by having more energy available for
reproduction, but other considerations, such as
avoiding predators, also are important in determining
reproductive success.

 

Chapter 27. Behavioral Ecology 555
