bility is that females mate with genetically superior individ-
uals, thus enhancing the genes passed on to their offspring.
Another possibility is that females can increase the amount
of help they get in raising their offspring. Ifa female mates
with more than one male, each male may help raise the off-
spring. This is exactly what happens in a common English
bird, the dunnock. Females mate not only with the terri-
tory owner, but also with subordinate males that hang
around the edge of the territory. If these subordinates mate
enough with a female, they will help raise her young, pre-
sumably because some of these young may have been fa-
thered by this male.

Alternative Mating Tactics

Natural selection has led to the evolution of a variety of
other means of increasing reproductive success. For ex-
ample, in many species of fish, there are two genetic
classes of males. One group is large and defends territo-
ries to obtain matings. The other type of male is small
and adopts a completely different strategy. They do not
maintain territories, but hang around the edge of the ter-
ritories of large males. Just at the end of a male’s
courtship, when the female is laying her eggs and the ter-
ritorial male is depositing sperm, the smaller male will
dart in and release its own sperm into the water, thus fer-
tilizing some of the eggs. If this strategy is successful,
natural selection will favor the evolution of these two dif-
ferent male reproductive strategies.

Similar patterns are seen in other organisms. In some
dung beetles, territorial males have large horns that they
use to guard the chambers in which females reside,
whereas genetically small males don’t have horns; in-
stead, they dig side tunnels and attempt to intercept the
female inside her chamber. In isopods, there are three
genetic size classes. The medium-sized males pass for fe-
males and enter a large male’s territory in this way; the
smallest class are so tiny, they are able to sneak in com-
pletely undetected.

This is just a glimpse of the rich diversity in mating sys-
tems that have evolved. The bottom line is: if there is a way
of increasing reproductive success, natural selection will
favor its evolution.

 

Mating systems represent reproductive adaptations to
ecological conditions. The need for parental care, the
ability of both sexes to provide it, and the timing of
female reproduction are important influences on the
evolution of monogamy, polygyny, and polyandry.
Detailed study of animal mating systems, along with
the use of modern molecular techniques, are revealing
many surprises in animal mating systems. This
diversity is a testament to the power of natural
selection to favor any trait that increases an animal’s
fitness.

 

 

9dd,DEFG

kb

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 27.10

The study of paternity. (2) A DNA fingerprinting gel from the
dunnock. The bands represent fragments of DNA of different
lengths. The four nestlings (D-G) were in the nest of the female.
By comparing the bands present in the two males, we can
determine which male fathered which offspring. The triangles
point to the bands which are diagnostic for one male and not the
other. In this case, the beta male fathered three of the four
offspring. () Results of a DNA fingerprinting study in red-
winged blackbirds. Fractions indicate the proportion of offspring
fathered by the male in whose territory the nest occurred. Arrows
indicate how many offspring were fathered by particular males
outside of each territory. Nests on some territories were not
sampled.

Chapter 27. Behavioral Ecology 561
