The Benefits of Mate Choice

In some cases, the benefits are obvious. In many species of
birds and mammals, and some species of other types of ani-
mals, males help raise the offspring. In these cases, females
would benefit by choosing the male that can provide the
best care—the better the parent, the more offspring she is
likely to rear.

In other species, males provide no care, but maintain
territories that provide food, nesting sites, and predator
refuges. In such species, females that choose males with
the best territories will maximize their reproductive
success.

Indirect Benefits

In other species, however, males provide no direct benefits
of any kind to females. In such cases, it is not intuitively
obvious what females have to gain by being choosy. More-
over, what could be the possible benefit of choosing a male
with an extremely long tail or a complex song?

A number of theories have been proposed to explain the
evolution of such preferences. One idea is that females
choose the male that is the healthiest or oldest. Large
males, for example, have probably been successful at living
long, acquiring a lot of food and resisting parasites and dis-
ease. Similarly, in guppies and some birds, the brightness of
a male’s color is a reflection of the quality of his diet and
overall health. Females may gain two benefits from mating
with large or colorful males. First, to the extent that the
males’ success in living long and prospering is the result of
a good genetic makeup, the female will be ensuring that
her offspring receive good genes from their father. Indeed,
several studies have demonstrated that males that are pre-
ferred by females produce offspring that are more vigorous
and survive better than offspring of males that are not pre-
ferred. Second, healthy males are less likely to be carrying
diseases, which might be transmitted to the female during
mating.

A variant of this theory goes one step further. In some
cases, females prefer mates with traits that are detrimental
to survival (figure 27.8). The long tail of the peacock is a
hindrance in flying and makes males more vulnerable to
predators. Why should females prefer males with such
traits? The handicap hypothesis states that only geneti-
cally superior mates can survive with such a handicap. By
choosing a male with the largest handicap, the female is en-
suring that her offspring will receive these quality genes.
Of course, the male offspring will also inherit the genes for
the handicap. For this reason, evolutionary biologists are
still debating the merits of this hypothesis.

Other courtship displays appear to have evolved from a
predisposition in the female’s sensory system to be stimu-
lated by a certain type of stimulus. For example, females
may be better able to detect particular colors or sounds at a
certain frequency. Sensory exploitation involves the evolu-
tion in males of an attractive signal that “exploits” these

 

 

 

 

Frequency (kHz)

 

 

CHANMBSOHANBHBOANMBHOANAA

 

 

 

 

(b) (o)

FIGURE 27.8

The benefits and costs of vocalizing. (2) The male Ttingara
frog, Physalaemus pustulosus. (b) The males’ calls attract females as
well as predatory bats. Calls of greater complexity are represented
from top to bottom in (). Females prefer more complex calls, but
these calls are detected particularly well by bats. Consequently,
males that females prefer are at the greatest risk of being captured.

preexisting biases—if females are particularly adept at de-
tecting red objects, for example, then males will evolve red
coloration. Consider the vocalizations of the Tiingara frog
(Physalaemus pustulosus) (see figure 27.8). Unlike related
species, males include a “chuck” in their calls. Recent re-
search suggests that even females of related species are par-
ticularly attracted to calls of this sort, even though males of
these species do not produce “chucks.” Why this prefer-
ence evolved is unknown, but males of the Ttingara frog
have evolved to take advantage of it.

A great variety of other theories have been proposed to
explain the evolution of mating preferences. Many of these
theories may be correct in some circumstances and none
seems capable of explaining all of the variation in mating
behavior in the animal world. This is an area of vibrant re-
search with new discoveries appearing regularly.

 

Natural selection has favored the evolution of behaviors
that maximize the reproductive success of males and
females. By evaluating and selecting mates with

superior qualities, an animal can increase its
reproductive success.

 

Chapter 27. Behavioral Ecology 559
