=
Vey

Chapter 27 www.mhhe.com/raven6e www.biocourse.com

 

Summary Questions Media Resources

27.1 Evolutionary forces shape behavior.

 

* Many behaviors are ecologically important and serve 1, What does optimal foraging
as adaptations. theory predict about an animal’s

: . foraging behavior? What factors
* Foraging and territorial behaviors have evolved unrelated to this theory may also

because they allow animals to use resources influence an animal’s foraging
efficiently. choices?

2. What are the benefits of
territorial behavior, and what are
its costs? Under what
circumstances is territorial
behavior disadvantageous?

27.2 Reproductive behavior involves many choices influenced by natural selection.

 

* Male and female animals maximize their fitness with 3. Why does natural selection * Bioethics Case Study:
different reproductive behaviors. The differences favor mate choice? What factor eS Behar Disordered
relate to the extent to which each sex provides care is most important in ent nicle
for offsprin determining which sex exhibits mn Science Article:

pring. mate choice? Repetition and

* Usually, males are competitive and females show Learning
mate choice because females have higher 4. In birds, how does the amount * On Science Article:

haere 8 of parental care required by the Flipper, A Senseless
reproductive costs. offspring affect the evolution of Killer?

* Aspecies’ mating system is related to its ecology. a species’ mating system?

27.3 There is considerable controversy about the evolution of social behavior.

 

¢ Many animals show altruistic, or self-sacri icing, 5. What is reciprocal altruism?
behavior. Altruism may evolve through reciprocity or What is kin selection? How does
be directed toward relatives. Cooperative behavior kin selection increase an

individual’s success in passing its

often increases an individual’s inclusive fitness. Ss
genes on to the next generation?

* Individuals form social groups because it is
advantageous for them to do so.

* The benefits of living in a group, such as enhanced
feeding success, are often balanced by the cost of in-
creased incidence of disease and parasitism.

¢ Animal societies are characterized by cooperation and
conflict. The organization of a society is related to
the ecology of a species.

27.4 Vertebrates exhibit a broad range of social behaviors.

 

¢ Human behavior is extremely rich and varied and 6. In vertebrate societies, what
may result from both biology and culture. are the costs to an individual

who makes an alarm call? Based
¢ Evolutionary theory can give us important insight
on research in ground squirrels,

into human nature, but such an approach to the study hich individuals are most likely
of human behavior may have political consequences. to make alarm calls, and what
benefits do they receive by doing

so?

568 Part VIL Ecology and Behavior
