Bm Vertebrates exhibit a broad range of social behaviors.

Vertebrate Societies

In contrast to the highly structured and integrated insect
societies and their remarkable forms of altruism, vertebrate
social groups are usually less rigidly organized and cohe-
sive. It seems paradoxical that vertebrates, which have
larger brains and are capable of more complex behaviors,
are generally less altruistic than insects. Nevertheless, in
some complex vertebrate social systems individuals may be
exhibiting both reciprocity and kin-selected altruism. But
vertebrate societies also display more conflict and aggres-
sion among group members than do insect societies. Con-
flict in vertebrate societies generally centers on access to
food and mates.

Vertebrate societies, like insect societies, have particular
types of organization. Each social group of vertebrates has
a certain size, stability of members, number of breeding
males and females, and type of mating system. Behavioral
ecologists have learned that the way a group is organized is
influenced most often by ecological factors such as food
type and predation (figure 27.14).

African weaver birds, which construct nests from vege-
tation, provide an excellent example to illustrate the rela-
tionship between ecology and social organization. Their
roughly 90 species can be divided according to the type
of social group they form. One set of species lives in the
forest and builds camouflaged, solitary nests. Males and
females are monogamous; they forage for insects to feed
their young. The second group of species nests in
colonies in trees on the savanna. They are polygynous
and feed in flocks on seeds. The feeding and nesting
habits of these two sets of species are correlated with
their mating systems. In the forest, insects are hard to
find, and both parents must cooperate in feeding the
young. The camouflaged nests do not call the attention
of predators to their brood. On the open savanna, build-
ing a hidden nest is not an option. Rather, savanna-
dwelling weaver birds protect their young from predators
by nesting in trees which are not very abundant. This
shortage of safe nest sites means that birds must nest to-
gether in colonies. Because seeds occur abundantly, a fe-
male can acquire all the food needed to rear young with-
out a male’s help. The male, free from the duties of
parenting, spends his time courting many females—a
polygynous mating system.

One exception to the general rule that vertebrate soci-
eties are not organized like those of insects is the naked
mole rat, a small, hairless rodent that lives in and near East
Africa. Unlike other kinds of mole rats, which live alone or
in small family groups, naked mole rats form large under-
ground colonies with a far-ranging system of tunnels and a
central nesting area. It is not unusual for a colony to con-
tain 80 individuals.

566 Part VIE Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 27.14

Foraging and predator avoidance. A meerkat sentinel on duty.
Meerkats, Suricata suricata, are a species of highly social mongoose
living in the semiarid sands of the Kalahari Desert. This meerkat
is taking its turn to act as a lookout for predators. Under the
security of its vigilance, the other group members can focus their
attention on foraging.

Naked mole rats feed on bulbs, roots and tubers,
which they locate by constant tunneling. As in insect so-
cieties, there is a division of labor among the colony
members, with some mole rats working as tunnelers
while others perform different tasks, depending upon the
size of their body. Large mole rats defend the colony and
dig tunnels.

Naked mole rat colonies have a reproductive division of
labor similar to the one normally associated with the euso-
cial insects. All of the breeding is done by a single female or
“queen,” who has one or two male consorts. The workers,
consisting of both sexes, keep the tunnels clear and forage
for food.

 

Social behavior in vertebrates is often characterized by
kin-selected altruism. Altruistic behavior is involved in
cooperative breeding in birds and alarm-calling in
mammals.

 
