Dynamics of Ecosystems

 

Concept Outline

28.1 Chemicals cycle within ecosystems.

The Water Cycle. Water cycles between the atmosphere
and the oceans, although deforestation has broken the cycle
in some ecosystems.

The Carbon Cycle. Photosynthesis captures carbon
from the atmosphere; respiration returns it.

The Nitrogen Cycle. Nitrogen is captured from the
atmosphere by the metabolic activities of bacteria; other
bacteria degrade organic nitrogen, returning it to the
atmosphere.

The Phosphorus Cycle. Of all nutrients that plants
require, phosphorus tends to be the most limiting.
Biogeochemical Cycles Illustrated: Recycling in a
Forest Ecosystem. In a classic experiment, the role of
forests in retaining nutrients is assessed.

28.2 Ecosystems are structured by who eats whom.

Trophic Levels. Energy passes through ecosystems in a
limited number of steps, typically three or four.

 

FIGURE 28.1
28.3 Energy flows through ecosystems. Mushrooms serve a greater function than haute cuisine.
Primary Productivity. Plants produce biomass by Mushrooms and other organisms are crucial recyclers in
photosynthesis, while animals produce biomass by ecosystems, breaking down dead and decaying material and
consuming plants or other animals. releasing critical elements such as carbon and nitrogen back into
The Energy in Food Chains. As energy passes through nutrient cycles.
an ecosystem, a good deal is lost at each step.
Ecological Pyramids. ‘The biomass of a trophic level is
less, the farther it is from the primary production of lhe earth is a closed system with respect to chemicals,
photosynthesizers. but an open system in terms of energy. Collectively,
Interactions among Different Trophic Levels. the organisms in ecosystems regulate the capture and ex-
Processes on one trophic level can have effects on higher or penditure of energy and the cycling of chemicals (figure
lower levels of the food chain. 28.1). As we will see in this chapter, all organisms, includ-
28.4 Biodiversity promotes ecosystem stability. ing humans, depend on the ability of other organisms—

plants, algae, and some bacteria—to recycle the basic com-
ponents of life. In chapter 29, we consider the many
different types of ecosystems that constitute the biosphere.
Chapters 30 and 31 then discuss the many threats to the
biosphere and the species it contains.

Effects of Species Richness. Species-rich communities are
more productive and resistant to disturbance.

Causes of Species Richness. Ecosystem productivity,
spatial heterogeneity, and climate all affect the number of
species in an ecosystem.

Biogeographic Patterns of Species Diversity. Many

more species occur in the tropics than in temperate regions.
Island Biogeography. Species richness on islands may be a
dynamic equilibrium between extinction and colonization.

571
