    

The Global Environment

Identifying the Environmental
Culprit Harming Amphibians

What started out as a relatively standard field trip in 1995
turned into a bizarre experience for a group of middle-
school science students in Minnesota. Their assignment:
to collect frogs for their biology class. What they found in
local ponds were not frogs like you are accustomed to see-
ing, frogs like the one shown here. What they found
looked more like the result of some bizarre genetic experi-
ment! Approximately half of the animals collected were
deformed, with extra legs or missing legs or no eyes.
Turning to the Internet, they soon discovered that the
problem was not isolated to Minnesota. Neighboring
states were reporting the same phenomenon—an alarming
number of deformed frogs, all across the United States and
Canada.

Although deformed frogs such as those collected by
the Minnesota students received national attention, a dif-
ferent problem affecting amphibians has received even
more. During the past 30 years, there has been a world-
wide catastrophic decline in amphibian populations, with
many local populations becoming extinct. The problem is
a focus of intensive research, which indicates that four
factors are contributing in a major way to the worldwide
amphibian decline: (1) habitat destruction, particularly
loss of wetlands, (2) the introduction of exotic species
that outcompete local amphibian populations, (3) alter-
ation of habitats by toxic chemicals or other human activ-
ities (clear-cutting of trees, for example, drastically re-
duces humidity), and (4) infection of amphibians by
chytrid fungi or ranavirus, both of which are fatal to
them.

The developmental deformities reported in frogs are
also a worldwide problem, but seem to arise from a differ-
ent set of factors than those producing global declines in
amphibian populations. The increase in deformities seems
to reflect the fact that amphibians are particularly sensitive
to their environment. Their semi-aquatic mode of living,
depending on a watery environment to reproduce and keep
their skin moist, means that they are exposed to all types of
environmental changes.

Amphibians are particularly vulnerable during early de-
velopment, when their fertilized eggs lay in water, exposed
to potential infection by trematodes that can disrupt devel-
opment, to acid introduced to ponds by acid rain, to toxic

: is
cades frog
(Rana cascadae),
are declining in
numbers in
many regions

 

oni, <a

chemical pollutants, and to increased levels of UV-B radia-
tion produced by ozone depletion.

While numerous experiments performed under labora-
tory conditions have demonstrated the power of these fac-
tors to produce developmental deformities, and in so
doing to reduce population survival rates, it is important to
understand that “can” does not equal “does.” To learn
what is in fact going on, scientists have examined the ef-
fects of these factors on amphibian development in the
natural environment.

Some environmental scientists suspected that toxic
chemical pollutants in the water might be causing the de-
formities and that the widespread occurrence of deformed
frogs might well be an early warning of potential future
problems in other species, including humans.

Other scientists cautioned that a different factor might
be responsible. Although chemicals such as pesticides cer-
tainly could produce deformities in localized situations, say
near a chemical spill, so too could other environmental
factors affecting local habitats, particularly parasitic infec-
tions by trematodes. Demonstrating this point, re-
searchers in 1999 showed that the multilimb and missing
limb phenomenon in frogs can be caused by trematodes
that infect the developing tadpoles, disrupting develop-
ment of their limbs.

Responding to this alternative suggestion, those scien-
tists nominating toxins as the principal culprit have cau-
tioned that showing trematode parasites can have a sig-
nificant effect on local populations is not the same thing
as demonstrating that they have in fact done so. And,
they add, it certainly doesn’t rule out a major contribu-
tion to the problem by toxic environmental pollutants, or
by any of the other potential disruptors of amphibian
development.

In a particularly clear example of the sort of investiga-
tion that will be needed to sort out this complex issue,
Andrew Blaustein of Oregon State University headed a
team of scientists that set out to examine the effects of
UV-B radiation on amphibians in natural populations. In
a series of experiments carried out in the field, they at-
tempted to assess the degree to which UV-B radiation

569
