Human Sociobiology

As a social species, humans have an unparalleled com-
plexity. Indeed, we are the only species with the intelli-
gence to contemplate the social behavior of other ani-
mals. Intelligence is just one human trait. If an ethologist
were to take an inventory of human behavior, he or she
would list kin-selected altruism; reciprocity and other
elaborate social contracts; extensive parental care; con-
flicts between parents and offspring; violence and war-
fare; infanticide; a variety of mating systems, including
monogamy, polygyny, and polyandry; along with sexual
behaviors such as extra-pair copulation (“adultery”) and
homosexuality; and behaviors like adoption that appear to
defy evolutionary explanation. This incredible variety of
behaviors occurs in one species, and any trait can change
within any individual. Are these behaviors rooted in
human biology?

Biological and Cultural Evolution

During the course of human evolution and the emergence
of civilization, two processes have led to adaptive change.
One is biological evolution. We have a primate heritage,
reflected in the extensive amount of genetic material we
share with our closest relatives, the chimpanzees. Our up-
right posture, bipedal locomotion, and powerful, precise
hand grips are adaptations whose origins are traceable
through our primate ancestors. Kin-selected and recipro-
cal altruism, as well as other shared traits like aggression
and different types of mating systems, can also be seen in
nonhuman primates, in whom we can demonstrate that
these social traits are adaptive. We may speculate, based
on various lines of evidence, that similar traits evolved in
early humans. If individuals with certain social traits had
an advantage in reproduction over other individuals that
lacked the traits, and if these traits had a genetic basis,
then the alleles for their expression would now be ex-
pected to be part of the human genome and to influence
our behavior.

The second process that has underscored the emer-
gence of civilization and led to adaptive change is cultural
evolution, the transfer across generations of information
necessary for survival. This is a nongenetic mode of adap-
tation. Many adaptations—the use of tools, the formation
of cooperative hunting groups, the construction of shel-
ters, and marriage practices—do not follow Mendelian
rules of inheritance and are passed from generation to
generation by tradition. Nonetheless, cultural inheritance
is as valid a way to convey adaptations across generations
as genetic inheritance. Human cultures are also extraordi-
narily diverse. The ways in which children are socialized
among Trobriand Islanders, Pygmies, and Yanomamo In-

dians are very different. Again, we must remember that
this fantastic variation occurs within one species, and that
individual behavior is very flexible.

Identifying the Biological Components of Human
Behavior

Given this great flexibility, how can the biological compo-
nents of human behavior be identified? One way is to look
for common patterns that appear in a wide variety of cul-
tures, that is, to study behaviors that are cross-cultural. In
spite of cultural variation, there are some traits that char-
acterize all human societies. For example, all cultures have
an incest taboo, forbidding marriages between close rela-
tives. Incestuous matings lead to a greater chance of ex-
posing disorders such as mental retardation and hemo-
philia. Natural selection may have acted to create a
behavioral disposition against incest, and that disposition
is now a cultural norm. Genes responsible for guiding this
behavior may have become fixed in human populations
because of their adaptive effects. Genes thus guide the di-
rection of culture.

Although human mating systems vary, polygyny is found
to be the most common among all cultures. Because most
mammalian species are polygynous, the human pattern
seems to reflect our mammalian evolutionary heritage and
thus is a part of our biology. This conclusion is drawn from
using the comparative approach, common in evolutionary
science. Nonverbal communication patterns, like smiling
and raising the hand in a greeting, also occur in many cul-
tures. Perhaps these behaviors represent a common human
heritage.

The explanations sociobiology offers to understand
human behavior have been and continue to be controver-
sial. For example, the new discipline of evolutionary
psychology seeks to understand the origins of the human
mind. Human behaviors are viewed as being extensions
of our genes. The diversity of human cultures are
thought to have a common core of characteristics that are
generated by our psychology, which evolved as an adap-
tation to the lifestyle of our hunter-gatherer ancestors
during the Pleistocene. Much of human behavior is seen
as reflecting ancient, adaptive traits, now expressed in the
context of modern civilization. In this controversial view,
human behaviors such as jealousy and infidelity are
viewed as adaptations; these behaviors increased the fit-
ness of our ancestors, and thus are now part of the human
psyche.

 

Sociobiology offers general explanations of human
behavior that are controversial, but are becoming more
generally accepted than in the past.

 

Chapter 27 Behavioral Ecology 567
