The Origin and Early
History of Life

 

Concept Outline
4.1 All living things share key characteristics.

What Is Life? All known organisms share certain general
properties, and to a large degree these properties define what
we mean by life.

4.2 There are many ideas about the origin of life.

Theories about the Origin of Life. There are both
religious and scientific views about the origin of life. This
text treats only the latter—only the scientifically testable.
Scientists Disagree about Where Life Started. The
atmosphere of the early earth was rich in hydrogen,

providing a ready supply of energetic electrons with which to
build organic molecules.

The Miller-Urey Experiment. Experiments attempting to
duplicate the conditions of early earth produce many of the
key molecules of living organisms.

4.3 The first cells had little internal structure.

Theories about the Origin of Cells. The first cells are
thought to have arisen spontaneously, but there is little
agreement as to the mechanism.

The Earliest Cells. The earliest fossils are of bacteria too
small to see with the unaided eye.

44 The first eukaryotic cells were larger and more
complex than bacteria.

The First Eukaryotic Cells. Fossils of the first eukaryotic
cells do not appear in rocks until 1.5 billion years ago, over 2
billion years after bacteria. Multicellular life is restricted to
the four eukaryotic kingdoms of life.

Has Life Evolved Elsewhere? _ It seems probable that life
has evolved on other worlds besides our own. The possible
presence of life in the warm waters beneath the surface of
Europa, a moon of Jupiter, is a source of current speculation.

 

 

FIGURE 4.1

The origin of life. The fortuitous mix of physical events and
chemical elements at the right place and time created the first
living cells on earth.

here are a great many scientists with intriguing ideas

that explain how life may have originated on earth, but
there is very little that we know for sure. New hypotheses
are being proposed constantly, and old ones reevaluated. By
the time this text is published, some of the ideas presented
here about the origin of life will surely be obsolete. Thus,
the contesting ideas are presented in this chapter in an
open-ended format, attempting to make clear that there is
as yet no one answer to the question of how life originated
on earth. Although recent photographs taken by the Hubble
Space Telescope have revived controversy about the age of
the universe, it seems clear the earth itself was formed about
4.6 billion years ago. The oldest clear evidence of life—mi-
crofossils in ancient rock—are 3.5 billion years old. The ori-
gin of life seems to have taken just the right combination of
physical events and chemical processes (figure 4.1).
