[128.1 Chemicals cycle within ecosystems.

All of the chemical elements that occur in organisms cycle
through ecosystems in biogeochemical cycles, cyclical
paths involving both biological and chemical processes. On
a global scale, only a very small portion of these substances
is contained within the bodies of organisms; almost all ex-
ists in nonliving reservoirs: the atmosphere, water, or rocks.
Carbon (in the form of carbon dioxide), nitrogen, and oxy-
gen enter the bodies of organisms primarily from the at-
mosphere, while phosphorus, potassium, sulfur, magne-
sium, calcium, sodium, iron, and cobalt come from rocks.
All organisms require carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur in relatively large quantities; they
require other elements in smaller amounts.

The cycling of materials in ecosystems begins when
these chemicals are incorporated into the bodies of organ-
isms from nonliving reservoirs such as the atmosphere or
the waters of oceans or rivers. Many minerals, for example,
first enter water from weathered rock, then pass into or-
ganisms when they drink the water. Materials pass from the
organisms that first acquire them into the bodies of other
organisms that eat them, until ultimately, through decom-
position, they complete the cycle and return to the nonliv-
ing world.

 

FIGURE 28.2

The Water Cycle

The water cycle (figure 28.2) is the most familiar of all bio-
geochemical cycles. All life depends directly on the pres-
ence of water; the bodies of most organisms consist mainly
of this substance. Water is the source of hydrogen ions,
whose movements generate ATP in organisms. For that
reason alone, it is indispensable to their functioning.

The Path of Free Water

The oceans cover three-fourths of the earth’s surface. From
the oceans, water evaporates into the atmosphere, a process
powered by energy from the sun. Over land approximately
90% of the water that reaches the atmosphere is moisture
that evaporates from the surface of plants through a process
called transpiration (see chapter 40). Most precipitation falls
directly into the oceans, but some falls on land, where it
passes into surface and subsurface bodies of fresh water.
Only about 2% of all the water on earth is captured in any
form—frozen, held in the soil, or incorporated into the
bodies of organisms. All of the rest is free water, circulating
between the atmosphere and the oceans.

Evaporation

The water cycle. Water circulates from atmosphere to earth and back again.

572 Part VII The Global Environment
