Examples of Kin Selection

Many examples of kin selection are known from the ani-
mal world. For example, Belding’s ground squirrel give
alarm calls when they spot a predator such as a coyote or
a badger. Such predators may attack a calling squirrel, so
giving a signal places the caller at risk. The social unit of
a ground squirrel colony consists of a female and her
daughters, sisters, aunts, and nieces. Males in the colony
are not genetically related to these females. By marking
all squirrels in a colony with an individual dye pattern on
their fur and by recording which individuals gave calls
and the social circumstances of their calling, researchers
found that females who have relatives living nearby are
more likely to give alarm calls than females with no kin
nearby. Males tend to call much less frequently as would
be expected as they are not related to most colony
members.

Another example of kin selection comes from a bird
called the white-fronted bee-eater which lives along rivers
in Africa in colonies of 100 to 200 birds. In contrast to the
ground squirrels, it is the males that usually remain in the
colony in which they were born, and the females that dis-
perse to join new colonies. Many bee-eaters do not raise
their own offspring, but rather help others. Many of these
birds are relatively young, but helpers also include older
birds whose nesting attempts have failed. The presence of
a single helper, on average, doubles the number of off-
spring that survive. Two lines of evidence support the
idea that kin selection is important in determining help-
ing behavior in this species. First, helpers are usually
males, which are usually related to other birds in the
colony, and not females, which are not related. Second,
when birds have the choice of helping different parents,
they almost invariably choose the parents to which they
are most closely related.

Haplodiploidy and Hymenopteran Social

Evolution

Probably the most famous application of kin selection
theory has been to social insects. A hive of honeybees
consists of a single queen, who is the sole egg-layer, and
up to 50,000 of her offspring, nearly all of whom are fe-
male workers with nonfunctional ovaries (figure 27.12),
a situation termed eusociality. The sterility of the work-
ers is altruistic: these offspring gave up their personal
reproduction to help their mother rear more of their
sisters.

Hamilton explained the origin of altruism in hy-
menopterans (that is, bees, wasps, and ants) with his kin
selection model. In these insects, males are haploid and
females are diploid. This unusual system of sex determi-
nation, called haplodiploidy, leads to an unusual situa-
tion. If the queen is fertilized by a single male, then all

564 Part VII Ecology and Behavior

 

FIGURE 27.12

Reproductive division of labor in honeybees. The queen
(shown here with a red spot painted on her thorax) is the sole egg-
layer. Her daughters are sterile workers.

female offspring will inherit exactly the same alleles from
their father (because he is haploid and has only one copy
of each allele). These female offspring will also share
among themselves, on average, half of the alleles they get
from the queen. Consequently, each female offspring will
share on average 75% of her alleles with each sister (to
verify this, rework figure 27.11, but allow the father to
only have one allele for each gene). By contrast, should
she have offspring of her own, she would only share half
of her alleles with these offspring (the other half would
come from their father). Thus, because of this close ge-
netic relatedness, workers propagate more alleles by giving
up their own reproduction to assist their mother in rearing
their sisters, some of whom will be new queens and start new
colonies and reproduce. Thus, this unusual haplodiploid sys-
tem may have set the stage for the evolution of eusocial-
ity in hymenopterans and, indeed, such systems have
evolved as many as 12 or many times in the Hy-
menoptera.

One wrinkle in this theory, however, is that eusocial
systems have evolved in several other groups, including
thrips, termites, and naked mole rats. Although thrips
are also haplodiploid, both termites and naked mole rats
are not. Thus, although haplodiploidy may have facili-
tated the evolution of eusociality, it is not a necessary
prerequisite.

 

Kin selection is a potent force favoring, in some
situations, the evolution of altruism and even complex
social systems.

 
