 

Group Living and the
Evolution of Social Systems

Organisms as diverse as bacteria, cnidarians, in-
sects, fish, birds, prairie dogs, lions, whales, and
chimpanzees exist in social groups. To encom-
pass the wide variety of social phenomena, we
can broadly define a society as a group of organ-
isms of the same species that are organized in a co-
operative manner.

Why have individuals in some species given
up a solitary existence to become members of
a group? We have just seen that one explana-
tion is kin selection: groups may be composed
of close relatives. In other cases, individuals
may benefit directly from social living. For ex- @)

8

40

Percent attack success

 

 

 

 

100}
80;
60}
40+

20-

al mo 0

Median reaction distance (m)

 

 

 

 

1 2-10 11-50 50+ 1 2-10 11-50 50+

Number of pigeons Number of pigeons
in flock in flock

 

 

ample, a bird that joins a flock may receive
greater protection from predators. As flock
size increases, the risk of predation decreases
because there are more individuals to scan the
environment for predators (figure 27.13). A
member of a flock may also increase its feed-
ing success if it can acquire information from
other flock members about the location of
new, rich food sources. In some predators, hunting in
groups can increase success and allow the group to tackle
prey too large for any one individual.

Insect Societies

In insects, sociality has chiefly evolved in two orders, the
Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps) and the Isoptera (ter-
mites), although a few other insect groups include social
species. All ants, some bees, some wasps, and all termites
are eusocial (truly social): they have a division of labor in
reproduction (a fertile queen and sterile workers), coopera-
tive care of brood and an overlap of generations so that the
queen lives alongside her offspring. Social insect colonies
are composed of different castes of workers that differ in
size and morphology and have different tasks they perform,
such as workers and soldiers.

In honeybees, the queen maintains her dominance in
the hive by secreting a pheromone, called “queen sub-
stance,” that suppresses development of the ovaries in
other females, turning them into sterile workers. Drones
(male bees) are produced only for purposes of mating.
When the colony grows larger in the spring, some mem-
bers do not receive a sufficient quantity of queen sub-
stance, and the colony begins preparations for swarming.
Workers make several new queen chambers, in which new
queens begin to develop. Scout workers look for a new
nest site and communicate its location to the colony. The
old queen and a swarm of female workers then move to
the new site. Left behind, a new queen emerges, kills the

FIGURE 27.13

Flocking behavior decreases predation. (a) As the size of a pigeon flock
increases, hawks are less successful at capturing pigeons. (») When more
pigeons are present in the flock, they can detect hawks at greater distances,
thus allowing more time for the pigeons to escape.

other potential queens, flies out to mate, and returns to
assume “rule” of the hive.

The leafcutter ants provide another fascinating exam-
ple of the remarkable lifestyles of social insects. Leafeut-
ters live in colonies of up to several million individuals,
growing crops of fungi beneath the ground. Their
mound-like nests are underground “cities” covering more
than 100 square meters, with hundreds of entrances and
chambers as deep as 5 meters beneath the ground. The
division of labor among the worker ants is related to their
size. Every day, workers travel along trails from the nest
to a tree or a bush, cut its leaves into small pieces, and
carry the pieces back to the nest. Smaller workers chew
the leaf fragments into a mulch, which they spread like a
carpet in the underground fungus chambers. Even
smaller workers implant fungal hyphae in the mulch.
Soon a luxuriant garden of fungi is growing. While other
workers weed out undesirable kinds of fungi, nurse ants
carry the larvae of the nest to choice spots in the garden,
where the larvae graze. This elaborate social system has
evolved to produce reproductive queens that will disperse
from the parent nest and start new colonies, repeating
the cycle.

 

Eusocial insect workers exhibit an advanced social
structure that includes division of labor in reproduction
and workers with different tasks.

 

Chapter 27. Behavioral Ecology 565
