 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3
> 100 + = 100 +
Seb Se}
38 35
gs 28
2 8 507 peeoods
a 37
ar — 25
=
0 <0 =
3 6 10 14 3 6 10 14
Length of exposure (days) Length of exposure (days)
UV-B blocking shield [Bl vv-8 transmitting cover

 

 

Blaustein’s UV-B experiment. In the group of salamanders whose eggs were protected from UV-B radiation, hatching rates were higher

and deformity rates were lower.

promoted amphibian developmental deformities under
natural conditions.

Laboratory experiments examining the affects of UV-B
on amphibian development had already shown a significant
increase in embryonic mortality in some amphibian species,
and not in others. Why only in some?

Perhaps behaviors shared by many amphibian species
might lead to an increased susceptibility to damage from
UV-B radiation, behaviors such as laying eggs in open,
shallow waters that offer significant exposure to UV-B ra-
diation. Perhaps physiological traits of certain species make
them particularly susceptible to damage from UV-B radia-
tion, traits such as low levels of photolyase, an enzyme that
removes harmful photoproducts induced by UV light.

Blaustein’s group selected a specimen that exhibits these
two factors, the long-toed salamander, Ambystoma macro-
dactylum.

The Experiment

The goal of Blaustein’s field experiment was to allow fertil-
ized eggs to develop in their natural environment with and
without a UV-B protective shield. Eggs in both groups were
monitored for the appearance of deformities and for survival
rates. Eggs were collected from natural shallow water sites
(<20 cm deep) and randomly placed within enclosures con-
taining either a UV-B blocking Mylar shield or a UV-B trans-
mitting acetate cover (50 eggs per each enclosure replicated
four times). The enclosures were placed in small, unperfo-
rated plastic pools containing pond water and the pools were
placed back in the pond, thereby exposing the eggs and devel-
oping embryos to ambient conditions. The UV-B blocking
Mylar shield filtered out more than 94% of ambient UV-B
radiation, while the UV-B transmitting acetate cover allowed
about 90% of ambient UV-B radiation to pass through.

The Results

Embryos under the UV-B shields had significantly higher
hatching rates and fewer deformities compared with those

570 = Part VII The Global Environment

under the UV-B transmitting acetate covers. Of the 29
UV-B exposed individuals that hatched, 25 had deformi-
ties. This is significant compared to the 190 UV-B shielded
individuals that hatched and only 1 showed deformities.
These results support the hypothesis that naturally occur-
ring UV-B radiation can adversely affect development in
some amphibians, inducing deformities.

Blaustein’s group speculates that the higher mortality
rates and deformities in frogs and other amphibian species
might in fact be due to lower than normal levels of pho-
tolyase activity in their developing eggs and embryos, low
levels such as found naturally in salamanders.

Laboratory and field experiments seem to support this
idea. For one thing, frog species that are not sensitive to
UV-B have very high photolyase activity levels. Evaluating
10 different species, Blaustein’s team found a strong corre-
lation between species exhibiting littke UV-B radiation ef-
fects and higher levels of photolyase activity in developing
eggs and embryos.

In these experiments, the Pacific tree frog (Hyla
regilla)—whose populations have not shown deformities or
decline—exhibited the highest photolyase activity and was
not affected by UV-B radiation, showing no significant in-
creases in mortality rates in UV-B exposed individuals.

In parallel experiments, the Cascades frog (Rana
cascadae) and the Western toad (Bufo boreas)—both of whose
populations have been experiencing deformities and
markedly declining populations—had less than one-third
the photolyase activity seen in Hy/a, and were strongly af-
fected by UV-B radiation, showing significant increases in
mortality rates when exposed to UV-B radiation.

These results suggest that increased level of UV-B ra-
diation resulting from ozone depletion may indeed be a
major contributor to amphibian deformities and de-
cline—in populations with low photolyase activity. Could
chemical pollutants be acting to lower activity levels of
this key enzyme? The investigation continues. Undoubt-
edly, many factors are contributing to deformities in am-
phibian population, and there are not going to be many
simple answers.
