Trophic Levels

 

An ecosystem includes autotrophs and heterotrophs. Au-
totrophs are plants, algae, and some bacteria that are able
to capture light energy and manufacture their own food.
To support themselves, heterotrophs, which include ani-
mals, fungi, most protists and bacteria, and nongreen
plants, must obtain organic molecules that have been syn-
thesized by autotrophs. Autotrophs are also called primary
producers, and heterotrophs are also called consumers.

Once energy enters an ecosystem, usually as the result of
photosynthesis, it is slowly released as metabolic processes
proceed. The autotrophs that first acquire this energy pro-
vide all of the energy heterotrophs use. The organisms that
make up an ecosystem delay the release of the energy ob-
tained from the sun back into space.

Green plants, the primary producers of a terrestrial
ecosystem, generally capture about 1% of the energy that
falls on their leaves, converting it to food energy. In espe-
cially productive systems, this percentage may be a little
higher. When these plants are consumed by other organ-
isms, only a portion of the plant’s accumulated energy is
actually converted into the bodies of the organisms that
consume them.

Several different levels of consumers exist. The primary
consumers, or herbivores, feed directly on the green
plants. Secondary consumers, carnivores and the parasites
of animals, feed in turn on the herbivores. Decomposers
break down the organic matter accumulated in the bodies
of other organisms. Another more general term that in-
cludes decomposers is detritivores. Detritivores live on the
refuse of an ecosystem. They include large scavengers, such
as crabs, vultures, and jackals, as well as decomposers.

All of these categories occur in any ecosystem. They
represent different trophic levels, from the Greek word
trophos, which means “feeder.” Organisms from each
trophic level, feeding on one another, make up a series
called a food chain (figure 28.8). The length and complex-
ity of food chains vary greatly. In real life, it is rather rare
for a given kind of organism to feed only on one other type
of organism. Usually, each organism feeds on two or more
kinds and in turn is eaten by several other kinds of organ-
isms. When diagrammed, the relationship appears as a se-
ries of branching lines, rather than a straight line; it is
called a food web (figure 28.9).

A certain amount of the chemical-bond energy ingested
by the organisms at a given trophic level goes toward stay-
ing alive (for example, carrying out mechanical motion).
Using the chemical-bond energy converts it to heat, which
organisms cannot use to do work. Another portion of the
chemical-bond energy taken in is retained as chemical-
bond energy within the organic molecules produced by
growth. Usually 40% or less of the energy ingested is

578 = Part VII The Global Environment

ems are structured by who eats whom.

 

Tertiary consumer

Trophic
level 4

 
 
 

Top
carnivore

 

 

Secondary consumer

Trophic
level 3

Carnivore
»

Primary consumer

 

 

    
 

Trophic
level 2

 

 

      

Detritivores Fungi

Bacteria @
FIGURE 28.8

Trophic levels within a food chain. Plants obtain their energy
directly from the sun, placing them at trophic level 1. Animals that
eat plants, such as grasshoppers, are primary consumers or
herbivores and are at trophic level 2. Animals that eat plant-eating
animals, such as shrews, are carnivores and are at trophic level 3
(secondary consumers); animals that eat carnivorous animals, such
as hawks, are tertiary consumers at trophic level 4. Detritivores

use all trophic levels for food.

stored by growth. An invertebrate typically uses about a
quarter of this 40% for growth; in other words, about 10%
of the food an invertebrate eats is turned into its own body
and thus into potential food for its predators. Although the
comparable figure varies from approximately 5% in carni-
vores to nearly 20% for herbivores, 10% is a good average
value for the amount of organic matter that reaches the
next trophic level.

 

Energy passes through ecosystems, a good deal being
lost at each step.

 
