 

Primary producer

FIGURE 28.11

Secondary consumer Tertiary consumer

A food chain. Because so much energy is lost at each step, food chains usually consist of just three or four steps.

The Energy in Food Chains

Food chains generally consist of only three or four steps
(figure 28.11). So much energy is lost at each step that very
little usable energy remains in the system after it has been
incorporated into the bodies of organisms at four successive
trophic levels.

Community Energy Budgets

Lamont Cole of Cornell University studied the flow of en-
ergy in a freshwater ecosystem in Cayuga Lake in upstate
New York. He calculated that about 150 of each 1000 calo-
ries of potential energy fixed by algae and cyanobacteria are
transferred into the bodies of small heterotrophs (figure
28.12). Of these, about 30 calories are incorporated into
the bodies of smelt, small fish that are the principal sec-
ondary consumers of the system. If humans eat the smelt,
they gain about 6 of the 1000 calories that originally en-
tered the system. If trout eat the smelt and humans eat the
trout, humans gain only about 1.2 calories.

Factors Limiting Community Productivity

Communities with higher productivity can in theory sup-
port longer food chains. The limit on a community’s pro-
ductivity is determined ultimately by the amount of sun-
light it receives, for this determines how much
photosynthesis can occur. This is why in the deciduous
forests of North America the net primary productivity in-
creases as the growing season lengthens. NPP is higher in
warm climates than cold ones not only because of the
longer growing seasons, but also because more nitrogen
tends to be available in warm climates, where nitrogen-
fixing bacteria are more active.

 

Considerable energy is lost at each stage in food chains,
which limits their length. In general, more productive
food chains can support longer food chains.

 

Algae and
cyanobacteria

   
 
 

1000 calories

Giumed 150 calories

30 calories =
=

1.2 calories

6 calories

FIGURE 28.12

The food web in Cayuga Lake. Autotrophic plankton (algae
and cyanobacteria) fix the energy of the sun, heterotrophic
plankton feed on them, and are both consumed by smelt. The
smelt are eaten by trout, with about a fivefold loss in fixed
energy; for humans, the amount of smelt biomass is at least five
times greater than that available in trout, although humans
prefer to eat trout.

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 581
