Biogeochemical Cycles Illustrated:
Recycling in a Forest Ecosystem

An ongoing series of studies conducted at the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire has re-
vealed in impressive detail the overall recycling pattern of
nutrients in an ecosystem. The way this particular ecosys-
tem functions, and especially the way nutrients cycle
within it, has been studied since 1963 by Herbert Bor-
mann of the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental
Studies, Gene Likens of the Institute of Ecosystem Stud-
ies, and their colleagues. These studies have yielded much
of the available information about the cycling of nutrients
in forest ecosystems. They have also provided the basis
for the development of much of the experimental
methodology that is being applied successfully to the
study of other ecosystems.

Hubbard Brook is the central stream of a large water-
shed that drains a region of temperate deciduous forest.
To measure the flow of water and nutrients within the
Hubbard Brook ecosystem, concrete weirs with V-shaped
notches were built across six tributary streams. All of the
water that flowed out of the valleys had to pass through
the notches, as the weirs were anchored in bedrock. The
researchers measured the precipitation that fell in the six
valleys, and determined the amounts of nutrients that
were present in the water flowing in the six streams. By
these methods, they demonstrated that the undisturbed
forests in this area were very efficient at retaining nutri-
ents; the small amounts of nutrients that precipitated
from the atmosphere with rain and snow were approxi-
mately equal to the amounts of nutrients that ran out of
the valleys. These quantities were very low in relation to
the total amount of nutrients in the system. There was a
small net loss of calcium—about 0.3% of the total calcium
in the system per year—and small net gains of nitrogen
and potassium.

In 1965 and 1966, the investigators felled all the trees
and shrubs in one of the six watersheds and then prevented
regrowth by spraying the area with herbicides. The effects
were dramatic. The amount of water running out of that
valley increased by 40%. This indicated that water that
previously would have been taken up by vegetation and ul-
timately evaporated into the atmosphere was now running
off. For the four-month period from June to September
1966, the runoff was four times higher than it had been
during comparable periods in the preceding years. The
amounts of nutrients running out of the system also greatly
increased; for example, the loss of calcium was 10 times
higher than it had been previously. Phosphorus, on the
other hand, did not increase in the stream water; it appar-
ently was locked up in the soil.

The change in the status of nitrogen in the disturbed
valley was especially striking (figure 28.7). The undis-
turbed ecosystem in this valley had been accumulating ni-
trogen at a rate of about 2 kilograms per hectare per year,

 

 

 

 

 

 

@
<= 80
DB
£
@ 40
s
g
$ 4
< Deforestation
5
22
<=
0.
1965 1966 1967 1968
Year
o)
FIGURE 28.7

The Hubbard Brook experiment. (2) A 38-acre watershed was
completely deforested, and the runoff monitored for several
years. (b) Deforestation greatly increased the loss of minerals in
runoff water from the ecosystem. The red curve represents
nitrate in the runoff water from the deforested watershed; the
blue curve, nitrate in runoff water from an undisturbed
neighboring watershed.

but the deforested ecosystem Jost nitrogen at a rate of
about 120 kilograms per hectare per year. The nitrate
level of the water rapidly increased to a level exceeding
that judged safe for human consumption, and the stream
that drained the area generated massive blooms of
cyanobacteria and algae. In other words, the fertility of
this logged-over valley decreased rapidly, while at the
same time the danger of flooding greatly increased. This
experiment is particularly instructive at the start of the
twenty-first century, as large areas of tropical rain forest
are being destroyed to make way for cropland, a topic that
will be discussed further in chapter 30.

 

When the trees and shrubs in one of the valleys in the
Hubbard Brook watershed were cut down and the area
was sprayed with herbicide, water runoff and the loss of
nutrients from that valley increased. Nitrogen, which
had been accumulating at a rate of about 2 kilograms
per hectare per year, was lost at a rate of 120 kilograms
per hectare per year.

 

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 577
