The Carbon Cycle

The carbon cycle is based on carbon dioxide, which makes
up only about 0.03% of the atmosphere (figure 28.4).
Worldwide, the synthesis of organic compounds from car-
bon dioxide and water through photosynthesis (see chapter
10) utilizes about 10% of the roughly 700 billion metric
tons of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere each year. This
enormous amount of biological activity takes place as a re-
sult of the combined activities of photosynthetic bacteria,
protists, and plants. All terrestrial heterotrophic organisms
obtain their carbon indirectly from photosynthetic organ-
isms. When the bodies of dead organisms decompose, mi-
croorganisms release carbon dioxide back to the atmo-
sphere. From there, it can be reincorporated into the
bodies of other organisms.

Most of the organic compounds formed as a result of
carbon dioxide fixation in the bodies of photosynthetic or-
ganisms are ultimately broken down and released back
into the atmosphere or water. Certain carbon-containing
compounds, such as cellulose, are more resistant to break-
down than others, but certain bacteria and fungi, as well
as a few kinds of insects, are able to accomplish this feat.
Some cellulose, however, accumulates as undecomposed

 

CO, in
atmosphere

 

 

 

Respiration

FIGURE 28.4

 

organic matter such as peat. The carbon in this cellulose
may eventually be incorporated into fossil fuels such as oil
or coal.

In addition to the roughly 700 billion metric tons of car-
bon dioxide in the atmosphere, approximately 1 trillion
metric tons are dissolved in the ocean. More than half of
this quantity is in the upper layers, where photosynthesis
takes place. The fossil fuels, primarily oil and coal, contain
more than 5 trillion additional metric tons of carbon, and
between 600 million and 1 trillion metric tons are locked
up in living organisms at any one time. In global terms,
photosynthesis and respiration (see chapters 9 and 10) are
approximately balanced, but the balance has been shifted
recently because of the consumption of fossil fuels. The
combustion of coal, oil, and natural gas has released large
stores of carbon into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide.
The increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere appears
to be changing global climates, and may do so even more
rapidly in the future, as we will discuss in chapter 30.

 

About 10% of the estimated 700 billion metric tons of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is fixed annually by
the process of photosynthesis.

 

Photosynthesis

The carbon cycle. Photosynthesis captures carbon; respiration returns it to the atmosphere.

574 = Part VII The Global Environment
