Ecological Pyramids

A plant fixes about 1% of the sun’s energy that falls on its
green parts. The successive members of a food chain, in
turn, process into their own bodies about 10% of the en-
ergy available in the organisms on which they feed. For this
reason, there are generally far more individuals at the lower
trophic levels of any ecosystem than at the higher levels.
Similarly, the biomass of the primary producers present in
a given ecosystem is greater than the biomass of the pri-
mary consumers, with successive trophic levels having a
lower and lower biomass and correspondingly less potential
energy.

These relationships, if shown diagrammatically, appear
as pyramids (figure 28.13). We can speak of “pyramids of
biomass,” “pyramids of energy,” “pyramids of number,”
and so forth, as characteristic of ecosystems.

Inverted Pyramids

Some aquatic ecosystems have inverted biomass pyramids.
For example, in a planktonic ecosystem—dominated by
small organisms floating in water—the turnover of photo-
synthetic phytoplankton at the lowest level is very rapid,
with zooplankton consuming phytoplankton so quickly that
the phytoplankton (the producers at the base of the food
chain) can never develop a large population size. Because
the phytoplankton reproduce very rapidly, the community
can support a population of heterotrophs that is larger in
biomass and more numerous than the phytoplankton (see

figure 28.130).

Top Carnivores

The loss of energy that occurs at each trophic level places a
limit on how many top-level carnivores a community can
support. As we have seen, only about one-thousandth of
the energy captured by photosynthesis passes all the way
through a three-stage food chain to a tertiary consumer
such as a snake or hawk. This explains why there are no
predators that subsist on lions or eagles—the biomass of
these animals is simply insufficient to support another
trophic level.

In the pyramid of numbers, top-level predators tend to
be fairly large animals. Thus, the small residual biomass
available at the top of the pyramid is concentrated in a rela-
tively small number of individuals.

 

Because energy is lost at every step of a food chain, the
biomass of primary producers (photosynthesizers) tends
to be greater than that of the herbivores that consume
them, and herbivore biomass greater than the biomass
of the predators that consume them.

 

582 = Part VIIT_ The Global Environment

     

 

Herbivore

Pyramid of numbers

Second-level camivore

Decomposer (1.5 grams/square meter)

(6 grams/
square meter) First-level camivore

(11 grams/square meter)

Herbivore
(37 grams/square meter)

 

Zooplankton and bottom fauna
(21 grams/square meter)

Phytoplankton
(4 grams/square meter)
Pyramid of biomass
(b)

Firstevel camivore
(48 kilocalories!
square meteriyear)

Decomposer
(3890 kilocalories/
square meteriyear)

Herbivore
(696 kilocalories/
square meteriyear)

   

Pyramid of energy

(c)

FIGURE 28.13
Ecological pyramids. Ecological pyramids measure different
characteristics of each trophic level. (a) Pyramid of numbers.

(@ Pyramids of biomass, both normal (top) and inverted (bottom).
(© Pyramid of energy.
