| 41 Allliving things share key characteristics.

The earth formed as a hot mass of molten rock about 4.6
billion years ago. As the earth cooled, much of the water
vapor present in its atmosphere condensed into liquid water,
which accumulated on the surface in chemically rich oceans.
One scenario for the origin of life is that it originated in this
dilute, hot smelly soup of ammonia, formaldehyde, formic
acid, cyanide, methane, hydrogen sulfide, and organic hy-
drocarbons. Whether at the oceans’ edge, in hydrothermal
deep-sea vents, or elsewhere, the consensus among re-
searchers is that life arose spontaneously from these early
waters less than 4 billion years ago. While the way in which
this happened remains a puzzle, one cannot escape a certain
curiosity about the earliest steps that eventually led to the
origin of all living things on earth, including ourselves. How
did organisms evolve from the complex molecules that
swirled in the early oceans?

What Is Life?

Before we can address this question, we must first consider
what qualifies something as “living.” What is life? This is a
difficult question to answer, largely because life itself is not a
simple concept. If you try to write a definition of “life,” you
will find that it is not an easy task, because of the loose man-
ner in which the term is used.

Imagine a situation in which two astronauts encounter a
large, amorphous blob on the surface of a planet. How
would they determine whether it is alive?

 

FIGURE 4.2
Movement. Animals have evolved
mechanisms that allow them to move about _ Sensitivity. This father lion is responding to a stimulus: he has just been bitten on the

FIGURE 4.3

in their environment. While some animals,
like this giraffe, move on land, others move
through water or air.

60 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

Movement. One of the first things the astronauts
might do is observe the blob to see if it moves. Most
animals move about (figure 4.2), but movement from
one place to another in itself is not diagnostic of life.
Most plants and even some animals do not move about,
while numerous nonliving objects, such as clouds, do
move. The criterion of movement is thus neither meces-
sary (possessed by all life) nor sufficient (possessed only
by life).

Sensitivity. The astronauts might prod the blob to
see if it responds. Almost all living things respond to
stimuli (figure 4.3). Plants grow toward light, and
animals retreat from fire. Not all stimuli produce
responses, however. Imagine kicking a redwood tree or
singing to a hibernating bear. This criterion, although
superior to the first, is still inadequate to define life.

Death. The astronauts might attempt to kill the blob.
All living things die, while inanimate objects do not.
Death is not easily distinguished from disorder, how-
ever; a car that breaks down has not died because it was
never alive. Death is simply the loss of life, so this is a
circular definition at best. Unless one can detect life,
death is a meaningless concept, and hence a very inade-
quate criterion for defining life.

 

Complexity. Finally, the astronauts might cut up
the blob, to see if it is complexly organized. All living
things are complex. Even the simplest bacteria

 

rump by his cub. As far as we know, all organisms respond to stimuli, although not always
to the same ones or in the same way. Had the cub bitten a tree instead of its father, the
response would not have been as dramatic.
