The Nitrogen Cycle

Relatively few kinds of organisms—all of them bacteria—
can convert, or fix, atmospheric nitrogen (78% of the
earth’s atmosphere) into forms that can be used for biologi-
cal processes via the nitrogen cycle (figure 28.5). The
triple bond that links together the two atoms that make up
diatomic atmospheric nitrogen (N2) makes it a very stable
molecule. In living systems the cleavage of atmospheric ni-
trogen is catalyzed by a complex of three proteins—ferre-
doxin, nitrogen reductase, and nitrogenase. This process
uses ATP as a source of energy, electrons derived from
photosynthesis or respiration, and a powerful reducing
agent. The overall reaction of nitrogen fixation is written:

N2 +3H2 > 2NH3

Some genera of bacteria have the ability to fix atmo-
spheric nitrogen. Most are free-living, but some form sym-
biotic relationships with the roots of legumes (plants of the
pea family, Fabaceae) and other plants. Only the symbiotic
bacteria fix enough nitrogen to be of major significance in
nitrogen production. Because of the activities of such organ-
isms in the past, a large reservoir of ammonia and nitrates

Carnivores

Plankton with
«— nitrogen-fixing
bacteria

FIGURE 28.5

now exists in most ecosystems. This reservoir is the imme-
diate source of much of the nitrogen used by organisms.

Nitrogen-containing compounds, such as proteins in
plant and animal bodies, are decomposed rapidly by certain
bacteria and fungi. These bacteria and fungi use the amino
acids they obtain through decomposition to synthesize
their own proteins and to release excess nitrogen in the
form of ammonium ions (NH4*), a process known as am-
monification. The ammonium ions can be converted to
soil nitrites and nitrates by certain kinds of organisms and
which then can be absorbed by plants.

A certain proportion of the fixed nitrogen in the soil
is steadily lost. Under anaerobic conditions, nitrate is
often converted to nitrogen gas (N2) and nitrous oxide
(N20), both of which return to the atmosphere. This
process, which several genera of bacteria carry out, is
called denitrification.

 

Nitrogen becomes available to organisms almost
entirely through the metabolic activities of bacteria,
some free-living and others which live symbiotically in
the roots of legumes and other plants.

 

Atmospheric
nitrogen

 

The nitrogen cycle. Certain bacteria fix atmospheric nitrogen, converting it to a form living organisms can use. Other bacteria
decompose nitrogen-containing compounds from plant and animal materials, returning it to the atmosphere.

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 575
