The Phosphorus Cycle

In all biogeochemical cycles other than those involving
water, carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen, the reservoir of the
nutrient exists in mineral form, rather than in the atmo-
sphere. The phosphorus cycle (figure 28.6) is presented as
a representative example of all other mineral cycles. Phos-
phorus, a component of ATP, phospholipids, and nucleic
acid, plays a critical role in plant nutrition.

Of all the required nutrients other than nitrogen, phos-
phorus is the most likely to be scarce enough to limit plant
growth. Phosphates, in the form of phosphorus anions,
exist in soil only in small amounts. This is because they are
relatively insoluble and are present only in certain kinds of
rocks. As phosphates weather out of soils, they are trans-
ported by rivers and streams to the oceans, where they ac-
cumulate in sediments. They are naturally brought back up
again only by the uplift of lands, such as occurs along the
Pacific coast of North and South America, creating up-
welling currents. Phosphates brought to the surface are as-
similated by algae, and then by fish, which are in turn eaten
by birds. Seabirds deposit enormous amounts of guano

  
 
 
   

  

  

2 a Phosphates
Fa] aa in solution
jung

Animal tissue
and feces

FIGURE 28.6

(feces) rich in phosphorus along certain coasts. Guano de-
posits have traditionally been used for fertilizer. Crushed
phosphate-rich rocks, found in certain regions, are also
used for fertilizer. The seas are the only inexhaustible
source of phosphorus, making deep-seabed mining look in-
creasingly commercially attractive.

Every year, millions of tons of phosphate are added to
agricultural lands in the belief that it becomes fixed to and
enriches the soil. In general, three times more phosphate
than a crop requires is added each year. This is usually in
the form of superphosphate, which is soluble calcium di-
hydrogen phosphate, Ca(H»POx)2, derived by treating
bones or apatite, the mineral form of calcium phosphate,
with sulfuric acid. But the enormous quantities of phos-
phates that are being added annually to the world’s agricul-
tural lands are not leading to proportionate gains in crops.
Plants can apparently use only so much of the phosphorus
that is added to the soil.

 

Phosphates are relatively insoluble and are present in
most soils only in small amounts. They often are so
scarce that their absence limits plant growth.

 

Rocks and
eer eee

Plants and
algae

    

Precipitates

The phosphorus cycle. Phosphates weather from soils into water, enter plants and animals, and are redeposited in the soil when plants

and animals decompose.

576 = Part VIII The Global Environment
