The Importance of Water to Organisms

Organisms live or die on the basis of their ability to capture
water and incorporate it into their bodies. Plants take up
water from the earth in a continuous stream. Crop plants
require about 1000 kilograms of water to produce one kilo-
gram of food, and the ratio in natural communities is simi-
lar. Animals obtain water directly or from the plants or
other animals they eat. The amount of free water available
at a particular place often determines the nature and abun-
dance of the living organisms present there.

Groundwater

Much less obvious than surface water, which we see in
streams, lakes, and ponds, is groundwater, which occurs
in aquifers—permeable, saturated, underground layers of
rock, sand, and gravel. In many areas, groundwater is the
most important reservoir of water. It amounts to more
than 96% of all fresh water in the United States. The
upper, unconfined portion of the groundwater consti-
tutes the water table, which flows into streams and is
partly accessible to plants; the lower confined layers are
generally out of reach, although they can be “mined” by
humans. The water table is recharged by water that per-
colates through the soil from precipitation as well as by
water that seeps downward from ponds, lakes, and
streams. The deep aquifers are recharged very slowly
from the water table.

Groundwater flows much more slowly than surface
water, anywhere from a few millimeters to a meter or so
per day. In the United States, groundwater provides about
25% of the water used for all purposes and provides about
50% of the population with drinking water. Rural areas
tend to depend almost exclusively on wells to access
groundwater, and its use is growing at about twice the rate
of surface water use. In the Great Plains of the central
United States, the extensive use of the Ogallala Aquifer as a
source of water for agricultural needs as well as for drink-
ing water is depleting it faster than it can be naturally
recharged. This seriously threatens the agricultural produc-
tion of the area and similar problems are appearing
throughout the drier portions of the globe.

Because of the greater rate of groundwater use, and be-
cause it flows so slowly, the increasing chemical pollution
of groundwater is also a very serious problem. It is esti-
mated that about 2% of the groundwater in the United
States is already polluted, and the situation is worsening.
Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers have become a serious
threat to water purity. Another key source of groundwater
pollution consists of the roughly 200,000 surface pits,
ponds, and lagoons that are actively used for the disposal of
chemical wastes in the United States alone. Because of the
large volume of water, its slow rate of turnover, and its in-
accessibility, removing pollutants from aquifers is virtually
impossible.

 

FIGURE 28.3

Deforestation breaks the water cycle. As time goes by, the
consequences of tropical deforestation may become even more
severe, as the extensive erosion in this deforested area of
Madagascar shows.

Breaking the Water Cycle

In dense forest ecosystems such as tropical rainforests,
more than 90% of the moisture in the ecosystem is taken
up by plants and then transpired back into the air. Because
so many plants in a rainforest are doing this, the vegetation
is the primary source of local rainfall. In a very real sense,
these plants create their own rain: the moisture that travels
up from the plants into the atmosphere falls back to earth
as rain.

Where forests are cut down, the organismic water cycle
is broken, and moisture is not returned to the atmos-
phere. Water drains away from the area to the sea instead
of rising to the clouds and falling again on the forest. As
early as the late 1700s, the great German explorer Alexan-
der von Humbolt reported that stripping the trees from a
tropical rainforest in Colombia prevented water from re-
turning to the atmosphere and created a semiarid desert.
It is a tragedy of our time that just such a transformation
is occurring in many tropical areas, as tropical and tem-
perate rainforests are being clear-cut or burned in the
name of “development” (figure 28.3). Much of Madagas-
car, a California-sized island off the east coast of Africa,
has been transformed in this century from lush tropical
forest into semiarid desert by deforestation. Because the
rain no longer falls, there is no practical way to reforest
this land. The water cycle, once broken, cannot be easily
reestablished.

 

Water cycles between oceans and atmosphere. Some
96% of the fresh water in the United States consists of
groundwater, which provides 25% of all the water used
in this country.

 

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 573
