| 29.1 Organisms must cope with a varied environment.

The Environmental Challenge

How Environments Vary

The nature of the physical environment in large measure
determines what organisms live in a place. Key elements
include:

‘Temperature.
within a relatively narrow range of temperatures and will
not thrive if temperatures are colder or warmer. The
growing season of plants, for example, is importantly in-
fluenced by temperature.

Most organisms are adapted to live

Water. Plants and all other organisms require water.
On land, water is often scarce, so patterns of rainfall
have a major influence on life.

Sunlight. Almost all ecosystems rely on energy cap-
tured by photosynthesis; the availability of sunlight in-
fluences the amount of life an ecosystem can support,
particularly below the surface in marine communities.
Soil. The physical consistency, pH, and mineral com-
position of soil often severely limit plant growth, partic-
ularly the availability of nitrogen and phosphorus.

Active and Passive Approaches to Coping with
Environmental Variation

An individual encountering environmental variation may
choose to maintain a “steady-state” internal environment,
an approach known as maintaining homeostasis. Many
animals and plants actively employ physiological, mor-
phological, or behavioral mechanisms to maintain home-
ostasis. The beetle in figure 29.2 is using a behavioral
mechanism to cope with drastic changes in water avail-
ability. Other animals and plants simply conform to the
environment in which they find themselves, their bodies
adopting the temperature, salinity, and other aspects of
their surroundings.

Responses to environmental variation can be seen over
both the short and the long term. In the short term, span-
ning periods of a few minutes to an individual’s lifetime,
organisms have a variety of ways of coping with environ-
mental change. Over longer periods, natural selection can
operate to make a population better adapted to the envi-
ronment.

Individual Response to Environmental Change

Physiology. Many organisms are able to adapt to envi-
ronmental change by making physiological adjustments.
Thus, your body constricts the blood vessels on the surface
of your face on a cold day, reducing heat loss (and also giv-
ing your face a “flush”). Similarly, humans who visit high

$92 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

FIGURE 29.2

Meeting the challenge of
obtaining moisture in a
desert. On the dry sand
dunes of the Namib Desert
in southwestern Africa, the
beetle Onymacris
unguicularis collects
moisture from the fog by
holding its abdomen up at
the crest ofa dune to
gather condensed water.

‘Table 29.1 Physiological changes at high altitude that
increase the amount of oxygen delivered to body tissues

Increased rate of breathing

Increased erythrocyte production, increasing the amount of
hemoglobin in the blood

Decreased binding capacity of hemoglobin, thus increasing the
rate at which oxygen is unloaded in body tissues

Increased density of mitochondria, capillaries, and muscle
myoglobin

Based on Table 14-11 in A. J. Vander, J. H. Sherman, and D. S. Luciano,
Human Physiology, Sth Ed., McGraw-Hill, 1990.

 

altitudes, such as in the Andes, initially experience altitude
sickness—the symptoms of which include heart palpita-
tions, nausea, fatigue, headache, mental impairment and, in
serious cases, pulmonary edema—because of the lower at-
mospheric pressure and consequent lower oxygen availabil-
ity in the air. After several days, however, the same people
will feel fine, because of a number of physiological changes
that increase the delivery of oxygen to body (table 29.1).

Some insects avoid freezing in the winter by adding
glycerol “antifreeze” to their blood; others tolerate freezing
by converting much of their glycogen reserves into alcohols
that protect their cell membranes from freeze damage.

Morphology. Animals that maintain a constant internal
temperature (endotherms) in a cold environment have
adaptations that tend to minimize energy expenditure.
Many other mammals grower thicker coats during the win-
ter, utilizing their fur as insulation to retain body heat dur-
ing the winter. In general, the thicker the fur, the greater
the insulation (figure 29.3). Thus, a wolf's fur is some three
times as thick in winter as summer and insulates more than
twice as well. Other mammals escape some of the costs of
maintaining a constant body temperature during winter by
hibernating during the coldest season, behaving, in effect,
like conformers.
