Island Biogeography

One of the most reliable patterns in ecology is the observa-
tion that larger islands contain more species than smaller
islands. In 1967, Robert MacArthur of Princeton Univer-
sity and Edward O. Wilson of Harvard University pro-
posed that this species-area relationship was a result of
the effect of area on the likelihood of species extinction and
colonization.

The Equilibrium Model

MacArthur and Wilson reasoned that species are constantly
being dispersed to islands, so islands have a tendency to ac-
cumulate more and more species. At the same time that
new species are added, however, other species are lost by
extinction. As the number of species on an initially empty
island increases, the rate of colonization must decrease as
the pool of potential colonizing species not already present
on the island becomes depleted. At the same time, the rate
of extinction should increase—the more species on an is-
land, the greater the likelihood that any given species will
perish. As a result, at some point, the number of extinctions
and colonizations should be equal and the number of
species should then remain constant. Every island of a
given size, then, has a characteristic equilibrium number of
species that tends to persist through time (the intersection
point in figure 28.242), although the individual species will
change as species become extinct and new species colonize.

MacArthur and Wilson’s equilibrium theory proposes
that island species richness is a dynamic equilibrium be-
tween colonization and extinction. Both island size and dis-
tance from the mainland would play important roles. We
would expect smaller islands to have higher rates of extinc-
tion because their population sizes would, on average, be

smaller. Also, we would expect fewer colonizers to reach is-
lands that lie farther from the mainland. Thus, small is-
lands far from the mainland have the fewest species; large
islands near the mainland have the most (figure 28.24).

The predictions of this simple model bear out well in
field data. Asian Pacific bird species (figure 28.24c) exhibit a
positive correlation of species richness with island size, but
a negative correlation of species richness with distance
from the mainland.

Testing the Equilibrium Model

Field studies in which small islands have been censused,
cleared, and allowed to recolonize tend to support the equi-
librium model. However, long-term experimental field
studies are suggesting that the situation is more compli-
cated than MacArthur and Wilson envisioned. Their the-
ory predicts a high level of species turnover as some
species perish and others arrive. However, studies on island
birds and spiders indicate that very little turnover occurs
from year to year. Moreover, those species that do come
and go are a subset of species that never attain high popula-
tions. A substantial proportion of the species appears to
maintain high populations and rarely go extinct. These
studies, of course, have only been going on for 20 years or
less. It is possible that over periods of centuries, rare
species may become common and vice versa so that, over
such spans of time, the equilibrium theory is a good de-
scription of what determines island species richness. Future
research is necessary to fully understand the dynamics of
species richness.

 

Species richness on islands is a dynamic equilibrium
between colonization and extinction.

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

a 4,000 |. ®More than 3200 km from New Guinea
Sa ‘© 800-3200 km ftom New Guinea
Spec es Small island & Less than 800 km from )

Extinction & aa
rate of island a Island < 8 100 .
species 8 far from Fs 3 8 %°%e
c mainland $ eg eee
s oy -
= c eS Peee
8 Ss gs
S 3 27 10 °
2 3s € 5 5
é 8 hi =
.
: 0 - 10° 100 1000 10,000 100,000
(a) __ Number of species —> (b) Number of species —> (©) Island size (km?)
FIGURE 28.24

The equilibrium model of island biogeography. (a) Island species richness reaches an equilibrium (black dot) when the colonization rate
of new species equals the extinction rate of species on the island. (b) The equilibrium shifts when the colonization rate is affected by
distance from the mainland and when the extinction rate is affected by size of the island. Species richness is positively correlated with
island size and inversely correlated with distance from the mainland. (c) The effect of distance from a larger island—which can be the
source of colonizing species—is readily apparent. More distant islands have fewer species compared to nearer islands of the same size.

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 589
