Causes of Species Richness

While ecologists still argue about why some ecosystems are
more stable than others—better able to avoid permanent
change and return to normal after disturbances like land
clearing, fire, invasion by plagues of insects, or severe
storm damage—most ecologists now accept as a working
hypothesis that biologically diverse ecosystems are gener-
ally more stable than simple ones. Ecosystems with many
different kinds of organisms support a more complex web
of interactions, and an alternative niche is thus more likely
to exist to compensate for the effect of a disruption.

Factors Promoting Species Richness

How does the number of species in a community affect
the functioning of the ecosystem? How does ecosystem
functioning affect the number of species in a community?
It is often extremely difficult to sort out the relative con-
tributions of different factors. With regard to determi-
nants of species richness in a community, of the many
variables that may play a role, we will discuss three:
ecosystem productivity, spatial heterogeneity, and cli-
mate. Two additional factors that may play an important
role, the evolutionary age of the community and the de-
gree to which the community has been disturbed, will be
examined later in this chapter.

Ecosystem Productivity. Ecosystems differ in produc-
tivity, which is a measure of how much new growth they
can produce. Surprisingly, the relationship between pro-
ductivity and species richness is not linear. Rather, ecosys-
tems with intermediate levels of productivity tend to have
the most species (figure 28.20). Why this is so is a topic of
considerable current debate. One possibility is that levels
of productivity are linked to numbers of predators. At low
productivity, there are few predators and superior competi-
tors eliminate most species, whereas at high productivity,
there are so many predators that only the most predation-
resistant species survive. At intermediate levels, however,
predators may act as keystone species, maintaining species
richness.

 

Spatial Heterogeneity. Environments that are more
spatially heterogencous—that contain more soil types,
topographies, and other habitat variations—can be ex-
pected to accommodate more species because they provide
a greater variety of microhabitats, microclimates, places to
hide from predators, and so on. In general, the species rich-
ness of animals tends to reflect the species richness of the
plants in their community, while plant species richness re-
flects the spatial heterogeneity of the ecosystem. The
plants provide a biologically derived spatial heterogeneity
of microhabitats to the animals. Thus, the number of lizard
species in the American Southwest mirrors the structural
diversity of the plants (figure 28.21).

 

FIGURE 28.20
Productivity. In
fynbos plant
communities of
mountainous
areas of South
Africa, species
richness of plants
peaks at
intermediate
levels of
productivity
(biomass).

 

 

mountainous vegetation

°

 

1 1 1 1

100 200 300 400
Productivity

(amount of biomass produced)

Species richness of South African
°

 

 

FIGURE 28.21
Spatial
heterogeneity.
The species
richness of desert
lizards is positively
correlated with
the structural
complexity of the
plant cover in
desert sites in the
American,
Southwest.

 

Number of lizard species

 

 

T T T T T i T T
0 01 0.2 0304 0.5 06 0.7 0.8
Plant structural complexity

 

 

FIGURE 28.22
Climate. The
species richness of
mammals is
inversely
correlated with
monthly mean
temperature range
along the west
coast of North
Toor _OAmerica.

0 5 10 15 20 25
Temperature range (°C)

8

8
1
e

8
1

Number of mammal species
e

 

 

 

 

Climate. The role of climate is more difficult to assess.
On the one hand, more species might be expected to coex-
ist in a seasonal environment than in a constant one, be-
cause a changing climate may favor different species at dif-
ferent times of the year. On the other hand, stable
environments are able to support specialized species that
would be unable to survive where conditions fluctuate.
Thus, the number of mammal species along the west coast
of North America increases as the temperature range de-
creases (figure 28.22).

 

Species richness promotes ecosystem productivity and
is fostered by spatial heterogeneity and stable climate.

 

Chapter 28 Dynamics of Ecosystems 587
