contain a bewildering array of molecules, organized
into many complex structures. However a computer is
also complex, but not alive. Complexity is a necessary
criterion of life, but it is not sufficient in itself to iden-
tify living things because many complex things are not
alive.
To determine whether the blob is alive, the astronauts
would have to learn more about it. Probably the best thing
they could do would be to examine it more carefully and de-
termine whether it resembles the organisms we are familiar
with, and if so, how.

Fundamental Properties of Life

As we discussed in chapter 1, all known organisms share cer-
tain general properties. To a large degree, these properties
define what we mean by life. The following fundamental
properties are shared by all organisms on earth.

Cellular organization. All organisms consist of one
or more ce//s—complex, organized assemblages of mol-
ecules enclosed within membranes (figure 4.4).
Sensitivity. All organisms respond to stimuli—
though not always to the same stimuli in the same
ways.

Growth. All living things assimilate energy and use it
to grow, a process called metabolism. Plants, algae, and
some bacteria use sunlight to create covalent carbon-
carbon bonds from CO; and HO through photosyn-
thesis. This transfer of the energy in covalent bonds is
essential to all life on earth.

Development. Multicellular organisms undergo
systematic gene-directed changes as they grow and
mature.

Reproduction. All living things reproduce, passing
on traits from one generation to the next. Although
some organisms live for a very long time, no organism
lives forever, as far as we know. Because all organisms
die, ongoing life is impossible without reproduction.
Regulation. All organisms have regulatory mecha-
nisms that coordinate internal processes.

Homeostasis. All living things maintain relatively
constant internal conditions, different from their envi-
ronment.

The Key Role of Heredity

Are these properties adequate to define life? Is a
membrane-enclosed entity that grows and reproduces
alive? Not necessarily. Soap bubbles and proteinoid
microspheres spontaneously form hollow bubbles that
enclose a small volume of water. These spheres can
enclose energy-processing molecules, and they may also
grow and subdivide. Despite these features, they are
certainly not alive. Therefore, the criteria just listed,

 

FIGURE 4.4

Cellular organization (150x). These Paramecia, which are
complex, single-celled organisms called protists, have just
ingested several yeast cells. The yeasts, stained red in this
photograph, are enclosed within membrane-bounded sacs
called digestive vacuoles. A variety of other organelles are also
visible.

although necessary for life, are not sufficient to define life.
One ingredient is missing—a mechanism for the preserva-
tion of improvement.

Heredity. All organisms on earth possess a genetic
system that is based on the replication of a long, complex
molecule called DNA. This mechanism allows for
adaptation and evolution over time, also distinguishing
characteristics of living things.

To understand the role of heredity in our definition of
life, let us return for a moment to proteinoid microspheres.
When we examine an individual microsphere, we see it at
that precise moment in time but learn nothing of its prede-
cessors. It is likewise impossible to guess what future
droplets will be like. The droplets are the passive prisoners
of a changing environment, and it is in this sense that they
are not alive. The essence of being alive is the ability to en-
compass change and to reproduce the results of change
permanently. Heredity, therefore, provides the basis for the
great division between the living and the nonliving.
Change does not become evolution unless it is passed on to
a new generation. A genetic system is the sufficient condi-
tion of life. Some changes are preserved because they
increase the chances of survival in a hostile world, while
others are lost. Not only did life evolve—evolution is the
very essence of life.

 

All living things on earth are characterized by cellular
organization, heredity, and a handful of other
characteristics that serve to define the term life.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 61
