Biogeographic Patterns
of Species Diversity

Since before Darwin, biologists have recognized that there
are more different kinds of animals and plants in the tropics
than in temperate regions. For many species, there is a
steady increase in species richness from the arctic to the
tropics. Called a species diversity cline, such a biogeo-
graphic gradient in numbers of species correlated with lati-
tude has been reported for plants and animals, including
birds (figure 28.23), mammals, reptiles.

Why Are There More Species in the Tropics?

For the better part of a century, ecologists have puzzled
over the cline in species diversity from the arctic to the
tropics. The difficulty has not been in forming a reasonable
hypothesis of why there are more species in the tropics, but
rather in sorting through the many reasonable hypotheses
that suggest themselves. Here we will consider five of the
most commonly discussed suggestions:

Evolutionary age. It has often been proposed that the
tropics have more species than temperate regions be-
cause the tropics have existed over long and uninter-
rupted periods of evolutionary time, while temperate re-
gions have been subject to repeated glaciations. The
greater age of tropical communities would have allowed
complex population interactions to coevolve within
them, fostering a greater variety of plants and animals in
the tropics.

However, recent work suggests that the long-term

stability of tropical communities has been greatly exag-
gerated. An examination of pollen within undisturbed
soil cores reveals that during glaciations the tropical
forests contracted to a few small refuges surrounded by
grassland. This suggests that the tropics have not had a
continuous record of species richness over long periods
of evolutionary time.
Higher productivity. A second often-advanced hy-
pothesis is that the tropics contain more species because
this part of the earth receives more solar radiation than
temperate regions do. The argument is that more solar
energy, coupled to a year-round growing season, greatly
increases the overall photosynthetic activity of plants in
the tropics. If we visualize the tropical forest as a pie
(total resources) being cut into slices (species niches), we
can see that a larger pie accommodates more slices.
However, many field studies have indicated that species
richness is highest at intermediate levels of productivity.
Accordingly, increasing productivity would be expected
to lead to lower, not higher, species richness. Perhaps
the long column of vegetation down through which light
passes in a tropical forest produces a wide range of fre-
quencies and intensities, creating a greater variety of
light environments and so promoting species diversity.

588 = Part VIII The Global Environment

   
 

Number
of species
0-50
50-100
100-150
i 150-200
200-250
250-300
300-350
(350-400
400-450
450-500
[500-550
i 550-600
i 600-650
650-700

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 28.23

A latitudinal cline in species richness. Among North and
Central American birds, a marked increase in the number of
species occurs as one moves toward the tropics. Fewer than 100
species are found at arctic latitudes, while more than 600 species
live in southern Central America.

Predictability. There are no winters in the tropics.
Tropical temperatures are stable and predictable, one
day much like the next. These unchanging environments
might encourage specialization, with niches subdivided
to partition resources and so avoid competition. The ex-
pected result would be a larger number of more special-
ized species in the tropics, which is what we see. Many
field tests of this hypothesis have been carried out, and
almost all support it, reporting larger numbers of nar-
rower niches in tropical communities than in temperate
areas.

Predation. Many reports indicate that predation may
be more intense in the tropics. In theory, more intense
predation could reduce the importance of competition,
permitting greater niche overlap and thus promoting
greater species richness.

Spatial heterogeneity. As noted earlier, spatial het-
erogeneity promotes species richness. Tropical forests,
by virtue of their complexity, create a variety of micro-
habitats and so may foster larger numbers of species.

 

No one really knows why there are more species in the
tropics, but there are plenty of suggestions.

 
