| 28.4 Biodiversity promotes ecosystem stability.

Effects of Species Richness

Ecologists have long debated what are the consequences of
differences in species richness among communities. One
theory is that more species-rich communities are more sta-
ble; that is, more constant in composition and better able
to resist disturbance. This hypothesis has been elegantly
studied by David Tilman and colleagues at the University
of Minnesota’s Cedar Creek Natural History Area. These
workers monitored 207 small rectangular plots of land (8 to
16 m?) for 11 years. In each plot, they counted the number
of prairie plant species and measured the total amount of
plant biomass (that is, the mass of all plants on the plot).
Over the course of the study, plant species richness was re-
lated to community stability—plots with more species
showed less year-to-year variation in biomass (figure
28.18). Moreover, in two drought years, the decline in bio-
mass was negatively related to species richness; in other
words, plots with more species were less affected. In a re-
lated experiment, when seeds of other plant species were
added to different plots, the ability of these species to be-
come established was negatively related to species richness.
More diverse communities, in other words, are more resis-
tant to invasion by new species, another measure of com-
munity stability.

Species richness may also have effects on other ecosys-
tem processes. In a follow-up study, Tilman established an-
other 147 plots in which they experimentally varied the
number of plant species. Each of the plots was monitored
to estimate how much growth was occurring and how
much nitrogen the growing plants were taking up from the
soil. Tilman found that the more species a plot had, the
greater nitrogen uptake and total amount of biomass pro-
duced. In his study, increased biodiversity clearly leads to
greater productivity (figure 28.19).

Laboratory studies on artificial ecosystems have pro-
vided similar results. In one elaborate study, ecosystems
covering | m? were constructed in growth chambers that
controlled temperature, light levels, air currents, and at-
mospheric gas concentrations. A variety of plants, insects,
and other animals were introduced to construct ecosys-
tems composed of 9, 15, or 31 species with the lower di-
versity treatments containing a subset of the species in
the higher diversity enclosures. As with Tilman’s experi-
ments, the amount of biomass produced was related to
species richness, as was the amount of carbon dioxide
consumed, a measure of respiration occurring in the
ecosystem.

Tilman’s conclusion that healthy ecosystems depend
on diversity is not accepted by all ecologists. Critics ques-
tion the validity and relevance of these biodiversity stud-
ies, claiming their experimental design is critically
flawed. Tilman’s Cedar Creek result was a statistical arti-

 

586 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

 

 

Variation in biomass —»

 

a nn Se
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
‘Average species richness

T T T
18 20 22

 

 

 

FIGURE 28.18

Effect of species richness on ecosystem stability. In the Cedar
Creek experimental fields, each square is a 100-square-foot
experimental plot. Experimental plots with more plant species
seem to show less variation in the total amount of biomass
produced, and thus more community stability.

 

 

 

 

0.40
0.35:
>
£_ 0.30
82
EP 025
bs
52 0.20
£8 o15 *
2
0.10:
0 5 10 15 20 25
Species richness
FIGURE 28.19

Effect of species richness on productivity. In Tilman’s
experimental studies, plots with more species took up more
nitrogen from the soil, leaving less in the rooting zone. The
increased amount of nitrogen absorption is an indicator of
increased growth, increased biomass, and thus increased
productivity.

fact, they argue—the more species you add to a mix, the
greater the probability that you will add a highly produc-
tive one. Adding taller or highly productive plants of
course increases productivity, they explain. To show a
real benefit from diversity, experimental plots would have
to exhibit “overyielding”—plot productivity would have
to be greater than that of the single most productive
species grown in isolation. The long-simmering debate
continues.

 

Controversial experimental field studies support the
hypothesis that species-rich communities are more
stable.

 
