Human Effects on Trophic Cascades

Humans have inadvertently created a test of the trophic
cascade hypothesis by removing top predators from ecosys-
tems. The great naturalist Aldo Leopold captured the re-
sults long before the trophic cascade hypothesis had ever
been scientifically articulated when he wrote in the Sand
County Almanac:

“T have lived to see state after state extirpate its wolves. I
have watched the face of many a new wolfless mountain,
and seen the south-facing slopes wrinkle with a maze of
new deer trails. I have seen every edible bush and seedling
browsed, first to anemic desuetude, and then to death. I
have seen every edible tree defoliated to the height of a
saddle horn.”

Many similar examples exist in nature in which the re-
moval of predators has led to cascading effects on lower
trophic levels. On Barro Colorado Island, a hilltop turned
into an island by the construction of the Panama Canal at
the beginning of the last century, large predators such as
jaguars and mountain lions are absent. As a result, smaller
predators whose populations are normally held in check—
including monkeys, peccaries (a relative of the pig), coat-
imundis and armadillos—have become extraordinarily
abundant. These animals will eat almost anything they find.
Ground-nesting birds are particularly vulnerable, and many
species have declined; at least 15 bird species have vanished
from the island entirely. Similarly, in woodlots in the mid-
western United States, raccoons, opossums, and foxes have
become abundant due to the elimination of larger preda-
tors, and populations of ground-nesting birds have declined
greatly.

Bottom-Up Effects

Conversely, factors acting at the bottom of food webs may
have consequences that ramify to higher trophic levels,
leading to what are termed bottom-up effects. The basic
idea is when the productivity of an ecosystem is low, her-
bivore populations will be too small to support any preda-
tors. Increases in productivity will be entirely devoured by
the herbivores, whose populations will increase in size. At
some point, herbivore populations will become large
enough that predators can be supported. Thus, further in-
creases in productivity will not lead to increases in herbi-
vore populations, but, rather to increases in predator pop-
ulations. Again, at some level, top predators will become
established that can prey on lower-level predators. With
the lower-level predator populations in check, herbivore
populations will again increase with increasing productiv-
ity (figure 28.16).

Experimental evidence for the role of bottom-up ef-
fects was provided in an elegant study conducted on the
Eel River in northern California. Enclosures were con-
structed that excluded large fish. A roof was placed above
each enclosure. Some roofs were clear and let light pass

 

 

584 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

 

Higher level predators

 

 

Lower level predators

 

 

 

Herbivores

 

 

 

Vegetation

 

 

Productivity ————>

 

 

FIGURE 28.16

Bottom-up effects. At low levels of productivity, herbivore
populations cannot be maintained. Above some threshold,
increases in productivity lead to increases in herbivore biomass;
vegetation biomass no longer increases with productivity because
it is converted into herbivore biomass. Similarly, above another
threshold, herbivore biomass gets converted to carnivore biomass.
At this point, vegetation biomass is no longer constrained by
herbivores, and so again increases with increasing productivity.
