The Biosphere

 

Concept Outline

29.1 Organisms must cope with a varied environment.

The Environmental Challenge. Habitats vary in ways
important to survival. Organisms cope with environmental
variation with physiological, morphological, and behavioral
adaptations.

29.2 Climate shapes the character of ecosystems.

The Sun and Atmospheric Circulation. The sun
powers major movements in atmospheric circulation.
Atmospheric Circulation, Precipitation, and Climate.
Latitude and elevation have important effects on climate,
although other factors affect regional climate.

29.3 Biomes are widespread terrestrial ecosystems.

The Major Biomes. Characteristic communities called
biomes occur in different climatic regions. Variations in
temperature and precipitation are good predictors of what
biomes will occur where. Major biomes include tropical
rain forest, savanna, desert, grassland, temperate deciduous
forest, temperate evergreen forest, taiga, and tundra.

29.4 Aquatic ecosystems cover much of the earth.

Patterns of Circulation in the Oceans. The world’s
oceans circulate in huge circles deflected by the continents.
Life in the Oceans. Most of the major groups of
organisms originated and are still represented in the sea.
Marine Ecosystems. The communities of the ocean are
delineated primarily by depth.

Freshwater Habitats. Like miniature oceans, ponds and
lakes support different communities at different depths.
Productivity of Freshwater Ecosystems. Freshwater
ecosystems are often highly productive.

 

FIGURE 29.1

Life in the biosphere. In this satellite image, orange zones are
largely arid. Almost every environment on earth can be described
in terms of temperature and moisture. These physical parameters
have great bearing on the forms of life that are able to inhabit a
particular region.

lhe biosphere includes all living communities on earth,

from the profusion of life in the tropical rain forests to
the photosynthetic phytoplankton in the world’s oceans. In
a very general sense, the distribution of life on earth re-
flects variations in the world’s environments, principally in
temperature and the availability of water. Figure 29.1 is a
satellite image of North and South America, collected over
cight years, the colors keyed to the relative abundance of
chlorophyll, a good indicator of rich biological communi-
ties. Phytoplankton and algae produce the dark red zones
in the oceans and along the seacoasts. Green and dark
green areas on land are dense forests, while orange areas
like the deserts of western South America are largely bar-
ren of life.

591
