   

QS!

FIGURE 29.6

 

 

* Westerfi

 

Pe
rtheast trades

Not
ee

SGA etrades
SF <polcrum

 

 

(b)

General patterns of atmospheric circulation. (@) The pattern of air movement toward and away from the earth’s surface. (¥) The major

wind currents across the face of the earth.

The earth’s annual orbit around the sun and its daily ro-
tation on its own axis are both important in determining
world climate (figure 29.5). Because of the annual cycle,
and the inclination of the earth’s axis at approximately
23.5° from its plane of revolution around the sun, there is a
progression of seasons in all parts of the earth away from
the equator. One pole or the other is tilted closer to the
sun at all times except during the spring and autumn
equinoxes.

Major Atmospheric Circulation Patterns

The moisture-holding capacity of air increases when it
warms and decreases when it cools. High temperatures
near the equator encourage evaporation and create warm,
moist air. As this air rises and flows toward the poles, it
cools and loses most of its moisture (figure 29.6). Conse-
quently, the greatest amounts of precipitation on earth
fall near the equator. This equatorial region of rising air is
one of low pressure, called the doldrums, which draws air
from both north and south of the equator. When the air
masses that have risen reach about 30° north and south
latitude, the dry air, now cooler, sinks and becomes re-
heated. As the air reheats, its evaporative capacity in-
creases, creating a zone of decreased precipitation. The
air, still warmer than in the polar regions, continues to
flow toward the poles. It rises again at about 60° north
and south latitude, producing another zone of high pre-
cipitation. At this latitude there is another low-pressure
area, the polar front. Some of this rising air flows back to

the equator and some continues north and south, de-
scending near the poles and producing another zone of
low precipitation before it returns to the equator.

Air Currents Generated by the Earth’s Rotation

Related to these bands of north-south circulation are
three major air currents generated mainly by the interac-
tion of the earth’s rotation with patterns of worldwide
heat gain. Between about 30° north latitude and 30° south
latitude, the trade winds blow, from the east-southeast in
the southern hemisphere and from the east-northeast in
the northern hemisphere. The trade winds blow all year
long and are the steadiest winds found anywhere on earth.
They are stronger in winter and weaker in summer. Be-
tween 30° and 60° north and south latitude, strong pre-
vailing westerlies blow from west to east and dominate
climatic patterns in these latitudes, particularly along the
western edges of the continents. Weaker winds, blowing
from east to west, occur farther north and south in their
respective hemispheres.

 

Warm air rises near the equator, descends and
produces arid zones at about 30° north and south
latitude, flows toward the poles, then rises again at
about 60° north and south latitude, and moves back
toward the equator. Part of this air, however, moves
toward the poles, where it produces zones of low
precipitation.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 595
