Atmospheric Circulation,
Precipitation, and Climate

As we have discussed, precipitation is generally low near
30° north and south latitude, where air is falling and warm-
ing, and relatively high near 60° north and south latitude,
where it is rising and cooling. Partly as a result of these fac-
tors, all the great deserts of the world lie near 30° north or
south latitude. Other major deserts are formed in the inte-
riors of large continents. These areas have limited precipi-
tation because of their distance from the sea, the ultimate
source of most moisture.

Rain Shadows

Other deserts occur because mountain ranges intercept
moisture-laden winds from the sea. When this occurs,
the air rises and the moisture-holding capacity of the air
decreases, resulting in increased precipitation on the
windward side of the mountains—the side from which
the wind is blowing. As the air descends the other side of
the mountains, the leeward side, it is warmed, and its
moisture-holding capacity increases, tending to block
precipitation. In California, for example, the eastern sides
of the Sierra Nevada Mountains are much drier than the
western sides, and the vegetation is often very different.
This phenomenon is called the rain shadow effect (fig-
ure 29.7).

Regional Climates

Four relatively small areas, each located on a different con-
tinent, share a climate that resembles that of the Mediter-
ranean region. So-called Mediterranean climates are found
in portions of Baja, California, and Oregon; in central
Chile; in southwestern Australia; and in the Cape region of
South Africa. In all of these areas, the prevailing westerlies
blow during the summer from a cool ocean onto warm
land. As a result, the air’s moisture-holding capacity in-
creases, the air absorbing moisture and creating hot rainless
summers. Such climates are unusual on a world scale. In
the five regions where they occur, many unique kinds of
plants and animals, often local in distribution, have
evolved. Because of the prevailing westerlies, the great
deserts of the world (other than those in the interiors of
continents) and the areas of Mediterranean climate lie on
the western sides of the continents.

Another kind of regional climate occurs in southern
Asia. The monsoon climatic conditions characteristic of
India and southern Asia occur during the summer months.
During the winter, the trade winds blow from the east-
northeast off the cool land onto the warm sea. From June
to October, though, when the land is heated, the direction
of the air flow reverses, and the winds veer around to blow

596 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

FIGURE 29.7

The rain shadow effect. Moisture-laden winds from the Pacific
Ocean rise and are cooled when they encounter the Sierra Nevada
Mountains. As their moisture-holding capacity decreases,
precipitation occurs, making the middle elevation of the range one
of the snowiest regions on earth; it supports tall forests, including
those that include the famous giant sequoias (Sequoiadendron
giganteum). As the air descends on the east side of the range, its
moisture-holding capacity increases again, and the air picks up
rather than releases moisture from its surroundings. As a result,
desert conditions prevail on the east side of the mountains.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30F Annual mean

9 20-

£ e

2 10

3

a

& or Variation

a in monthly

-10F means
1 1 1 1 1
60° 30° 0 30° 60°
N s
Latitude
FIGURE 29.8

Temperature varies with latitude. The blue line represents the
annual mean temperature at latitudes from the North Pole to
Antarctica.

onto the Indian subcontinent and adjacent areas from the
southwest bringing rain. The duration and strength of the
monsoon winds spell the difference between food suffi-
ciency and starvation for hundreds of millions of people in
this region each year.

 
