 

Theories about the
Origin of Life

The question of how life originated
is not easy to answer because it is
impossible to go back in time and
observe life’s beginnings; nor are
there any witnesses. There is testi-
mony in the rocks of the earth, but it
is not easily read, and often it is
silent on issues crying out for an-
swers. There are, in principle, at
least three possibilities:

1. Special creation. Life-forms
may have been put on earth by
supernatural or divine forces.

2. Extraterrestrial origin. Life
may not have originated on
earth at all; instead, life may
have infected earth from some
other planet.

3. Spontaneous origin. Life may
have evolved from inanimate
matter, as associations among
molecules became more and
more complex.

many ideas about the origin of life.

rocks from Mars lend some credence
to this idea. The hypothesis that an
early source of carbonaceous material
is extraterrestrial is testable, although
it has not yet been proven. Indeed,
NASA is planning to land on Europa,
drill through the surface, and send a
probe down to see if there is life.
Spontaneous Origin. Most scien-
tists tentatively accept the theory of
spontaneous origin, that life evolved
from inanimate matter. In this view,
the force leading to life was selec-
tion. As changes in molecules in-
creased their stability and caused
them to persist longer, these mole-
cules could initiate more and more
complex associations, culminating in
the evolution of cells.

Taking a Scientific Viewpoint

In this book we will focus on the sec-
ond and third possibilities, attempting
to understand whether natural forces
could have led to the origin of life
and, if so, how the process might have

Special Creation. The theory of
special creation, that a divine God
created life is at the core of most
major religions. The oldest hypothesis
about life’s origins, it is also the most
widely accepted. Far more Americans,
for example, believe that God created
life on earth than believe in the other

 

FIGURE 4.5

Lightning. Before life evolved, the simple
molecules in the earth’s atmosphere
combined to form more complex molecules.
‘The energy that drove these chemical
reactions may have come from lightning
and forms of geothermal energy.

occurred. This is not to say that the
first possibility is definitely not the
correct one. Any one of the three pos-
sibilities might be true. Nor do the
second and third possibilities preclude
religion (a divine agency might have
acted via evolution, for example).
However, we are limiting the scope of

two hypotheses. Many take a more ex-

treme position, accepting the biblical

account of life’s creation as factually

correct. This viewpoint forms the basis for the very
unscientific “scientific creationism” viewpoint discussed
in chapter 21.

Extraterrestrial Origin. The theory of panspermia
proposes that meteors or cosmic dust may have carried
significant amounts of complex organic molecules to
earth, kicking off the evolution of life. Hundreds of thou-
sands of meteorites and comets are known to have
slammed into the early earth, and recent findings suggest
that at least some may have carried organic materials.
Nor is life on other planets ruled out. For example, the
discovery of liquid water under the surface of Jupiter’s
ice-shrouded moon Europa and suggestions of fossils in

62 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

our inquiry to scientific matters, and

only the second and third possibilities

permit testable hypotheses to be

constructed—that is, explanations
that can be tested and potentially disproved.

In our search for understanding, we must look back to
the early times. There are fossils of simple living things,
bacteria, in rocks 3.5 billion years old. They tell us that
life originated during the first billion years of the history
of our planet. As we attempt to determine how this
process took place, we will first focus on how organic
molecules may have originated (figure 4.5), and then we
will consider how those molecules might have become
organized into living cells.

 

Panspermia and spontaneous origin are the only testable
hypotheses of life’s origin currently available.

 
