| 29.2 Climate shapes the character of ecosystems.

The distribution of biomes (see
discussion later in this chapter) re-
sults from the interaction of the
features of the earth itself, such as
different soil types or the occur-
rence of mountains and valleys,
with two key physical factors: (1)
the amount of solar heat that
reaches different parts of the earth
and seasonal variations in that heat;
and (2) global atmospheric circula-
tion and the resulting patterns of
oceanic circulation. Together these
factors dictate local climate, and so
determine the amounts and distrib-
ution of precipitation.

The Sun and
Atmospheric
Circulation

The earth receives an enormous
quantity of heat from the sun in the
form of shortwave radiation, and it
radiates an equal amount of heat
back to space in the form of long-
wave radiation. About 104 calories
arrive at the upper surface of the
earth’s atmosphere each year, or
about 1.94 calories per square cen-
timeter per minute. About half of
this energy reaches the earth’s sur-
face. The wavelengths that reach
the earth’s surface are not identical
to those that reach the outer atmos-
phere. Most of the ultraviolet radia-
tion is absorbed by the oxygen (Oz)
and ozone (O3) in the atmosphere.
As we will see in chapter 30, the de-
pletion of the ozone layer, appar-
ently as a result of human activities,
poses serious ecological problems.

Why the Tropics Are Warmer

 

Vernal equinox
(sun aims directly
at equator)

Winter solstice

(northem hemisphere
™\ away from the sun)

=

: 2318

  

Autumnal equinox

(sun aims directly at
equator)

Summer solstice a
(northem hemisphere

tilts toward the sun)

  
   

(b)

FIGURE 29.5

Relationships between the earth and the sun are critical in determining the nature
and distribution of life on earth. (a) A beam of solar energy striking the earth in the
middle latitudes spreads over a wider area of the earth’s surface than a similar beam
striking the earth near the equator. (b) The rotation of the earth around the sun has a
profound effect on climate. In the northern and southern hemispheres, temperatures
change in an annual cycle because the earth tilts slightly on its axis in relation to the path
around the sun.

occur over the earth’s surface, and, indirectly, for much

The world contains a great diversity of biomes because
its climate varies so much from place to place. On a given
day, Miami, Florida, and Bangor, Maine, often have very
different weather. There is no mystery about this. Be-
cause the earth is a sphere, some parts of it receive more
energy from the sun than others. This variation is re-
sponsible for many of the major climatic differences that

594 = Part VIIT_§ The Global Environment

of the diversity of biomes. The tropics are warmer than
temperate regions because the sun’s rays arrive almost
perpendicular to regions near the equator. Near the poles
the angle of incidence of the sun’s rays spreads them out
over a much greater area, providing less energy per unit
area (figure 29.54).
