Temperate Deciduous Forests

Mild climates (warm summers and cool
winters) and plentiful rains promote the
growth of deciduous (hardwood)
forests in Eurasia, the northeastern
United States, and eastern Canada (fig-
ure 29.14). A deciduous tree is one that
drops its leaves in the winter. Deer,
bears, beavers, and raccoons are familiar
animals of the temperate regions. Be-
cause the temperate deciduous forests
represent the remnants of more exten-
sive forests that stretched across North
America and Eurasia several million
years ago, the remaining areas in eastern
Asia and eastern North America share
animals and plants that were once more
widespread. Alligators, for example, are
found today only in China and in the
southeastern United States. The decidu-
ous forest in eastern Asia is rich in
species because climatic conditions have
historically remained constant. Many
perennial herbs live in areas of temper-
ate deciduous forest.

FIGURE 29.14
‘Temperate deciduous forest.

Temperate Evergreen Forests

Temperate evergreen forests occur in regions where win-
ters are cold and there is a strong, seasonal dry period. The
pine forests of the western United States and California
oak woodlands are typical temperate evergreen forests.
Temperate evergreen forests are characteristic of regions
with nutrient-poor soils. Temperate-mixed evergreen
forests represent a broad transitional zone between temper-
ate deciduous forests to the south and taiga to the north.
Many of these forests are endangered by overlogging, par-
ticularly in the western United States.

Taiga

A great ring of northern forests of coniferous trees (spruce,
hemlock, and fir) extends across vast areas of Asia and
North America. Coniferous trees are ones with leaves like
needles that are kept all year long. This ecosystem, called
taiga, is one of the largest on earth. Here, the winters are
long and cold, and most of the limited precipitation falls in
the summer. Because the taiga has too short a growing sea-
son for farming, few people live there. Many large mam-
mals, including elk, moose, deer, and such carnivores as
wolves, bears, lynx, and wolverines, live in the taiga. Tradi-
tionally, fur trapping has been extensive in this region, as
has lumber production. Marshes, lakes, and ponds are com-
mon and are often fringed by willows or birches. Most of
the trees occur in dense stands of one or a few species.

 

Tundra

In the far north, above the great coniferous forests and
south of the polar ice, few trees grow. There the grassland,
called tundra, is open, windswept, and often boggy. Enor-
mous in extent, this ecosystem covers one-fifth of the
earth’s land surface. Very little rain or snow falls. When
rain does fall during the brief arctic summer, it sits on
frozen ground, creating a sea of boggy ground. Per-
mafrost, or permanent ice, usually exists within a meter of
the surface. Trees are small and are mostly confined to the
margins of streams and lakes. As in taiga, herbs of the tun-
dra are perennials that grow rapidly during the brief sum-
mers. Large grazing mammals, including musk-oxen, cari-
bou, reindeer, and carnivores, such as wolves, foxes, and
lynx, live in the tundra. Lemming populations rise and fall
on a long-term cycle, with important effects on the animals
that prey on them.

 

Major biological communities called biomes can be
distinguished in different climatic regions. These
communities, which occur in regions of similar
climate, are much the same wherever they are found.
Variation in annual mean temperature and
precipitation are good predictors of what biome will
occur where.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 601
