| 29.4 Aquatic ecosystems cover much of the earth.

Patterns of Circulation in the
Oceans

Patterns of ocean circulation are determined by the pat-
terns of atmospheric circulation, but they are modified by
the locations of landmasses. Oceanic circulation is domi-
nated by huge surface gyres (figure 29.15), which move
around the subtropical zones of high pressure between ap-
proximately 30° north and 30° south latitude. These gyres
move clockwise in the northern hemisphere and counter-
clockwise in the southern hemisphere. The ways they re-
distribute heat profoundly affects life not only in the
oceans but also on coastal lands. For example, the Gulf
Stream, in the North Atlantic, swings away from North
America near Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, and reaches
Europe near the southern British Isles. Because of the
Gulf Stream, western Europe is much warmer and more
temperate than eastern North America at similar latitudes.

As a general principle, western sides of continents in tem-
perate zones of the northern hemisphere are warmer than
their eastern sides; the opposite is true of the southern
hemisphere. In addition, winds passing over cold water
onto warm land increase their moisture-holding capacity,
limiting precipitation.

In South America, the Humboldt Current carries
phosphorus-rich cold water northward up the west coast.
Phosphorus is brought up from the ocean depths by the
upwelling of cool water that occurs as offshore winds
blow from the mountainous slopes that border the Pacific
Ocean. This nutrient-rich current helps make possible
the abundance of marine life that supports the fisheries of
Peru and northern Chile. Marine birds, which feed on
these organisms, are responsible for the commercially
important, phosphorus-rich, guano deposits on the sea-
coasts of these countries.

 

 

 

———> Cold water current
——> Warm water current

FIGURE 29.15

Ocean circulation. Water moves in the oceans in great surface spiral patterns called gyres; they profoundly affect the climate on

adjacent lands.

602 = Part VIII The Global Environment
