Tropical Rain Forests

Rain forests, which receive 140 to 450
centimeters of rain a year, are the rich-
est ecosystems on earth (figure 29.13).
They contain at least half of the earth’s
species of terrestrial plants and ani-
mals—more than 2 million species! In a
single square mile of tropical forest in
Rondonia, Brazil, there are 1200
species of butterflics—twice the total
number found in the United States and
Canada combined. The communities
that make up tropical rain forests are
diverse in that each kind of animal,
plant, or microorganism is often repre-
sented in a given area by very few indi-
viduals. There are extensive tropical
rain forests in South America, Africa,
and Southeast Asia. But the world’s
rain forests are being destroyed, and
countless species, many of them never
seen by humans, are disappearing with
them. A quarter of the world’s species
will disappear with the rain forests dur-
ing the lifetime of many of us.

FIGURE 29.13
Tropical rain forest.

Savannas

In the dry climates that border the tropics are the world’s
great grasslands, called savannas. Savanna landscapes are
open, often with widely spaced trees, and rainfall (75 to
125 centimeters annually) is seasonal. Many of the ani-
mals and plants are active only during the rainy season.
The huge herds of grazing animals that inhabit the
African savanna are familiar to all of us. Such animal
communities lived in North America during the Pleis-
tocene epoch but have persisted mainly in Africa. On a
global scale, the savanna biome is transitional between
tropical rain forest and desert. As these savannas are in-
creasingly converted to agricultural use to feed rapidly
expanding human populations in subtropical areas, their
inhabitants are struggling to survive. The elephant and
rhino are now endangered species; lion, giraffe, and chee-
tah will soon follow.

Deserts

In the interior of continents are the world’s great deserts,
especially in Africa (the Sahara), Asia (the Gobi) and Aus-
tralia (the Great Sandy Desert). Deserts are dry places
where less than 25 centimeters of rain falls in a year—an
amount so low that vegetation is sparse and survival de-
pends on water conservation. Plants and animals may re-
strict their activity to favorable times of the year, when
water is present. To avoid high temperatures, most desert

600 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

vertebrates live in deep, cool, and sometimes even some-
what moist burrows. Those that are active over a greater
portion of the year emerge only at night, when tempera-
tures are relatively cool. Some, such as camels, can drink
large quantities of water when it is available and then sur-
vive long, dry periods. Many animals simply migrate to
or through the desert, where they exploit food that may
be abundant seasonally.

Temperate Grasslands

Halfway between the equator and the poles are temperate
regions where rich grasslands grow. These grasslands
once covered much of the interior of North America, and
they were widespread in Eurasia and South America as
well. Such grasslands are often highly productive when
converted to agricultural use. Many of the rich agricul-
tural lands in the United States and southern Canada
were originally occupied by prairies, another name for
temperate grasslands. The roots of perennial grasses
characteristically penetrate far into the soil, and grassland
soils tend to be deep and fertile. Temperate grasslands
are often populated by herds of grazing mammals. In
North America, huge herds of bison and pronghorns
once inhabited the prairies. The herds are almost all gone
now, with most of the prairies having been converted to
the richest agricultural region on earth.
