Polar ice
Tundra

Taiga

 

Temperate
forest

Tropical
rain forest

   

FIGURE 29.9

A Polar ice
\,

 
  
  

3500 m
4 Tundra

| ,

| Taiga

} Temperate

Elevation forest |
Tropical
rain forest
Elevation

Sea level

 

 

Elevation affects the distribution of biomes much as latitude does. Biomes that normally occur far north and far south of the equator
at sea level also occur in the tropics at high mountain elevations. Thus, on a tall mountain in southern Mexico or Guatemala, one might

see a sequence of biomes like the one illustrated here.

Latitude

Temperatures are higher in tropical ecosystems for a sim-
ple reason: more sunlight per unit area falls on tropical lati-
tudes. Solar radiation is most intense when the sun is di-
rectly overhead, and this only occurs in the tropics, where
sunlight strikes the equator perpendicularly. As figure 29.8
shows, the highest mean global temperatures occur near
the equator (that is, 0 latitude). Because there are no sea-
sons in the tropics, there is little variation in mean monthly
temperature in tropical ecosystems. As you move from the
equator into temperate latitudes, sunlight strikes the earth
at a more oblique angle, so that less falls on a given area. As
a result, mean temperatures are lower. At temperate lati-
tudes, temperature variation increases because of the in-
creasingly marked seasons.

Seasonal changes in wind circulation produce corre-
sponding changes in ocean currents, sometimes causing
nutrient-rich cold water to well up from ocean depths.
This produces “blooms” among the plankton and other
organisms living near the surface. Similar turnover occurs
seasonally in freshwater lakes and ponds, bringing nutri-
ents from the bottom to the surface in the fall and again in
the spring.

Elevation

Temperature also varies with elevation, with higher alti-
tudes becoming progressively colder. At any given lati-

tude, air temperature falls about 6°C for every 1000-
meter increase in elevation. The ecological consequences
of temperature varying with elevation are the same as
temperature varying with latitude (figure 29.9). Thus, in
North America a 1000-meter increase in elevation results
in a temperature drop equal to that of an 880-kilometer
increase in latitude. This is one reason “timberline” (the
elevation above which trees do not grow) occurs at pro-
gressively lower elevations as one moves farther from the
equator.

Microclimate

Climate also varies on a very fine scale within ecosystems.
Within the litter on a forest floor, there is considerable
variation in shading, local temperatures, and rates of evapo-
ration from the soil. Called microclimate, these very local-
ized climatic conditions can be very different from those of
the overhead atmosphere. Gardeners spread straw over
newly seeded lawns to create such a moisture-retaining mi-
croclimate.

 

The great deserts and associated arid areas of the world
mostly lie along the western sides of continents at about
30° north and south latitude. Mountain ranges tend to
intercept rain, creating deserts in their shadow. In
general, temperatures are warmer in the tropics and at
lower elevations.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 597
