Behavior. Many animals deal with variation in the envi-
ronment by moving from one patch of habitat to another,
avoiding areas that are unsuitable. The tropical lizards in
figure 29.4 manage to maintain a fairly uniform body tem-
perature in an open habitat by basking in patches of sun,
retreating to the shade when they become too hot. By con-
trast, in shaded forests, the same lizards do not have the op-
portunity to regulate their body temperature through be-
havioral means. Thus, they become conformers and adopt
the temperature of their surroundings.

Behavioral adaptations can be extreme. The spadefoot
toad Scaphiopbus, which lives in the deserts of North Amer-
ica, can burrow nearly a meter below the surface and re-
main there for as long as nine months of each year, its
metabolic rate greatly reduced, living on fat reserves.
When moist cool conditions return, the toads emerge and
breed. The young toads mature rapidly and burrow back
underground.

Evolutionary Responses to Environmental
Variation

These examples represent different ways in which organ-
isms may adjust to changing environmental conditions.
The ability of an individual to alter its physiology, mor-
phology, or behavior is itself an evolutionary adaptation,
the result of natural selection. The results of natural selec-
tion can also be detected by comparing closely related
species that live in different environments. In such cases,
species often exhibit striking adaptations to the particular
environment in which they live.

For example, animals that live in different climates show
many differences. Mammals from colder climates tend to
have shorter ears and limbs (Allen’s Rule) and larger bodies
(Bergmann’s Rule) to limit heat loss. Both mechanisms re-
duce the surface area across which animals lose heat.
Lizards that live in different climates exhibit physiological
adaptations for coping with life at different temperatures.
Desert lizards are unaffected by high temperatures that
would kill a lizard from northern Europe, but the northern
lizards are capable of running, capturing prey, and digest-
ing food at cooler temperatures at which desert lizards
would be completely immobilized.

Many species also exhibit adaptations to living in areas
where water is scarce. Everyone knows of the camel, and
other desert animals, which can go extended periods with-
out drinking water. Another example of desert adaptation is
seen in frogs. Most frogs have moist skins through which
water permeates readily. Such animals could not survive in
arid climates because they would rapidly dehydrate and dry.
However, some frogs have solved this problem by greatly
reducing the rate of water loss through the skin. One
species, for example, secretes a waxy substance from spe-
cialized glands that waterproofs its skin and reduces rates of
water loss by 95%.

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

1.5F © Winter
ay + Summer
2 oll —v,
&
§ 10F
2 Wolf = Polar bear
5 a)
= ost Polar bear
3
z
po
10 20 30 40 50 60
Thickness of fur (mm)
FIGURE 29.3

Morphological adaptation. Fur thickness in North American
mammals has a major impact on the degree of insulation the fur
provides.

 

    

Hourly mean body
temperature (°C)
8
T

© Open habitat

Pl © Shaded forest

 

L L 1 1
24 26 28 30

Hourly mean air temperature (°C)

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 29.4

Behavioral adaptation. The Puerto Rican lizard Anolis cristatellus
maintains a relatively constant temperature by seeking out and
basking in patches of sunlight; in shaded forests, this behavior is
not possible and body temperature conforms to the surroundings.

Adaptation to different environments can also be stud-
ied experimentally. For example, when strains of E. coli
are grown at high temperatures (42°C), the speed at which
resources are utilized improves through time. After 2000
generations, this ability increased 30% over what it had
been when the experiment started. The mechanism by
which efficiency of resource use was increased is still un-
known and is the focus of current research.

 

Organisms use a variety of physiological,
morphological, and behavioral mechanisms to adjust to
environmental variation. Over time, species evolve
adaptations to living in different environments.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 593
