| 29.3 Biomes are widespread terrestrial ecosystems.

The Major Biomes

Biomes are major communities of organisms that have a
characteristic appearance and that are distributed over a
wide land area defined largely by regional variations in cli-
mate. As you might imagine from such a broad definition,
there are many ways to classify biomes, and different ecolo-
gists may assign the same community to different biomes.
There is little disagreement, however, about the reality of
biomes as major biological communities—only about how
to best describe them.

Distribution of the Major Biomes

Eight major biome categories are presented in this text:
tropical rain forest, savanna, desert, temperate grassland,
temperate deciduous forest, temperate evergreen forest,
taiga, and tundra. These biomes occur worldwide, occu-
pying large regions that can be defined by rainfall and
temperature.

Six additional biomes are considered by some ecologists
to be subsets of the eight major ones: polar ice, mountain
zone, chaparral, warm moist evergreen forest, tropical
monsoon forest, and semidesert. They vary remarkably
from one another because they have evolved in regions
with very different climates.

Distributions of the 14 biomes are mapped in figure
29.10. Although each is by convention named for the domi-
nant vegetation (deciduous forest, evergreen forest, grass-
land, and so on) each biome is also characterized by partic-
ular animals, fungi, and microorganisms adapted to live as
members of that community. Wolves, caribou or reindeer,
polar bears, hares, lynx, snowy owls, deer flies, and mosqui-
toes inhabit the tundra all over the world and are as much a
defining characteristic of the tundra biomes as the low,
shrubby, matlike vegetation.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Polar ice Gi Temperate evergreen forest [ij Temperate grassland
Tundra Warm, moist evergreen forest Savanna

Gi Taiga GHiTropical monsoon forest (GSemidesert

Gi Mountain zone Gi Tropical rain forest Desert

[i Temperate deciduous forest [ij Chaparral

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 29.10

The distribution of biomes. Each biome is similar in structure and appearance wherever it occurs on earth.

598 = Part VIII The Global Environment
