Establishing Controls

Often we are interested in learning about processes that are
influenced by many factors, or variables. To evaluate alter-
native hypotheses about one variable, all other variables
must be kept constant. This is done by carrying out two ex-
periments in parallel: in the first experiment, one variable is
altered in a specific way to test a particular hypothesis; in the
second experiment, called the control experiment, that
variable is left unaltered. In all other respects the two exper-
iments are identical, so any difference in the outcomes of
the two experiments must result from the influence of the
variable that was changed. Much of the challenge of experi-
mental science lies in designing control experiments that
isolate a particular variable from other factors that might in-
fluence a process.

Using Predictions

A successful scientific hypothesis needs to be not only valid
but useful—it needs to tell you something you want to
know. A hypothesis is most useful when it makes predic-
tions, because those predictions provide a way to test the va-
lidity of the hypothesis. If an experiment produces results
inconsistent with the predictions, the hypothesis must be re-
jected. On the other hand, if the predictions are supported
by experimental testing, the hypothesis is supported. The
more experimentally supported predictions a hypothesis
makes, the more valid the hypothesis is. For example, Ein-
stein’s hypothesis of relativity was at first provisionally ac-
cepted because no one could devise an experiment that in-
validated it. The hypothesis made a clear prediction: that
the sun would bend the path of light passing by it. When
this prediction was tested in a total eclipse, the light from
background stars was indeed bent. Because this result was
unknown when the hypothesis was being formulated, it pro-
vided strong support for the hypothesis, which was then ac-
cepted with more confidence.

Developing Theories

Scientists use the word theory in two main ways. A “theo-
ry” is a proposed explanation for some natural phenome-
non, often based on some general principle. Thus one
speaks of the principle first proposed by Newton as the
“theory of gravity.” Such theories often bring together
concepts that were previously thought to be unrelated,
and offer unified explanations of different phenomena.
Newton’s theory of gravity provided a single explanation
for objects falling to the ground and the orbits of planets
around the sun. “Theory” is also used to mean the body
of interconnected concepts, supported by scientific rea-
soning and experimental evidence, that explains the facts
in some area of study. Such a theory provides an indis-
pensable framework for organizing a body of knowledge.
For example, quantum theory in physics brings together a

8 Part The Origin of Living Things

set of ideas about the nature of the universe, explains ex-
perimental facts, and serves as a guide to further questions
and experiments.

To a scientist, such theories are the solid ground of sci-
ence, that of which we are most certain. In contrast, to the
general public, theory implies just the opposite—a lack of
knowledge, or a guess. Not surprisingly, this difference
often results in confusion. In this text, theory will always be
used in its scientific sense, in reference to an accepted gen-
eral principle or body of knowledge.

To suggest, as many critics outside of science do, that
evolution is “just a theory” is misleading. The hypothesis
that evolution has occurred is an accepted scientific fact; it is
supported by overwhelming evidence. Modern evolutionary
theory is a complex body of ideas whose importance spreads
far beyond explaining evolution; its ramifications permeate
all areas of biology, and it provides the conceptual frame-
work that unifies biology as a science.

Research and the Scientific Method

It used to be fashionable to speak of the “scientific meth-
od” as consisting of an orderly sequence of logical “ei-
ther/or” steps. Each step would reject one of two mutually
incompatible alternatives, as if trial-and-error testing
would inevitably lead one through the maze of uncertain-
ty that always impedes scientific progress. If this were in-
deed so, a computer would make a good scientist. But sci-
ence is not done this way. As British philosopher Karl
Popper has pointed out, successful scientists without ex-
ception design their experiments with a pretty fair idea of
how the results are going to come out. They have what
Popper calls an “imaginative preconception” of what the
truth might be. A hypothesis that a successful scientist
tests is not just any hypothesis; rather, it is an educated
guess or a hunch, in which the scientist integrates all that
he or she knows and allows his or her imagination full
play, in an attempt to get a sense of what might be true
(see Box: How Biologists Do Their Work). It is because
insight and imagination play such a large role in scientific
progress that some scientists are so much better at science
than others, just as Beethoven and Mozart stand out
among most other composers.

Some scientists perform what is called basic research,
which is intended to extend the boundaries of what we
know. These individuals typically work at universities, and
their research is usually financially supported by their in-
stitutions and by external sources, such as the government,
industry, and private foundations. Basic research is as di-
verse as its name implies. Some basic scientists attempt to
find out how certain cells take up specific chemicals, while
others count the number of dents in tiger teeth. The infor-
mation generated by basic research contributes to the
growing body of scientific knowledge, and it provides the
scientific foundation utilized by applied research. Scien-
tists who conduct applied research are often employed in

    

 
