Winter

  
      

Fall overturn

Nutrients

FIGURE 29.23

Spring overturn

Nutrients

Midsummer

Epilimnion
Thermocline

Hypolimnion

Stratification in fresh water. The pattern stratification in a large pond or lake in temperate regions is upset in the spring and fall
overturns. Of the three layers of water shown, the hypolimnion consists of the densest water, at 4°C; the epilimnion consists of warmer
water that is less dense; and the thermocline is the zone of abrupt change in temperature that lies between them. If you have dived into a

pond in temperate regions in the summer, you have experienced the existence of these layers.

Thermal Stratification

Thermal stratification is characteristic of larger lakes in
temperate regions (figure 29.23). In summer, warmer water
forms a layer at the surface known as the epilimnion. Cooler
water, called the bypolimnion (about 4°C), lies below. An
abrupt change in temperature, the thermocline, separates
these two layers. Depending on the climate of the particu-
lar area, the epilimnion may become as much as 20 meters
thick during the summer.

In autumn the temperature of the epilimnion drops
until it is the same as that of the hypolimnion, 4°C. When
this occurs, epilimnion and hypolimnion mix—a process
called fall overturn. Because water is densest at about 4°C,
further cooling of the water as winter progresses creates a
layer of cooler, lighter water, which freezes to form a
layer of ice at the surface. Below the ice, the water tem-

608 = Part VIII The Global Environment

perature remains between 0° and 4°C, and plants and ani-
mals can survive. In spring, the ice melts, and the surface
water warms up. When it warms back to 4°C, it again
mixes with the water below. This process is known as
spring overturn. When lake waters mix in the spring and
fall, nutrients formerly held in the depths of the lake are
returned to the surface, and oxygen from surface waters is

carried to the depths.

 

Freshwater habitats include several distinct life zones.
‘These zones shift seasonally in temperate lakes and
ponds. In the spring and fall, when their temperatures
are equal, shallower and deeper waters of the lake mix,
with oxygen being carried to the depths and nutrients
being brought to the surface.

 
