Scientists Disagree about Where
Life Started

While most researchers agree that life first appeared as the
primitive earth cooled and its rocky crust formed, there is
little agreement as to just where this occurred.

Did Life Originate at the Ocean’s Edge?

The more we learn about earth’s early history, the more
likely it seems that earth’s first organisms emerged and lived
at very high temperatures. Rubble from the forming solar
system slammed into early earth from 4.6 to 3.8 billion years
ago, keeping the surface molten hot. As the bombardment
slowed down, temperatures dropped. By about 3.8 billion
years ago, ocean temperatures are thought to have dropped
to a hot 49° to 88°C (120° to 190°F). Between 3.8 and 3.5
billion years ago, life first appeared, promptly after the earth
was inhabitable. Thus, as intolerable as early earth’s infernal
temperatures seem to us today, they gave birth to life.

Very few geochemists agree on the exact composition of
the early atmosphere. One popular view is that it contained
principally carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrogen gas (N2),
along with significant amounts of water vapor (HO). It is
possible that the early atmosphere also contained hydrogen
gas (H2) and compounds in which hydrogen atoms were
bonded to the other light elements (sulfur, nitrogen, and
carbon), producing hydrogen sulfide (H2S), ammonia
(NHB), and methane (CH).

We refer to such an atmosphere as a reducing atmosphere
because of the ample availability of hydrogen atoms and
their electrons. In such a reducing atmosphere it would not
take as much energy as it would today to form the carbon-
rich molecules from which life evolved.

The key to this reducing atmosphere hypothesis is the
assumption that there was very little oxygen around. In an
atmosphere with oxygen, amino acids and sugars react
spontaneously with the oxygen to form carbon dioxide and
water. Therefore, the building blocks of life, the amino
acids, would not last long and the spontaneous formation of
complex carbon molecules could not occur. Our atmosphere
changed once organisms began to carry out photosynthesis,
harnessing the energy in sunlight to split water molecules
and form complex carbon molecules, giving off gaseous oxy-
gen molecules in the process. The earth’s atmosphere is
now approximately 21% oxygen.

Critics of the reducing atmosphere hypothesis point out
that no carbonates have been found in rocks dating back to
the early earth. This suggests that at that time carbon diox-
ide was locked up in the atmosphere, and if that was the
case, then the prebiotic atmosphere would not have been re-
ducing.

Another problem for the reducing atmosphere hypothe-
sis is that because a prebiotic reducing atmosphere would
have been oxygen free, there would have been no ozone.
Without the protective ozone layer, any organic compounds

that might have formed would have been broken down
quickly by ultraviolet radiation.

Other Suggestions

If life did not originate at the ocean’s edge under the blanket
of a reducing atmosphere, where did it originate?

Under frozen oceans. One hypothesis proposes that
life originated under a frozen ocean, not unlike the one
that covers Jupiter’s moon Europa today. All evidence
suggests, however, that the early earth was quite warm
and frozen oceans quite unlikely.

Deep in the earth’s crust. Another hypothesis is that
life originated deep in the earth’s crust. In 1988 Gunter
Wachtershauser proposed that life might have formed as
a by-product of volcanic activity, with iron and nickel
sulfide minerals acting as chemical catalysts to recom-
bine gases spewing from eruptions into the building
blocks of life. In later work he and coworkers were able
to use this unusual chemistry to build precursors for
amino acids (although they did not actually succeed in
making amino acids), and to link amino acids together to
form peptides. Critics of this hypothesis point out that
the concentration of chemicals used in their experiments
greatly exceed what is found in nature.

Within clay. Other researchers have proposed the un-
usual hypothesis that life is the result of silicate surface
chemistry. The surface of clays have positive charges to
attract organic molecules, and exclude water, providing a
potential catalytic surface on which life’s early chemistry
might have occurred. While interesting conceptually,
there is little evidence that this sort of process could ac-
tually occur.

At deep-sea vents. Becoming more popular is the hy-
pothesis that life originated at deep-sea hydrothermal
vents, with the necessary prebiotic molecules being syn-
thesized on metal sulfides in the vents. The positive
charge of the sulfides would have acted as a magnet for
negatively charged organic molecules. In part, the cur-
rent popularity of this hypothesis comes from the new
science of genomics, which suggests that the ancestors of
today’s prokaryotes are most closely related to the bacte-
ria that live on the deep-sea vents.

No one is sure whether life originated at the ocean’s
edge, under frozen ocean, deep in the earth’s crust, within
clay, or at deep-sea vents. Perhaps one of these hypotheses
will be proven correct. Perhaps the correct theory has not
yet been proposed.

 

When life first appeared on earth, the environment was
very hot. All of the spontaneous origin hypotheses
assume that the organic chemicals that were the
building blocks of life arose spontaneously at that time.
How is a matter of considerable disagreement.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 63
