Life in the Oceans

Nearly three-quarters of the earth’s surface is covered by
ocean. Oceans have an average depth of more than 3 kilo-
meters, and they are, for the most part, cold and dark. Het-
erotrophic organisms inhabit even the greatest ocean
depths, which reach nearly 11 kilometers in the Marianas
Trench of the western Pacific Ocean. Photosynthetic or-
ganisms are confined to the upper few hundred meters of
water. Organisms that live below this level obtain almost all
of their food indirectly, as a result of photosynthetic activi-
ties that occur above.

The supply of oxygen can often be critical in the ocean,
and as water temperatures become warmer, the water
holds less oxygen. For this reason, the amount of available
oxygen becomes an important limiting factor for organ-
isms in warmer marine regions of the globe. Carbon diox-
ide, in contrast, is almost never limited in the oceans. The
distribution of minerals is much more uniform in the
ocean than it is on land, where individual soils reflect the
composition of the parent rocks from which they have
weathered.

Frigid and bare, the floors of the deep sea have long
been considered a biological desert. Recent close-up
looks taken by marine biologists, however, paint a differ-
ent picture (figure 29.17). The ocean floor is teeming
with life. Often miles deep, thriving in pitch darkness
under enormous pressure, crowds of marine invertebrates
have been found in hundreds of deep samples from the
Atlantic and Pacific. Rough estimates of deep-sea diver-
sity have soared to millions of species. Many appear en-
demic (local). The diversity of species is so high it may
rival that of tropical rain forests! This profusion is unex-
pected. New species usually require some kind of barrier
in order to diverge (see chapter 22), and the ocean floor
seems boringly uniform. However, little migration occurs
among deep populations, thus allowing populations to di-
verge and encouraging local specialization and species
formation. A patchy environment may also contribute to
species formation there; deep-sea ecologists find evidence
that fine but nonetheless formidable resource barriers
arise in the deep sea.

Another conjecture is that the extra billion years or so
that life has been evolving in the sea compared with land
may be a factor in the unexpected biological richness of its
deep recesses.

Despite the many new forms of small invertebrates
now being discovered on the seafloor, and the huge bio-
mass that occurs in the sea, more than 90% of all described
species of organisms occur on land. Each of the largest
groups of organisms, including insects, mites, nematodes,
fungi, and plants has marine representatives, but they
constitute only a very small fraction of the total number
of described species. There are two reasons for this. First,
barriers between habitats are sharper on land, and varia-
tions in elevation, parent rock, degree of exposure, and

604 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

FIGURE 29.17

Food comes to the ocean floor from above. Looking for all the
world like some undersea sunflower, the two sea anemones
(actually animals) use a glass-sponge stalk to catch “marine snow,”
food particles raining down on the ocean floor from the ocean
surface miles above.

other factors have been crucial to the evolution of the
millions of species of terrestrial organisms. Second, there
are simply few taxonomists actively classifying the profu-
sion of ocean floor life being brought to the surface.

In terms of higher level diversity, the pattern is quite
different. Of the major groups of organisms—phyla—
most originated in the sea, and almost every one has rep-
resentatives in the sea. Only a few phyla have been suc-
cessful on land or in freshwater habitats, but these have
given rise to an extraordinarily large number of described
species.

 

Although representatives of almost every phylum occur
in the sea, an estimated 90% of living species of
organisms are terrestrial. This is because of the
enormous evolutionary success of a few phyla on land,
where the boundaries between different habitats are
sharper than they are in the sea.

 
