Freshwater Habitats

Freshwater habitats are distinct from
both marine and terrestrial ones, but
they are limited in area. Inland lakes
cover about 1.8% of the earth’s sur-
face, and running water (streams and
rivers) covers about 0.3%. All fresh-
water habitats are strongly connected
with terrestrial ones, with marshes
and swamps constituting intermedi-
ate habitats. In addition, a large
amount of organic and inorganic ma-
terial continuously enters bodies of
fresh water from communities grow- @)
ing on the land nearby (figure

29.214). Many kinds of organisms are FIGURE 29.21

restricted to freshwater habitats (fig- A nutrient-rich stream. (7) Much organic
ure 29.21b,¢). When organisms live in material falls or seeps into streams from
rivers and streams, they must be able Communities along the edges. This input _
to swim against the current or attach creases the stream’s biological productivity.
themselves in such a way as to resist ( This speckled darter and () this giant

the effets of eurrent, or rik being pags wi gas on is ack can only Hein
swept avay,

  

Ponds and Lakes

Small bodies of fresh water are
called ponds, and larger ones lakes.
Because water absorbs light passing
through it at wavelengths critical to
photosynthesis (every meter absorbs
40% of the red and about 2% of the
blue), the distribution of photosyn-
thetic organisms is limited to the
upper photic zone; heterotrophic
organisms occur in the lower
aphotic zone where very little light
penetrates.

Ponds and lakes, like the ocean,
have three zones where organisms
occur, distributed according to the
depth of the water and its distance
from shore (figure 29.22). The Jit-
toral zone is the shallow area along
the shore. The Jimmetic zone is the
well-illuminated surface water away
from the shore, inhabited by plank-
ton and other organisms that live in FIGURE 29.22
open water. The profundal zone is ‘The three zones in ponds and lakes. A shallow “edge” (littoral) zone lines the periphery of
the area below the limits where _ the lake, where attached algae and their insect herbivores live. An open-water surface
(limnetic) zone lies across the entire lake and is inhabited by floating algae, zooplankton, and
fish. A dark, deep-water (profundal) zone overlies the sediments at the bottom of the lake and
contains numerous bacteria and wormlike organisms that consume dead debris settling at the
bottom of the lake.

 

light can effectively penetrate.

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 607
