The Pelagic Zone

Drifting freely in the upper waters of
the pelagic zone, a diverse biological
community exists, primarily consisting
of microscopic organisms called
plankton. Fish and other larger or-
ganisms that swim in these waters con-
stitute the nekton, whose members feed
on plankton and one another. Some
members of the plankton, including
protists and some bacteria, are photo-
synthetic. Collectively, these organ-
isms account for about 40% of all pho- (a)
tosynthesis that takes place on earth.
Most plankton live in the top 100 me-
ters of the sea, the zone into which
light from the surface penetrates
freely. Perhaps half of the total photo-
synthesis in this zone is carried out by
organisms less than 10 micrometers in
diameter—at the lower limits of size
for organisms—including cyanobacteria and algae, organ-
isms so small that their abundance and ecological impor-
tance have been unappreciated until relatively recently.

Many heterotrophic protists and animals live in the
plankton and feed directly on photosynthetic organisms
and on one another. Gelatinous animals, especially jellyfish
and ctenophores, are abundant in the plankton. The largest
animals that have ever existed on earth, baleen whales,
graze on plankton and nekton as do a number of other or-
ganisms, such as fishes and crustaceans.

Populations of organisms that make up plankton can in-
crease rapidly, and the turnover of nutrients in the sea is
great, although the productivity in these systems is quite
low. Because nitrogen and phosphorus are often present in
only small amounts and organisms may be relatively scarce,
this productivity reflects rapid use and recycling rather
than an abundance of these nutrients.

FIGURE 29.20

The Benthic Zone

The seafloor at depths below 1000 meters, the abyssal
zone, has about twice the area of all the land on earth. The
seafloor itself, sometimes called the benthic zone, is a
thick blanket of mud, consisting of fine particles that have
settled from the overlying water and accumulated over mil-
lions of years. Because of high pressures (an additional at-
mosphere of pressure for every 10 meters of depth), cold
temperatures (2° to 3°C), darkness, and lack of food, biolo-
gists thought that nothing could live on the seafloor. In
fact, recent work has shown that the number of species that
live at great depth is quite high. Most of these animals are
only a few millimeters in size, although larger ones also
occur in these regions. Some of the larger ones are biolu-
minescent (figure 29.202) and thus are able to communi-
cate with one another or attract their prey.

606 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

(b)

Life in the abyssal and benthic zones. (a) The luminous spot below the eye of this deep-
sea fish results from the presence of a symbiotic colony of luminous bacteria. Similar
luminous signals are a common feature of deep-sea animals that move about. (6) These
giant beardworms live along vents where water jets from fissures at 350°C and then cools to
the 2°C of the surrounding water.

Animals on the sea bottom depend on the meager left-
overs from organisms living kilometers overhead. The low
densities and small size of most deep-sea bottom animals is
in part a consequence of this limited food supply. In 1977,
oceanographers diving in a research submarine were sur-
prised to find dense clusters of large animals living on geo-
thermal energy at a depth of 2500 meters. These deep-sea
oases occur where seawater circulates through porous rock
at sites where molten material from beneath the earth’s
crust comes close to the rocky surface. A series of these
areas occur on the Mid-Ocean Ridge, where basalt erupts
through the ocean floor.

This water is heated to temperatures in excess of 350°C
and, in the process, becomes rich in reduced compounds.
These compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide, provide en-
ergy for bacterial primary production through chemosyn-
thesis instead of photosynthesis. Mussels, clams, and large
red-plumed worms in a phylum unrelated to any shallow-
water invertebrates cluster around the vents (figure 29.200).
Bacteria live symbiotically within the tissues of these ani-
mals. The animal supplies a place for the bacteria to live
and transfers CO, H2S, and O) to them for their growth;
the bacteria supply the animal with organic compounds to
use as food. Polychaete worms (see chapter 46), anemones,
and limpets live on free-living chemosynthetic bacteria.
Crabs act as scavengers and predators, and some of the fish
are also predators. This is one of the few ecosystems on
earth that does not depend on the sun’s energy.

 

About 40% of the world’s photosynthetic productivity is
estimated to occur in the oceans. The turnover of
nutrients in the plankton is much more rapid than in
most other ecosystems, and the total amounts of
nutrients are very low.

 
