 

Drier and
warmer

‘Source: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

FIGURE 29.16

 

EI Nino
Sea temperature
higher than normal

 

An EI Nifio winter. E] Nifio currents produce unusual weather patterns all over the world as warm waters from the western Pacific move

eastward.

El Nifio and Ocean Ecology

Every Christmas a tepid current sweeps down the coast of
Peru and Ecuador from the tropics, reducing the fish popu-
lation slightly and giving local fishermen some time off.
The local fishermen named this Christmas current E/ Nifio
(literally, “the child,” after “the Christ Child”). Now,
though, the term is reserved for a catastrophic version of
the same phenomenon, one that occurs every two to seven
years and is felt not only locally but on a global scale.

Scientists now have a pretty good idea of what goes on
in an El Nifio. Normally the Pacific Ocean is fanned by
constantly blowing east-to-west trade winds that push
warm surface water away from the ocean’s eastern side
(Peru, Ecuador, and Chile) and allow cold water to well up
from the depths in its place, carrying nutrients that feed
plankton and hence fish. This surface water piles up in the
west, around Australia and the Philippines, making it sev-
eral degrees warmer and a meter or so higher than the east-
ern side of the ocean. But if the winds slacken briefly, warm
water begins to slosh back across the ocean.

Once this happens, ocean and atmosphere conspire to
ensure it keeps happening. The warmer the eastern ocean
gets, the warmer and lighter the air above it becomes, and
hence more similar to the air on the western side. This re-
duces the difference in pressure across the ocean. Because a
pressure difference is what makes winds blow, the easterly
trades weaken further, letting the warm water continue its
eastward advance.

The end result is to shift the weather systems of the
western Pacific Ocean 6000 km eastward. The tropical
rainstorms that usually drench Indonesia and the Philip-

pines are caused when warm seawater abutting these islands
causes the air above it to rise, cool, and condense its mois-
ture into clouds. When the warm water moves east, so do
the clouds, leaving the previously rainy areas in drought.
Conversely, the western edge of South America, its coastal
waters usually too cold to trigger much rain, gets a soaking,
while the upwelling slows down. During an El Nifio, com-
mercial fish stocks virtually disappear from the waters of
Peru and northern Chile, and plankton drop to a twentieth
of their normal abundance.

That is just the beginning. El Nifio’s effects are propa-
gated across the world’s weather systems (figure 29.16). Vi-
olent winter storms lash the coast of California, accompa-
nied by flooding, and El Niftlo produces colder and wetter
winters than normal in Florida and along the Gulf Coast.
The American midwest experiences heavier-than-normal
rains, as do Israel and its neighbors.

Though the effects of El Nifios are now fairly clear,
what triggers them still remains a mystery. Models of
these weather disturbances suggest that the climatic
change that triggers El Nifio is “chaotic.” Wind and
ocean currents return again and again to the same condi-
tion, but never in a regular pattern, and small nudges can
send them off in many different directions—including an
El Nifio.

 

The world’s oceans circulate in huge gyres deflected by
continental landmasses. Circulation of ocean water
redistributes heat, warming the western side of
continents. Disturbances in ocean currents like El Niiio
can have profound influences on world climate.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 603
