The Future of the
Biosphere

Concept Outline

30.1 The world’s human population is growing
explosively.
A Growing Population. ‘The world’s population of
6 billion people is growing rapidly and at current rates will
double in 39 years.

30.2 Improvements in agriculture are needed to feed a
hungry world.

The Future of Agriculture. Much of the effort in
searching for new sources of food has focused on improving
the productivity of existing crops.

30.3 Human activity is placing the environment under
increasing stress.

Nuclear Power. Nuclear power, a plentiful source of
energy, is neither cheap nor safe.

Carbon Dioxide and Global Warming. The world’s
industrialization has led to a marked increase in the
atmosphere’s level of CO», with resulting warming of
climates.

Pollution. Human industrial and agricultural activity
introduces significant levels of many harmful chemicals into
ecosystems.

Acid Precipitation. Burning of cheap high-sulfur coal
has introduced sulfur to the upper atmosphere, where it
combines with water to form sulfuric acid that falls back to
earth, harming ecosystems.

The Ozone Hole. Industrial chemicals called CFCs are
destroying the atmosphere’s ozone layer, removing an
essential shield from the sun’s UV radiation.

Destruction of the Tropical Forests. Much of the
world’s tropical forest is being destroyed by human activity.

30.4 Solving environmental problems requires
individual involvement.

Environmental Science. The commitment of one
person often makes a key difference in solving
environmental problems.

Preserving Nonreplaceable Resources. ‘Three key
nonreplaceable resources are topsoil, groundwater, and
biodiversity.

 

FIGURE 30.1
New York City by satellite.

the view of New York City in figure 30.1 was pho-

tographed from a satellite in the spring of 1985. At the
moment this picture was taken, millions of people within
its view were talking, hundreds of thousands of cars were
struggling through traffic, hearts were being broken, babies
born, and dead people buried. Our futures and those of
everyone on the planet are linked to the unseen millions in
this photograph, for we share the earth with them. A lot of
people consume a lot of food and water, use a great deal of
energy and raw materials, and produce a great deal of
waste. They also have the potential to solve the problems
that arise in an increasingly crowded world. In this chapter,
we will study how human life affects the environment and
how the efforts being mounted can lessen the adverse im-
pact and increase the potential benefits of our burgeoning
population.

611
