Productivity of Freshwater
Ecosystems

Some aquatic communities, such as fast-moving streams,
are not highly productive. Because the moving water
washes away plankton, the photosynthesis that supports the
community is limited to algae attached to the surface and
to rooted plants.

The Productivity of Lakes

Lakes can be divided into two categories based on their
production of organic matter. Eutrophic lakes contain an
abundant supply of minerals and organic matter. As the
plentiful organic material drifts below the thermocline
from the well-illuminated surface waters of the lake, it pro-
vides a source of energy for other organisms. Most of these
are oxygen-requiring organisms that can easily deplete the
oxygen supply below the thermocline during the summer
months. The oxygen supply of the deeper waters cannot be
replenished until the layers mix in the fall. This lack of oxy-
gen in the deeper waters of some lakes may have profound
effects, such as allowing relatively harmless materials such
as sulfates and nitrates to convert into toxic materials such
as hydrogen sulfide and ammonia.

In oligotrophic lakes, organic matter and nutrients are
relatively scarce. Such lakes are often deeper than eu-
trophic lakes and have very clear blue water. Their hy-
polimnetic water is always rich in oxygen.

Human activities can transform oligotrophic lakes into
eutrophic ones. In many lakes, phosphorus is in short
supply and is the nutrient that limits growth. When ex-
cess phosphorus from sources such as fertilizer runoff,
sewage, and detergents enters lakes, it can quickly lead to
harmful effects. In many cases, this leads to perfect con-
ditions for the growth of blue-green algae, which prolif-
erate immensely. Soon, larger plants are outcompeted
and disappear, along with the animals that live on them.
In addition, as these phytoplankton die and decompose,
oxygen in the water is used up, killing the natural fish
and invertebrate populations. This situation can be reme-
died if the continual input of phosphorus can be dimin-
ished. Given time, lakes can recover and return to pre-
pollution states, as happened with Lake Washington
pictured in figure 29.24.

The Productivity of Wetlands

Swamps, marshes, bogs, and other wetlands covered
with water support a wide variety of water-tolerant
plants, called hydrophytes (“water plants”), and a rich di-
versity of invertebrates, birds, and other animals. Wet-
lands are among the most productive ecosystems on earth
(table 29.2). They also play a key ecological role by pro-
viding water storage basins that moderate flooding. Many
wetlands are being disrupted by human “development” of

Table 29.2 The Most Productive Ecosystems

Net Primary
Productivity
Ecosystem per Unit Area (g/m?)
Coral reefs 2500
Tropical rain forest 2200
Wetlands 2000
Tropical seasonal forest 1600
Estuaries 1500
‘Temperate evergreen forest 1300
Temperate deciduous forest 1200
Savanna 900
Boreal forest 800
Cultivated land 650
Continental shelf 360
Lake and stream 250
Open ocean 125
Extreme desert, rock, sand, and ice 3

Source: Whitaker, 1975.

 

FIGURE 29.24

Oligotrophic lakes are highly susceptible to pollution. Lake
Washington is an oligotrophic lake near Seattle, Washington.

The drainage from fertilizers applied to the plantings around
residences, business concerns, and recreational facilities bordering
the lake poses an ever-present threat to its deep blue water. By
supplying phosphorus, the drainage promotes algal growth.
Aerobic bacteria decomposing dead algae deplete the lake’s
oxygen, killing much of the lake’s life.

what is sometimes perceived as otherwise useless land,
but government efforts are now underway to protect the
remaining wetlands.

 

‘The most productive freshwater ecosystems are
wetlands. Most lakes are far less productive, limited by
Jack of nutrients.

 

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 609
