Marine Ecosystems

The marine environment consists of three major habitats:
(1) the neritic zone, the zone of shallow waters along the
coasts of continents; (2) the pelagic zone, the area of water
above the ocean floor; and (3) the benthic zone, the actual
ocean floor (figure 29.18). The part of the ocean floor that
drops to depths where light does not penetrate is called the

abyssal zone.

The Neritic Zone

The neritic zone of the ocean is the area less than 300 me-
ters below the surface along the coasts of continents and is-
lands. The zone is small in area, but it is inhabited by large
numbers of species (figure 29.19). The intense and some-
times violent interaction between sea and land in this zone
gives a selective advantage to well-secured organisms that
can withstand being washed away by the continual beating
of the waves. Part of this zone, the intertidal region,
sometimes called the littoral region, is exposed to the air
whenever the tides recede.

The world’s great fisheries are in shallow waters over
continental shelves, either near the continents themselves
or in the open ocean, where huge banks come near the
surface. Nutrients, derived from land, are much more
abundant in coastal and other shallow regions, where up-
welling from the depths occurs, than in the open ocean.
This accounts for the great productivity of the continen-
tal shelf fisheries. The preservation of these fisheries, a
source of high-quality protein exploited throughout the
world, has become a growing concern. In Chesapeake
Bay, where complex systems of rivers enter the ocean
from heavily populated areas, environmental stresses have
become so severe that they not only threaten the contin-
ued existence of formerly highly productive fisheries, but
also diminish the quality of human life in these regions.
Increased runoff from farms and sewage effluent in areas
like Chesapeake Bay add large amounts of nutrients to
the water. This increased nutrient supply allows an in-

 

crease in the numbers of some marine organisms. The in-
creased populations then use up more and more of the
oxygen in the water and thus may disturb established
populations of organisms such as oysters. Climatic shifts
may magnify these effects, and large numbers of marine
animals die suddenly as a result.

About three-fourths of the surface area of the world’s
oceans are located in the tropics. In these waters, where the
water temperature remains about 21°C, coral reefs can
grow. These highly productive ecosystems can successfully
concentrate nutrients, even from the relatively nutrient-
poor waters characteristic of the tropics.

Intertidal or littoral region

Limit of light
penetration

    
 

Neritic zone

Abyssal zone

FIGURE 29.18

Marine ecosystems. Ecologists classify marine communities into
neritic, pelagic, benthic, and abyssal zones, according to depth
(which affects how much light penetrates) and distance from
shore.

 

FIGURE 29.19

Diversity is great in coastal regions. Fishes and many other
kinds of animals find food and shelter among the kelp beds in the
coastal waters of temperate regions.

Chapter 29 The Biosphere 605
