The Ozone Hole

The swirling colors of the satellite photos in figure 30.9
represent different concentrations of ozone (Os), a differ-
ent form of oxygen gas than OQ). As you can see, over
Antarctica there is an “ozone hole” three times the size of
the United States, an area within which the ozone concen-
tration is much less than elsewhere. The ozone thinning
appeared for the first time in 1975. The hole is not a per-
manent feature, but rather becomes evident each year for a
few months during Antarctic winter. Every September
from 1975 onward, the ozone “hole” has reappeared. Each
year the layer of ozone is thinner and the hole is larger.
The major cause of the ozone depletion had already
been suggested in 1974 by Sherwood Roland and Mario
Molina, who were awarded the Nobel Prize for their work
in 1995. They proposed that chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
relatively inert chemicals used in cooling systems, fire ex-
tinguishers, and Styrofoam containers, were percolating up
through the atmosphere and reducing O3 molecules to O).
One chlorine atom from a CFC molecule could destroy
100,000 ozone molecules in the following mechanism:

UV radiation causes CFCs to release Cl atoms:

cclF WY, c+ Cc.F
UV creates oxygen free radicals:
QO, — 20
Clatoms and O free radicals interact with ozone:
2Cl +203; — 2C10 + 20>
2C10 + 20 —3 2C1 + 20>

Net reaction: 20; —> 30)

Although other factors have also been implicated in
ozone depletion, the role of CFCs is so predominant that
worldwide agreements have been signed to phase out their
production. The United States banned the production of
CFCs and other ozone-destroying chemicals after 1995.
Nonetheless, the CFCs that were manufactured earlier are
moving slowly upward through the atmosphere. The ozone
layer will be further depleted before it begins to form
again.

Thinning of the ozone layer in the stratosphere, 25 to
40 kilometers above the surface of the earth, is a matter of
serious concern. This layer protects life from the harmful
ultraviolet rays that bombard the earth continuously from
the sun. Life appeared on land only after the oxygen layer
was sufficiently thick to generate enough ozone to shield
the surface of the earth from these destructive rays.

Ultraviolet radiation is a serious human health concern.
Every 1% drop in atmospheric ozone is estimated to lead
to a 6% increase in the incidence of skin cancers. At middle
latitudes, the approximately 3% drop that has already oc-
curred worldwide is estimated to have increased skin can-
cers by as much as 20%. A type of skin cancer (melanoma)
is one of the more lethal human diseases.

 

Industrial CFCs released into the atmosphere react at
very cold temperatures with ozone, converting it to
oxygen gas. This has the effect of destroying the earth’s
ozone shield and exposing the earth’s surface to
increased levels of harmful UV radiation.

 

 

(millions of square miles)
o
i

 

Southern hemisphere ozone hole area

September 9, 2000 — 2000

— 1999
—— 1990-99 average

  
  

 

 

 

August September October November December

 

 

@ (b)
FIGURE 30.9

The ozone hole over Antarctica is still growing. For decades NASA satellites have tracked the extent of ozone depletion over

Antarctica. Every year since 1979 an ozone “hole” has appeared in August when sunlight triggers chemical reactions in cold air trapped
over the South Pole during Antarctic winter. The hole intensifies during September before tailing off as temperatures rise in November-
December. In 2000, the 11-4 million square-mile hole (dark blue in the satellite image) covered an area larger than the United States,
Canada, and Mexico combined, the largest hole ever recorded. In September 2000, the hole extended over Punta Arenas, a city of about
120,000 people southern Chile, exposing residents to very high levels of UV radiation.

620 Part VII The Global Environment
