30.2 Improvements in agriculture are needed to feed a hungry world.

The Future of Agriculture

One of the greatest and most immediate challenges facing
today’s world is producing enough food to feed our ex-
panding population. This problem is often not appreciated
by economists, who estimate that world food production
has expanded 2.6 times since 1950, more rapidly than the
human population. However, virtually all land that can be
cultivated is already in use, and much of the world is popu-
lated by large numbers of hungry people who are rapidly
destroying the sustainable productivity of the lands they in-
habit. Well over 20% of the world’s topsoil has been lost
from agricultural lands since 1950. In the face of these mas-
sive problems, we need to consider what the prospects are
for increased agricultural productivity in the future.

  

Finding New Food Plants

How many food plants do we use at present? Just three
species—rice, wheat, and corn—supply more than half of
all human energy requirements. Just over 100 kinds of
plants supply over 90% of the calories we consume. Only
about 5000 have ever been used for food. There may be
tens of thousands of additional kinds of plants, among the
250,000 known species, that could be used for human food

 

FIGURE 30.4

if their properties were fully explored and they were
brought into cultivation (figure 30.4).

Agricultural scientists are attempting to identify such
new crops, especially ones that will grow well in the tropics
and subtropics, where the world’s population is expanding
most rapidly. Nearly all major crops now grown in the
world have been cultivated for hundreds or even thousands
of years. Only a few, including rubber and oil palms, have
entered widespread cultivation since 1800.

One key feature for which nearly all of our important
crops were first selected was ease of growth by relatively
simple methods. Today, however, techniques of cultivation
are far more sophisticated and are able to improve soil fer-
tility and combat pests. This enables us to consider many
more plants as potential crops. Agricultural scientists are
searching systematically for new crops that fit the multiple
needs of modern society, in ways that would not have been
considered earlier.

Improving the Productivity of Today’s Crops

Searching for new crops is not a quick process. While the
search proceeds, the most promising strategy to quickly ex-
pand the world food supply is to improve the productivity
of crops that are already being grown. Much of the im-

 

(b)

New food plants. (a) Grain amaranths (Amaranthus spp.) were important crops in the Latin American highlands during the days of the
Incas and Aztecs. Grain amaranths are fast-growing plants that produce abundant grain rich in lysine, an amino acid rare in plant proteins
but essential for animal nutrition. () The winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus) is a nitrogen-fixing tropical vine that produces highly
nutritious leaves and tubers whose seeds produce large quantities of edible oil. First cultivated in New Guinea and Southeast Asia, the

winged bean has spread since the 1970s throughout the tropics.

614 = Part VII. The Global Environment
