| 30.3 Human activity is placing the environment under increasing stress.

The simplest way to gain a feeling for the dimensions of
the global environmental problem we face is simply to
scan the front pages of any newspaper or news magazine
or to watch television. Although they are only a sam-
pling, features selected by these media teach us a great
deal about the scale and complexity of the challenge we
face. We will discuss a few of the most important issues
here.

Nuclear Power

At 1:24 A.M. on April 26, 1986, one of the four reactors of
the Chernobyl nuclear power plant blew up. Located in
Ukraine 100 kilometers north of Kiev, Chernobyl was one
of the largest nuclear power plants in Europe, producing
1000 megawatts of electricity, enough to light a medium-
sized city. Before dawn on April 26, workers at the plant
hurried to complete a series of tests of how Reactor Num-
ber 4 performed during a power reduction and took a fool-
ish short-cut: they shut off all the safety systems. Reactors
at Chernobyl were graphite reactors designed with a series
of emergency systems that shut the reactors down at low
power, because the core is unstable then—and these are the
emergency systems the workers turned off. A power surge
occurred during the test, and there was nothing to dampen
it. Power zoomed to hundreds of times the maximum, and
a white-hot blast with the force of a ton of dynamite par-
tially melted the fuel rods and heated a vast head of steam
that blew the reactor apart.

The explosion and heat sent up a plume 5 kilometers
high, carrying several tons of uranium dioxide fuel and fis-
sion products. The blast released over 100 megacuries of
radioactivity, making it the largest nuclear accident ever
reported; by comparison, the Three Mile Island accident
in Pennsylvania in 1979 released 17 curies, millions of
times less. This cloud traveled first northwest, then south-
east, spreading the radioactivity in a band across central
Europe from Scandinavia to Greece. Within a 30-kilome-
ter radius of the reactor, at least one-fifth of the popula-
tion, some 24,000 people, received serious radiation doses
(greater than 45 rem). Thirty-one individuals died as a di-
rect result of radiation poisoning, most of them firefight-
ers who succeeded in preventing the fire from spreading to
nearby reactors.

The rest of Europe received a much lower but still sig-
nificant radiation dose. Data indicate that, because of the
large numbers of people exposed, radiation outside of the
immediate Chernobyl area can be expected to cause from
5000 to 75,000 cancer deaths.

The Promise of Nuclear Power

Our industrial society has grown for over 200 years on a
diet of cheap energy. Until recently, much of this energy

616 Part VII The Global Environment

has been derived from burning wood and fossil fuels:
coal, gas, and oil. However, as these sources of fuel be-
come increasingly scarce and the cost of locating and ex-
tracting new deposits becomes more expensive, modern
society is being forced to look elsewhere for energy. The
great promise of nuclear power is that it provides an al-
ternative source of plentiful energy. Although nuclear
power is not cheap—power plants are expensive to build
and operate—its raw material, uranium ore, is so com-
mon in the earth’s crust that it is unlikely we will ever
run out of it.

Burning coal and oil to obtain energy produces two un-
desirable chemical by-products: sulfur and carbon dioxide.
The sulfur emitted from burning coal is a principal cause of
acid rain, while the CO) produced from burning all fossil
fuels is a major greenhouse gas (see the discussion of global
warming in the next section). For these reasons, we need to
find replacements for fossil fuels.

For all of its promise of plentiful energy, nuclear
power presents several new problems that must be ad-
dressed before its full potential can be realized. First, safe
operation of the world’s approximately 390 nuclear reac-
tors must be ensured. A second challenge is the need to
safely dispose of the radioactive wastes produced by the
plants and to safely decommission plants that have
reached the end of their useful lives (about 25 years). In
1997, over 35 plants were more than 25 years old, and
not one has been safely decommissioned, its nuclear
wastes disposed of. A third challenge is the need to guard
against terrorism and sabotage, because the technology of
nuclear power generation is closely linked to that of nu-
clear weapons.

For these reasons, it is important to continue to inves-
tigate and develop other promising alternatives to fossil
fuels, such as solar energy and wind energy. The genera-
tion of electricity by burning fossil fuels accounts for up
to 15% of global warming gas emissions in the United
States. As much as 75% of the electricity produced in the
United States and Canada currently is wasted through the
use of inefficient appliances, according to scientists at
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Using highly efficient
motors, lights, heaters, air conditioners, refrigerators, and
other technologies already available could save huge
amounts of energy and greatly reduce global warming gas
emission. For example, a new, compact fluorescent light
bulb uses only 20% of the amount of electricity a conven-
tional light bulb uses, provides equal or better lighting,
lasts up to 13 times longer, and provides substantial cost
savings.

 

Nuclear power offers plentiful energy for the world’s
future, but its use involves significant problems and
dangers.

 
