The Miller-Urey Experiment

An early attempt to see what kinds of organic molecules
might have been produced on the early earth was carried
out in 1953 by Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey. In
what has become a classic experiment, they attempted to
reproduce the conditions at ocean’s edge under a reducing
atmosphere. Even if this assumption proves incorrect—
the jury is still out on this—their experiment is critically
important, as it ushered in the whole new field of prebi-
otic chemistry.

To carry out their experiment, they (1) assembled a re-
ducing atmosphere rich in hydrogen and excluding gaseous
oxygen; (2) placed this atmosphere over liquid water, which
would have been present at ocean’s edge; (3) maintained this
mixture at a temperature somewhat below 100°C; and
() simulated lightning by bombarding it with energy in the
form of sparks (figure 4.6).

They found that within a week, 15% of the carbon origi-
nally present as methane gas (CH4) had converted into
other simple carbon compounds. Among these compounds
were formaldehyde (CHO) and hydrogen cyanide (HCN;
figure 4.7). These compounds then combined to form sim-
ple molecules, such as formic acid (HCOOH) and urea
(NH,CONH)), and more complex molecules containing
carbon-carbon bonds, including the amino acids glycine and
alanine.

As we saw in chapter 3, amino acids are the basic build-
ing blocks of proteins, and proteins are one of the major
kinds of molecules of which organisms are composed. In
similar experiments performed later by other scientists,
more than 30 different carbon compounds were identified,
including the amino acids glycine, alanine, glutamic acid,
valine, proline, and aspartic acid. Other biologically impor-
tant molecules were also formed in these experiments. For
example, hydrogen cyanide contributed to the production
of a complex ring-shaped molecule called adenine—one of
the bases found in DNA and RNA. Thus, the key mole-
cules of life could have formed in the atmosphere of the
early earth.

The Path of Chemical Evolution

A raging debate among biologists who study the origin of
life concerns which organic molecules came first, RNA or
proteins. Scientists are divided into three camps, those that
focus on RNA, protein, or a combination of the two. All
three arguments have their strong points. Like the hypothe-
ses that try to account for where life originated, these com-
peting hypotheses are diverse and speculative.

An RNA World. The “RNA world” group feels that with-
out a hereditary molecule, other molecules could not have
formed consistently. The “RNA world” argument earned
support when Thomas Cech at the University of Colorado
discovered ribozymes, RNA molecules that can behave as
enzymes, catalyzing their own assembly. Recent work has

64 — PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

     
     
   
   

Electrodes

Water. discharge sparks

vapor (lightning
simulation)

Stopcocks
for testing
samples

  
     
     
 
 
 
    

("primitive
atmosphere")

Condensed liquid
with complex

molecules
Heated water

(‘ocean’)

FIGURE 4.6

The Miller-Urey experiment. The apparatus consisted of a
closed tube connecting two chambers. The upper chamber
contained a mixture of gases thought to resemble the primitive
earth’s atmosphere. Electrodes discharged sparks through this
mixture, simulating lightning. Condensers then cooled the gases,
causing water droplets to form, which passed into the second
heated chamber, the “ocean.” Any complex molecules formed in
the atmosphere chamber would be dissolved in these droplets and
carried to the ocean chamber, from which samples were
withdrawn for analysis.

shown that the RNA contained in ribosomes (discussed in
chapter 5) catalyzes the chemical reaction that links amino
acids to form proteins. Therefore, the RNA in ribosomes
also functions as an enzyme. If RNA has the ability to pass
on inherited information and the capacity to act like an
enzyme, were proteins really needed?

A Protein World. The “protein-first” group argues that
without enzymes (which are proteins), nothing could
replicate at all, heritable or not. The “protein-first” pro-
ponents argue that nucleotides, the individual units of
nucleic acids such as RNA, are too complex to have
formed spontaneously, and certainly too complex to form
spontaneously again and again. While there is no doubt
that simple proteins are easier to synthesize from abiotic
components than nucleotides, both can form in the labo-
ratory under the right conditions. Deciding which came
first is a chicken-and-egg paradox. In an effort to shed
light on this problem, Julius Rebek and a number of
