| 30.4 Solving environmental problems requires individual involvement.

Environmental Science

Environmental scientists attempt to find solutions to en-
vironmental problems, considering them in a broad con-
text. Unlike biology or ecology, sciences that seek to learn
general principles about how life functions, environmental
science is an applied science dedicated to solving practical
problems. Its basic tools are derived from ecology, geology,
meteorology, social sciences, and many other areas of
knowledge that bear on the functioning of the environment
and our management of it. Environmental science ad-
dresses the problems created by rapid human population
growth: an increasing need for energy, a depletion of re-
sources, and a growing level of pollution.

Solving Environmental Problems

The problems our severely stressed planet faces are not in-
surmountable. A combination of scientific investigation and
public action, when brought to bear effectively, can solve
environmental problems that seem intractable. Viewed
simply, there are five components to solving any environ-
mental problem:

1. Assessment. The first stage in addressing any envi-
ronmental problem is scientific analysis, the gather-
ing of information. Data must be collected and exper-
iments performed to construct a model that describes
the situation. This model can be used to make predic-
tions about the future course of events.

2. Risk analysis. Using the results of scientific
analysis as a tool, it is possible to analyze what
could be expected to happen if a particular course of
action were followed. It is necessary to evaluate not
only the potential for solving the environmental
problem, but also any adverse effects a plan of ac-
tion might create.

3. Public education.
made among alternative courses of action, the public
must be informed. This involves explaining the prob-
lem in terms the public can understand, presenting
the alternatives available, and explaining the probable
costs and results of the different choices.

4. Political action. The public, through its elected
officials selects a course of action and implements
it. Choices are particularly difficult to implement
when environmental problems transcend national
boundaries.

5. Follow-through. The results of any action should
be carefully monitored to see whether the environ-
mental problem is being solved as well as to evaluate
and improve the initial modeling of the problem.
Every environmental intervention is an experiment,
and we need the knowledge gained from each one to
better address future problems.

When a clear choice can be

622 = Part VII The Global Environment

Individuals Can Make the Difference

The development of appropriate solutions to the world’s
environmental problems must rest partly on the shoulders
of politicians, economists, bankers, engineers—many kinds
of public and commercial activity will be required. How-
ever, it is important not to lose sight of the key role often
played by informed individuals in solving environmental
problems. Often one person has made the difference; two
examples serve to illustrate the point.

The Nashua River. Running through the heart of New
England, the Nashua River was severely polluted by mills
established in Massachusetts in the early 1900s. By the
1960s, the river was clogged with pollution and declared
ecologically dead. When Marion Stoddart moved to a town
along the river in 1962, she was appalled. She approached
the state about setting aside a “greenway” (trees running
the length of the river on both sides), but the state wasn’t
interested in buying land along a filthy river. So Stoddart
organized the Nashua River Cleanup Committee and
began a campaign to ban the dumping of chemicals and
wastes into the river. The committee presented bottles of
dirty river water to politicians, spoke at town meetings, re-
cruited businesspeople to help finance a waste treatment
plant, and began to clean garbage from the Nashua’s banks.
This citizen’s campaign, coordinated by Stoddart, greatly
aided passage of the Massachusetts Clean Water Act of
1966. Industrial dumping into the river is now banned, and
the river has largely recovered.

Lake Washington. A large, 86 km? freshwater lake east
of Seattle, Lake Washington became surrounded by Seattle
suburbs in the building boom following the Second World
War. Between 1940 and 1953, a ring of 10 municipal
sewage plants discharged their treated effluent into the
lake. Safe enough to drink, the effluent was believed
“harmless.” By the mid-1950s a great deal of effluent had
been dumped into the lake (try multiplying 80 million
liters/day x 365 days/year x 10 years). In 1954, an ecology
professor at the University of Washington in Seattle,
W. T. Edmondson, noted that his research students were
reporting filamentous blue-green algae growing in the lake.
Such algae require plentiful nutrients, which deep fresh-
water lakes usually lack—the sewage had been fertilizing
the lake! Edmondson, alarmed, began a campaign in 1956
to educate public officials to the danger: bacteria decom-
posing dead algae would soon so deplete the lake’s oxygen
that the lake would die. After five years, joint municipal
taxes financed the building of a sewer to carry the effluent
out to sea. The lake is now clean.

 

In solving environmental problems, the commitment of
one person can make a critical difference.

 
