Destruction of the
Tropical Forests

More than half of the world’s human
population lives in the tropics, and
this percentage is increasing rapidly.
For global stability, and for the sus-
tainable management of the world
ecosystem, it will be necessary to
solve the problems of food production
and regional stability in these areas.
World trade, political and economic
stability, and the future of most
species of plants, animals, fungi, and
microorganisms depend on our ad-
dressing these problems.

Rain Forests Are Rapidly
Disappearing @
(a
Tropical rain forests are biologically
“FIGURE 30.10

the richest of the world’s biomes.
Most other kinds of tropical forest,
such as seasonally dry forests and sa-
vanna forests, have already been
largely destroyed—because they tend
to grow on more fertile soils, they
were exploited by humans a long time
ago. Now the rain forests, which
grow on poor soils, are being de-
stroyed. In the mid-1990s, it is estimated that only about
5.5 million square kilometers of tropical rain forest still
exist in a relatively undisturbed form. This area, about
two-thirds of the size of the United States (excluding
Alaska), represents about half of the original extent of the
rain forest. From it, about 160,000 square kilometers are
being clear-cut every year, with perhaps an equivalent
amount severely disturbed by shifting cultivation, fire-
wood gathering, and the clearing of land for cattle ranch-
ing. The total area of tropical rain forest destroyed—and
therefore permanently removed from the world total—
amounts to an area greater than the size of Indiana each
year. At this rate, all of the tropical rain forest in the
world will be gone in about 30 years; but in many regions,
the rate of destruction is much more rapid. As a result of
this overexploitation, experts predict there will be little
undisturbed tropical forest left anywhere in the world by
early in the next century. Many areas now occupied by
dense, species-rich forests may still be tree-covered, but
the stands will be sparse and species-poor.

A Serious Matter

Not only does the disappearance of tropical forests repre-
sent a tragic loss of largely unknown biodiversity, but the
loss of the forests themselves is ecologically a serious mat-

 

(b)

Destroying the tropical forests. (@) When tropical forests are cleared, the ecological
consequences can be disastrous. These fires are destroying rain forest in Brazil and clearing
it for cattle pasture. (b) The consequences of deforestation can be seen on these middle-
elevation slopes in Ecuador, which now support only low-grade pastures and permit topsoil
to erode into the rivers (note the color of the water, stained brown by high levels of soil
erosion). These areas used to support highly productive forest, which protected the
watersheds of the area, in the 1970s.

ter. Tropical forests are complex, productive ecosystems
that function well in the areas where they have evolved.
When people cut a forest or open a prairie in the north
temperate zone, they provide farmland that we know can
be worked for generations. In most areas of the tropics,
people are unable to engage in continuous agriculture.
When they clear a tropical forest, they engage in a one-
time consumption of natural resources that will never be
available again (figure 30.10). The complex ecosystems
built up over millions of years are now being dismantled, in
almost complete ignorance, by humans.

What biologists must do is to learn more about the
construction of sustainable agricultural ecosystems that
will meet human needs in tropical and subtropical re-
gions. The ecological concepts we have been reviewing in
the last three chapters are universal principles. The undis-
turbed tropical rain forest has one of the highest rates of
net primary productivity of any plant community on
earth, and it is therefore imperative to develop ways that
it can be harvested for human purposes in a sustainable,
intelligent way.

 

More than half of the tropical rain forests have been
destroyed by human activity, and the rate of loss is
accelerating.

 

Chapter 30 The Future of the Biosphere 621
