provement in food production must take place in the trop-
ics and subtropics, where the rapidly growing majority of
the world’s population lives, including most of those en-
during a life of extreme poverty. These people cannot be
fed by exports from industrial nations, which contribute
only about 8% of their total food at present and whose
agricultural lands are already heavily exploited. During the
1950s and 1960s, the so-called Green Revolution intro-
duced new, improved strains of wheat and rice. The pro-
duction of wheat in Mexico increased nearly tenfold be-
tween 1950 and 1970, and Mexico temporarily became an
exporter of wheat rather than an importer. During the
same decades, food production in India was largely able to
outstrip even a population growth of approximately 2.3%
annually, and China became self-sufficient in food.

Despite the apparent success of the Green Revolution,
improvements were limited. Raising the new agricultural
strains of plants requires the expenditure of large amounts
of energy and abundant supplies of fertilizers, pesticides,
and herbicides, as well as adequate machinery. For exam-
ple, in the United States it requires about 1000 times as
much energy to produce the same amount of wheat pro-
duced from traditional farming methods in India.

Biologists are playing a crucial role in improving exist-
ing crops and in developing new ones by applying tradi-
tional methods of plant breeding and selection to many
new, nontraditional crops in the tropics and subtropics
(see figure 30.4).

Genetic Engineering to Improve Crops

Genetic engineering techniques (discussed in chapter 19)
make it possible to produce plants resistant to specific her-
bicides. These herbicides can then control weeds much
more effectively, without damaging crop plants. Genetic
engineers are also developing new strains of plants that will
grow successfully in areas where they previously could not
grow. Desirable characteristics are being introduced into
important crop plants. Genetically modified rice, for exam-
ple, is no longer deficient in ascorbic acid and iron, provid-
ing a major improvement in human nutrition. Other modi-
fications allow crops to tolerate irrigation with salt water,
fix nitrogen, carry out C4 photosynthesis, and produce sub-
stances that deter pests and diseases.

Genetically modified crops (so-called GM foods) have
proven to be a highly controversial issue, one currently
being debated in legislative bodies all over the globe. Crit-
ics fear loss of genetic diversity, escape of engineered vari-
eties into the environment, harm to insects feeding near
GM crops, undo influence of seed companies, and many
other real or imagined potential problems. The issue of risk
is assessed in chapter 19. While risks must be carefully con-
sidered, the ability to transfer genes between organisms,
first accomplished in a laboratory in 1973, has tremendous
potential for the improvement of crop plants as the twenty-
first century opens.

New Approaches to Cultivation

Several new approaches may improve crop production.
“No-till” agriculture, spreading widely in the United
States and elsewhere in the 1990s, conserves topsoil and so
is a desirable agricultural practice for many areas. On the
other hand, hydroponics, the cultivation of plants in
water containing an appropriate mixture of nutrients,
holds less promise. It does not differ remarkably in its re-
quirements and challenges from growing plants on land. It
requires as much fertilizer and other chemicals, as well as
the water itself.

The oceans were once regarded as an inexhaustible
source of food, but overexploitation of their resources is
limiting the world catch more each year, and these catches
are costing more in terms of energy. Mismanagement of
fisheries, mainly through overfishing, local pollution, and
the destruction of fish breeding and feeding grounds, has
lowered the catch of fish in the sea by about 20% from
maximum levels. Many fishing areas that were until re-
cently important sources of food have been depleted or
closed. For example, the Grand Banks in the North At-
lantic Ocean off Newfoundland, a major source of cod and
other fish, are now nearly depleted. In 1994, the Canadian
government prohibited all cod fishing there indefinitely,
throwing 27,000 fishermen out of work, and the United
States government banned all fishing on Georges Bank
and other defined New England waters. Populations of At-
lantic bluefin tuna have dropped 90% since 1975. The
United Nations Food and Agriculture organization esti-
mated in 1993 that 13 of 17 major ocean fisheries are in
trouble, with the annual marine fish catch dropping from
86 million metric tons in 1986 to 82.5 million tons by
1992 and continuing to fall each year as the intensity of
the fishing increases.

The development of new kinds of food, such as mi-
croorganisms cultured in nutrient solutions, should defi-
nitely be pursued. For example, the photosynthetic,
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium Spirulina is being investi-
gated in several countries as a possible commercial food
source. It is a traditional food in Africa, Mexico, and
other regions. Spirulina thrives in very alkaline water, and
it has a higher protein content than soybeans. Ponds in
which it grows are 10 times more productive than wheat
fields. Such protein-rich concentrates of microorganisms
could provide important nutritional supplements. How-
ever, psychological barriers must be overcome to per-
suade people to eat such foods, and the processing re-
quired tends to be energy-expensive.

 

Just over 100 kinds of plants, out of the roughly
250,000 known, supply more than 90% of all the
calories we consume. Many more could be developed by
a careful search for new crops.

 

Chapter 30 The Future of the Biosphere 615
