Pollution

The River Rhine is a broad ribbon of water that runs
through the heart of Europe. From high in the Alps that
separate Italy and Switzerland, the Rhine flows north
across the industrial regions of Germany before reaching
Holland and the sea. Where it crosses the mountains be-
tween Mainz and Coblenz, Germany, the Rhine is one of
the most beautiful rivers on earth. On the first day of No-
vember 1986, the Rhine almost died.

The blow that struck at the life of the Rhine did not at
first seem deadly. Firefighters were battling a blaze that
morning in Basel, Switzerland. The fire was gutting a
huge warehouse, into which firefighters shot streams of
water to dampen the flames. The warehouse belonged to
Sandoz, a giant chemical company. In the rush to contain
the fire, no one thought to ask what chemicals were
stored in the warehouse. By the time the fire was out,
streams of water had washed 30 tons of mercury and pes-
ticides into the Rhine.

Flowing downriver, the deadly wall of poison killed
everything it passed. For hundreds of kilometers, dead fish
blanketed the surface of the river. Many cities that use the
water of the Rhine for drinking had little time to make
other arrangements. Even the plants in the river began to
die. All across Germany, from Switzerland to the sea, the
river reeked of rotting fish, and not one drop of water was
safe to drink.

Six months later, Swiss and German environmental sci-
entists monitoring the effects of the accident were able to
report that the blow to the Rhine was not mortal. Enough
small aquatic invertebrates and plants had survived to pro-
vide a basis for the eventual return of fish and other water
life, and the river was rapidly washing out the remaining
residues from the spill. A lesson difficult to ignore, the spill
on the Rhine has caused the governments of Germany and
Switzerland to intensify efforts to protect the river from fu-
ture industrial accidents and to regulate the growth of
chemical and industrial plants on its shores.

The Threat of Pollution

The pollution of the Rhine is a story that can be told
countless times in different places in the industrial world,
from Love Canal in New York to the James River in Vir-
ginia to the town of Times Beach in Missouri. Nor are all
pollutants that threaten the sustainability of life immedi-
ately toxic. Many forms of pollution arise as by-products of
industry. For example, the polymers known as plastics,
which we produce in abundance, break down slowly in na-
ture. Much is burned or otherwise degraded to smaller
vinyl chloride units. Virtually all of the plastic that has ever
been produced is still with us, in one form or another. Col-
lectively, it constitutes a new form of pollution.
Widespread agriculture, carried out increasingly by
modern methods, introduces large amounts of many new
kinds of chemicals into the global ecosystem, including

618 Part VII The Global Environment

 

 

DDT Concentration

 

25 ppm in
predatory birds

2 ppmin
large fish

 

0.5 ppm in
small fish

0.04 ppm in
Zooplankton

0.000003 ppm
in water

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 30.6

Biological magnification of DDT. Because DDT accumulates
in animal fat, the compound becomes increasingly concentrated in
higher levels of the food chain. Before DDT was banned in the
United States, predatory bird populations drastically declined
because DDT made their eggshells thin and fragile enough to
break during incubation.

pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. Industrialized coun-
tries like the United States now attempt to carefully moni-
tor side effects of these chemicals. Unfortunately, large
quantities of many toxic chemicals no longer manufactured
still circulate in the ecosystem.

For example, the chlorinated hydrocarbons, a class of
compounds that includes DDT, chlordane, lindane, and
dieldrin, have all been banned for normal use in the United
States, where they were once widely used. They are still
manufactured in the United States, however, and exported
to other countries, where their use continues. Chlorinated
hydrocarbon molecules break down slowly and accumulate
in animal fat. Furthermore, as they pass through a food
chain, they become increasingly concentrated in a process
called biological magnification (figure 30.6). DDT caused
serious problems by leading to the production of thin, frag-
ile eggshells in many predatory bird species in the United
States and elsewhere until the late 1960s, when it was
banned in time to save the birds from extinction. Chlori-
nated compounds have other undesirable side effects and
exhibit hormonelike activities in the bodies of animals, dis-
rupting normal hormonal cycles with sometimes poten-
tially serious consequences.

 

Chemical pollution is causing ecosystems to accumulate
many harmful substances, as the result of spills and
runoff from agricultural or urban use.

 
