Acid Precipitation

The Four Corners power plant in New Mexico burns coal,
sending smoke up high into the atmosphere through its
smokestacks, each over 65 meters tall. The smoke the
stacks belch out contains high concentrations of sulfur
dioxide and other sulfates, which produce acid when they
combine with water vapor in the air. The intent of those
who designed the plant was to release the sulfur-rich smoke
high in the atmosphere, where winds would disperse and
dilute it, carrying the acids far away.

Environmental effects of this acidity are serious. Sul-
fur introduced into the upper atmosphere combines with
water vapor to produce sulfuric acid, and when the water
later falls as rain or snow, the precipitation is acid. Nat-
ural rainwater rarely has a pH lower than 5.6; in the
northeastern United States, however, rain and snow now
have a pH of about 3.8, roughly 100 times as acid
(figure 30.7).

Acid precipitation destroys life. Thousands of lakes in
southern Sweden and Norway no longer support fish; these
lakes are now eerily clear. In the northeastern United
States and eastern Canada, tens of thousands of lakes are
dying biologically as a result of acid precipitation. At pH
levels below 5.0, many fish species and other aquatic ani-
mals die, unable to reproduce. In southern Sweden and
elsewhere, groundwater now has a pH between 4.0 and 6.0,
as acid precipitation slowly filters down into the under-
ground reservoirs.

There has been enormous forest damage in the Black
Forest in Germany and in the forests of the eastern United
States and Canada. It has been estimated that at least 3.5
million hectares of forest in the northern hemisphere are
being affected by acid precipitation (figure 30.8), and the
problem is clearly growing.

Its solution at first seems obvious: capture and remove
the emissions instead of releasing them into the atmo-
sphere. However, there are serious difficulties in executing
this solution. First, it is expensive. The costs of installing
and maintaining the necessary “scrubbers” in the United
States are estimated to be 4 to 5 billion dollars per year. An
additional difficulty is that the polluter and the recipient of
the pollution are far from each other, and neither wants to
pay for what they view as someone else’s problem. The
Clean Air Act revisions of 1990 addressed this problem in
the United States significantly for the first time, and sub-
stantial worldwide progress has been made in implement-
ing a solution.

 

Industrial pollutants such as nitric and sulfuric acids,
introduced into the upper atmosphere by factory
smokestacks, are spread over wide areas by the
prevailing winds and fall to earth with precipitation
called “acid rain,” lowering the pH of water on the
ground and killing life.

 

 

 

 

 

   

Precipitation pH
DEEae

25.3 <43

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 30.7

pH values of rainwater in the United States. Precipitation in
the United States, especially in the Northeast, is more acidic than
that of natural rainwater, which has a pH of about 5.6.

 

FIGURE 30.8

Damage to trees at Clingman’s Dome, Tennessee. Acid
precipitation weakens trees and makes them more susceptible to
pests and predators.

Chapter 30 The Future of the Biosphere 619
