Population Growth Rate Starting to Decline

The United Nations has announced that the world popula-
tion growth rate continues to decline, down from a high of
2.0% in the period 1965-1970 to 1.4% in 1998. Nonethe-
less, because of the larger population, this amounts to an
increase of 77 million people per year to the world popula-
tion, compared to $3 million per year in the 1960s.

The U.N. attributes the decline to increased family
planning efforts and the increased economic power and so-
cial status of women. While the U.N. applauds the United
States for leading the world in funding family planning
programs abroad, some oppose spending money on inter-
national family planning. The opposition states that
money is better spent on improving education and the
economy in other countries, leading to an increased aware-
ness and lowered fertility rates. The U.N. certainly sup-
ports the improvement of education programs in develop-
ing countries, but, interestingly, it has reported increased
education levels following a decrease in family size as a re-
sult of family planning.

Most countries are devoting considerable attention to
slowing the growth rate of their populations, and there
are genuine signs of progress. If these efforts are main-
tained, the world population may stabilize sometime in
the next century. No one knows how many people the
planet can support, but we clearly already have more peo-
ple than can be sustainably supported with current
technologies.

However, population size is not the only factor that de-
termines resource use; per capita consumption is also im-
portant. In this respect, we in the developing world need to
pay more attention to lessening the impact each of us
makes, because, even though the vast majority of the
world’s population is in developing countries, the vast ma-
jority of resource consumption occurs in the developed
world. Indeed, the wealthiest 20% of the world’s popula-
tion accounts for 86% of the world’s consumption of re-
sources and produces 53% of the world’s carbon dioxide
emissions, whereas the poorest 20% of the world is respon-
sible for only 1.3% of consumption and 3% of CO) emis-
sions. Looked at another way, in terms of resource use, a
child born today in the developed world will consume as
many resources over the course of his or her life as 30 to 50
children born in the developing world.

Building a sustainable world is the most important task
facing humanity’s future. The quality of life available to our
children in the next century will depend to a large extent
on our success both in limiting population growth and the
amount of per capita resource consumption.

 

In 1998, the global human population of 6 billion
people was growing at a rate of approximately 1.4%
annually, At that rate, the population would double in
39 years. Growth rates, however, are declining, but
consumption per capita in the developing world is also a
significant drain on resources.

 

 

FIGURE 30.3

Population growth is highest in tropical and subtropical
countries. Mexico City, the world’s largest city, has well over
20 million inhabitants.

Chapter 30 The Future of the Biosphere 613
