Conservation Biology

 

Concept Outline

31.1 The new science of conservation biology is
focused on conserving biodiversity.

Overview of the Biodiversity Crisis. In prehistoric
times, humans decimated the faunas of many areas.
Worldwide extinction rates are accelerating.

Species Endemism and Hot Spots. Some geographic
areas are particularly rich in species that occur nowhere else.
What's So Bad about Losing Biodiversity? Biodiversity
is of considerable direct economic value, and provides key
support to the biosphere.

31.2 Vulnerable species are more likely to become
extinct.
Predicting Which Species Are Vulnerable to Extinction.
Biologists carry out population viability analyses to assess
danger of extinction.
Dependence upon Other Species. Extinction of one
species can have a cascading effect throughout the food
web, making other species vulnerable as well.
Categories of Vulnerable Species. Declining population
size, loss of genetic variation, and commercial value all tend
to increase a species’ vulnerability.

31.3 Causes of endangerment usually reflect human
activities.
Factors Responsible for Extinction. Most recorded
extinctions can be attributed to a few causes.
Habitat Loss. Without a place to live, species cannot survive.
Case Study: Overexploitation
Case Study: Introduced Species
Case Study: Disruption of Ecological Relationships
Case Study: Loss of Genetic Variation
Case Study: Habitat Loss and Fragmentation

31.4 Successful recovery plans will need to be
multidimensional.

Many Approaches Exist for Preserving Endangered
Species. Species recovery requires restoring degraded
habitats, breeding in captivity, maintaining population
diversity, and maintaining keystone species.
Conservation of Ecosystems. Maintaining large
preserves and focusing on the health of the entire

ecosystem may be the best means of preserving biodiversity.

 

 

FIGURE 31.1

Endangered. The Siberian tiger is in grave danger of extinction,
hunted for its pelt and having its natural habitat greatly reduced.
Aconcerted effort is being made to save it, using many of the ap-
proaches discussed in this chapter.

mong the greatest challenges facing the biosphere is

he accelerating pace of species extinctions—not since
the Cretaceous have so many species become extinct in so
short a period of time (figure 31.1). This challenge has led
to the emergence in the last decade of the new discipline of
conservation biology. Conservation biology is an applied
discipline that seeks to learn how to preserve species, com-
munities, and ecosystems. It both studies the causes of de-
clines in species richness and attempts to develop methods
to prevent such declines. In this chapter we will first exam-
ine the biodiversity crisis and its importance. Then, we will
assess the sorts of species which seem vulnerable to extinc-
tion. Using case histories, we go on to identify and study
five factors that have played key roles in many extinctions.
We finish with a review of recovery efforts at the species
and community level.

625
