Species Endemism and Hot Spots

A species found naturally in only one geographic area and
no place else is said to be endemic to that area. The area
over which an endemic species is found may be very large.
The black cherry tree (Prunus serotina), for example, is en-
demic to all of temperate North America. More typically,
however, endemic species occupy restricted ranges. The
Komodo dragon (Varanus komodoensis) lives only on a few
small islands in the Indonesian archipelago, while the
Mauna Kea silversword (Argyroxiphium sandwicense) lives in
a single volcano crater on the island of Hawaii.

Isolated geographical areas, such as oceanic islands,
lakes, and mountain peaks, often have high percentages of
endemic species, often in significant danger of extinction.
The number of endemic plant species varies greatly in the
United States from one state to another. Thus, 379 plant
species are found in Texas and nowhere else, whereas New
York has only one endemic plant species. California, with
its varied array of habitats, including deserts, mountains,
seacoast, old growth forests, grasslands, and many others, is
home to more endemic species than any other state.

Worldwide, notable concentrations of endemic species
occur in particular “hot spots” of high endemism. Such hot
spots are found in Madagascar, in a variety of tropical rain
forests, in the eastern Himalayas, in areas with Mediter-
ranean climates like California, South Africa, and Australia,
and in several other climatic areas (figure 31.4 and table
31.2). Unfortunately, many of these areas are experiencing
high rates of habitat destruction with consequent species
extinctions. In Madagascar, it is estimated that 90% of the

Table 31.2 Numbers of Endemic Vertebrate Species in
Some “Hot Spot” Areas

Region Mammals Reptiles Amphibians
Atlantic coastal Brazil 40 92 168
Colombian Chocé 8 137 11
Philippines 98 120 41
Northern Borneo 42 69 47
Southwestern Australia 10 25 22
Madagascar 86 234 142
Cae region (South Africa) 16 43 23
California Floristic Province 15 25 U
New Cledonia 2 21 0
Eastern Himalayas 2 20 25

Source: Data from Myers 1988; World Conservation and Monitoring
Center 1992.

original forest has already been lost, this in an island in
which 85% of the species are found nowhere else in the
world. In the forests of the Atlantic coast of Brazil, the ex-
tent of deforestation is even higher: 95% of the original
forest is gone.

 

Some areas of the earth have particularly high levels of
species endemism. Unfortunately, many of these areas
are currently in great jeopardy due to habitat
destruction with correspondingly high rates of species
extinction.

 

 

er

QE 2.

 

       

   
   
   
  

Califomia
floral
province

Hawaii

Colombian Choco.
Western Ecuador

 

 

Coast u ;
Malaysia Northern, Queensland Australia eens
Borneo Nee ey of western
Eastem eat Amazonia ‘Atlantic forest
Cape floral Madagascar Southwest D : region of
province Australia Central Chile eastem Brazil
FIGURE 31.4

“Hot spots” of high endemism. These areas are rich in endemic species under significant threat of imminent extinction.

628 = Part VIII The Global Environment
