What’s So Bad about Losing
Biodiversity?

What’s so bad about losing species? What is the value of
biodiversity? Its value can be divided into three principal
components: (1) direct economic value of products we obtain
from species of plants, animals, and other groups; (2) indi-
rect economic value of benefits produced by species without
our consuming them; and (3) ethical and aesthetic value.

Direct Economic Value

Many species have direct value, as sources of food, medi-
cine, clothing, biomass (for energy and other purposes),
and shelter. Most of the world’s food, for example, is de-
rived from a small number of plants that were originally
domesticated from wild plants in tropical and semi-arid re-
gions. In the future, wild strains of these species may be
needed for their genetic diversity if we are to improve
yields, or find a way to breed resistance to new pests.

About 40% of the prescription and nonprescription
drugs used today have active ingredients extracted from
plants or animals. Aspirin, the world’s most widely used
drug, was first extracted from the leaves of the tropical wil-
low, Salix alba. The rosy periwinkle, Catharanthus roseus,
from Madagascar has yielded potent drugs for combating
leukemia (figure 31.5).

Only in the last few decades have biologists perfected
the techniques that make possible the transfer of genes
from one kind of organism to another. We are just begin-
ning to be able to use genes obtained from other species to
our advantage, as explored at length in chapter 19. So-
called gene prospecting of the genomes of plants and ani-
mals for useful genes has only begun. We have been able to
examine only a minute proportion of the world’s organisms
so far, to see whether any of their genes have useful proper-
ties. By conserving biodiversity we maintain the option of
finding useful benefit in the future.

Indirect Economic Value

Diverse biological communities are of vital importance to
healthy ecosystems, in maintaining the chemical quality of
natural water, in buffering ecosystems against floods and
drought, in preserving soils and preventing loss of minerals
and nutrients, in moderating local and regional climate, in
absorbing pollution, and in promoting the breakdown of
organic wastes and the cycling of minerals. By destroying
biodiversity, we are creating conditions of instability and
lessened productivity and promoting desertification, water-
logging, mineralization, and many other undesirable out-
comes throughout the world.

Given the major role played by many species in main-
taining healthy ecosystems, it is alarming how little we
know about the details of how ecosystems and communi-
ties function. It is impossible to predict all the conse-

 

FIGURE 31.5

The rosy periwinkle. Two drugs extracted from the Madagascar
periwinkle Catharanthus roseus, vinblastine and vincristine,
effectively treat common forms of childhood leukemia, increasing
chances of survival from 20% to over 95%.

quences of removing a species, or to be sure that some of
them will not be catastrophic. Imagine taking a part list for
an airliner, and randomly changing a digit in one of the
part numbers: you might change a cushion to a roll of toi-
let paper—but you might as easily change a key bolt hold-
ing up the wing to a pencil. The point is, you shouldn’t
gamble if you cannot afford to lose, and in removing bio-
diversity we are gambling with the future of ecosystems
upon which we depend, and upon whose functioning we
only little understand.

Ethical and Aesthetic Value

Many people believe that preserving biodiversity is an ethi-
cal issue, feeling that every species is of value in its own
right, even if humans are not able to exploit or benefit from
it. It is clear that humans have the power to exploit and de-
stroy other species, but it is not as ethically clear that they
have the right to do so. Many people believe that along
with power comes responsibility: as the only organisms ca-
pable of eliminating species and entire ecosystems, and as
the only organisms capable of reflecting upon what we are
doing, we should act as guardians or stewards for the diver-
sity of life around us.

Almost no one would deny the aesthetic value of biodi-
versity, of a beautiful flower or noble elephant, but how do
we place a value on beauty? Perhaps the best we can do is
to appreciate the deep sense of lack we feel at its permanent
loss.

 

Biodiversity is of great value, for the products with
which it provides us, for its contributions to the health
of the ecosystems upon which we all depend, and for
the beauty it provides us, as well as being valuable in its
own right.

 

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 629
