 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Water 3 a Pp
Nitrogen Proprionic acid
Ammonia ene
Energy Energy Energy
Carbon jam] Aldehydes jpetap. | >|
dioxide o R
ase Formic acid
oo Hydrogen
Carbon puto
monoxide
oge N-Methylurea
Methane
oo
Hydrogen
ea Urea
Raw First group of
materials || intermediate products | {it t

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 4.7

 

 

 

Lactic Glycine
acid
acid
Alanine B-Alanine Sarcosine
Succinic
acid

 

ie ie

N-Methylalanine _f-Aminobutyric acid _o-Aminobutyric acid

te He

 

 

 

 

Valine Norvaline Isovaline
Proine xh,
Aspartic acid Iminodiacetic acid

 

 

a 3

Glutamic acid Immunoacetic propionic acid

 

 

 

Results of the Miller-Urey experiment. Seven simple molecules, all gases, were included in the original mixture. Note that oxygen was

not among them; instead, the atmosphere was rich in hydrogen. At eacl

h stage of the experiment, more complex molecules were formed:

first aldehydes, then simple acids, then more complex acids. Among the final products, the molecules that are structural isomers of one
another are grouped together in boxes. In most cases only one isomer of a compound is found in living systems today, although many may

have been produced in the Miller-Urey experiment.

other chemists have created synthetic nucleotide-like
molecules in the laboratory that are able to replicate.
Moving even further, Rebek and his colleagues have cre-
ated synthetic molecules that could replicate and “make
mistakes.” This simulates mutation, a necessary ingredi-
ent for the process of evolution.

A Peptide-Nucleic Acid World. Another important and
popular theory about the first organic molecules assumes
key roles for both peptides and nucleic acids. Because RNA

is so complex and unstable, this theory assumes there must
have been a pre-RNA world where the peptide-nucleic acid
(PNA) was the basis for life. PNA is stable and simple
enough to have formed spontaneously, and is also a self-
replicator.

 

Molecules that are the building blocks of living
organisms form spontaneously under conditions
designed to simulate those of the primitive earth.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 65
