Categories of Vulnerable Species

Studying past extinctions of species and using population
viability analyses of threatened ones, conservation biolo-
gists have observed that some categories of species are par-
ticularly vulnerable to extinction.

Local Endemic Distribution

Local endemic species typically occur at only one or a few
sites in a restricted geographical range, which makes them
particularly vulnerable to anything that harms the site, such
as destruction of habitat by human activity. Bird species on
oceanic islands have often become extinct as humans affect
the island habitats. Many endemic fish species confined to a
single lake undergo similar fates.

Local endemic species often have small population
sizes, placing them at particular risk of extinction be-
cause of their greater vulnerability to demographic and
genetic fluctuations. Indeed, population size by itself
seems to be one of the best predictors of the extinction
risk of populations.

Local endemic species often have quite specialized
niche requirements. Once a habitat is altered, it may no
longer be able to support a particular local endemic, while
remaining satisfactory for species with less particular re-
quirements. For example, wetlands plants that require
very specific and regular changes in water level may be
rapidly eliminated when human activity affects the hy-
drology of an area.

Declining Population Size

Species in which population size is declining are often at
grave risk of extinction, particularly if the decline in num-
bers of individuals is severe. Although there is no hard rule,
population trends in nature tend to continue, so a popula-
tion showing significant signs of decline should be consid-
ered at risk of extinction unless the cause of the decline is
identified and corrected. Darwin makes this point very
clearly in On the Origin of Species:

“To admit that species generally become rare before
they become extinct, to feel no surprise at the rarity of the
species, and yet to marvel greatly when the species ceases
to exist, is much the same as to admit that sickness in the
individual is the forerunner of death—to feel no surprise at
sickness, but when the sick man dies, to wonder and to sus-
pect that he dies of some deed of violence.”

Although long-term trends toward smaller population
numbers suggest that a species may be at risk in future
years, abrupt recent declines in population numbers, partic-
ularly when the population is small or locally endemic,
fairly scream of risk of extinction. It is for this reason that
PVA is best carried out with data on population sizes gath-
ered over a period of time.

632 = Part VIII The Global Environment

Lack of Genetic Variability

 

Species with little genetic variability are generally at signi
cantly greater risk of extinction than more variable species,
simply because they have a more limited arsenal with which
to respond to the vagaries of environmental change.
Species with extremely low genetic variability are particu-
larly vulnerable when faced with a new disease, predator, or
other environmental challenge. For example, the African
cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) has almost no genetic variability.
This lack of genetic variability is considered to be a signifi-
cant contributing factor to a lack of disease resistance in the
cheetah—diseases that are of little consequence to other cat
species can wipe out a colony of cheetahs (although envi-
ronmental factors also seem to have played a key role in the
cheetah’s decline).

Hunted or Harvested by People

Species that are hunted or harvested by people have histor-
ically been at grave risk of extinction. Overharvesting of
natural populations can rapidly reduce the population size
of a species, even when that species is initially very abun-
dant. A century ago the skies of North America were dark-
ened by huge flocks of passenger pigeons; hunted as free
and tasty food, they were driven to extinction. The buffalo
that used to migrate in enormous herds across the central
plains of North America only narrowly escaped the same
fate, a few individuals preserved from this catastrophic ex-
ercise in overhunting founding today’s modest herds.

The existence of a commercial market often leads to
overexploitation of a species. The international trade in
furs, for example, has severely reduced the numbers of
chinchilla, vicuna, otter, and many wild cat species. The
harvesting of commercially valuable trees provides another
telling example: almost all West Indies mahogany (Swiete-
nia mahogani) have been logged from the Caribbean is-
lands, and the extensive cedar forests of Lebanon, once
widespread at high elevations in the Middle East, now sur-
vive in only a few isolated groves.

A particularly telling example of overharvesting of a so-
called commercial species is the commercial harvesting of
fish in the North Atlantic. Fishing fleets continued to har-
vest large amounts of cod off Newfoundland during the
1980s, even as the population numbers declined precipi-
tously. By 1992 the cod population had dropped to less
than 1% of their original numbers. The American and
Canadian governments have closed the fishery, but no one
can predict if the fish populations will recover. The At-
lantic bluefin tuna has experienced a 90% population de-
cline in the last 10 years. The swordfish has declined even
further. In both cases, the drop has led to even more in-
tense fishing of the remaining populations.

 

A variety of factors can make a species particularly
vulnerable to extinction.

 
