| 31.2 Vulnerable species are more likely to become extinct.

Predicting Which Species Are
Vulnerable to Extinction

How can a biologist assess whether a particular species is
vulnerable to extinction? To get some handle on this, con-
servation biologists look for changes in population size and
habitat availability. Species whose populations are shrink-
ing rapidly, whose habitats are being destroyed (figure
31.6), or which are endemic to small areas can be consid-
ered to be endangered.

Population Viability Analysis

Quantifying the risk faced by a particular species is not a
simple or precise enterprise. Increasingly, conservation bi-
ologists make a rough estimate of a population’s risk of
local extinction in terms of a minimum viable population
(MVP), the estimated number or density of individuals
necessary for the population to maintain or increase its
numbers.

Some small populations are at high risk of extinction,
while other populations equally small are at little or no
risk. Conservation biologists carry out a population via-
bility analysis (PVA) to assess how the size of a popula-
tion influences its risk of becoming extinct over a specific
time period, often 100 years. Many factors must be taken
into account in a PVA. Two components of particular
importance are demographic stochasticity (the amount of
random variation in birth and death rates) and genetic sto-
chasticity (fluctuations in a population’s level of genetic
variation). Demographic stochasticity refers to random
events that affect a population. The smaller the popula-
tion, the more likely it is that a random event, such as a
disease epidemic or an environmental disturbance (such
as a flood or a fire) could decimate a population and lead
to extinction. Similarly, small populations are most likely
to lose genetic variation due to genetic drift (see chapter
20) and thus be vulnerable to both the short- and long-
term consequences of genetic uniformity. For these rea-
sons, small populations are at particularly great risk of ex-
tinction.

Many species are distributed as metapopulations, col-
lections of small populations each occupying a suitable
patch of habitat in an otherwise unsuitable landscape (see
chapter 24). Each individual subpopulation may be quite
small and in real threat of extinction, but the metapopu-
lation may be quite safe from extinction so long as indi-
viduals from other populations repopulate the habitat
patches vacated by extinct populations. The extent of this
rescue effect is an important component of the PVA of

630 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

FIGURE 31.6

Habitat removal. In this clear-cut lumbering of National Forest
land in Washington State, few if any trees have been left standing,
removing as well the home of the deer, birds, and other animal
inhabitants of temperate forest. Until a replacement habitat is
provided by replanting, this is a truly “lost” habitat.

such species; if rates of population extinction increase,
there may not be enough surviving populations to found
new populations, and the species as a whole may slide to-
ward extinction.

 

Small populations are particularly in danger of
extinction. To assess the risk of local extinction of a
particular species, conservation biologists carry out a
population viability analysis that takes into account
demographic and genetic variation.

 
