Dependence upon Other Species

Species often become vulnerable to extinction when their
web of ecological interactions becomes seriously disrupted.
A recent case in point are the sea otters that live in the cold
waters off Alaska and the Aleutian Islands. A keystone
species in the kelp forest ecosystem, the otter populations

 

have declined sharply in recent years. In a 500-mile stretch
of coastline, otter numbers had dropped to an estimated
6000 from 53,000 in the 1970s, a plunge of nearly 90%. In-
vestigating this catastrophic decline, marine ecologists un-
covered a chain of interactions among the species of the
ocean and kelp forest ecosystems, a falling domino chain of
lethal effects.

The first in a series of events leading to the sea otter’s
decline seems to have been the heavy commercial harvest-
ing of whales (see the case history later in this chapter).
Without whales to keep their numbers in check, ocean z00-
plankton thrived, leading in turn to proliferation of a
species of fish called pollock that feed on the now-abundant
zooplankton. Given this ample food supply, the pollock
proved to be very successful competitors of other northern
Pacific fish like herring and ocean perch, so that levels of
these other fish fell steeply in the 1970s.

 

Whal
Ovetharvesting of plankton-eating
whales may have caused an
increase in plankton-eating pollock
populations.

     

Nutritious fish

Populations of nutritious fish like
‘ocean perch and herring declined,

. likely due to overfishing, competition

~ with pollock, or climatic change.

 

Sea lions and harbor seals
Sea lion and harbor seal
populations drastically
declined in Alaska, probably
because the less-nutrtious
pollock could not sustain
them.

Killer whales
With the decline in their prey
populations of sea lions and
seals, Killer whales turned to a
new source of food: sea
otters.

FIGURE 31.7

Now the falling chain of dominos begins to accelerate.
The decline in the nutritious forage fish led to an ensuing
crash in Alaskan populations of Steller’s sea lions and har-
bor seals, for which pollock did not provide sufficient nour-
ishment. Numbers of these pinniped species have fallen
precipitously since the 1970s.

Pinnipeds are the major food of orcas, also called killer
whales. Faced with a food shortage, some orcas seem to
have turned to the next best thing: sea otters. In one bay
where the entrance from the sea was too narrow and shal-
low for orcas to enter, only 12% of the sea otters have dis-
appeared, while in a similar bay which orcas could enter
easily, two-thirds of the otters disappeared in a year’s time.

Without otters to eat them, the population of sea
urchins in the ecosystem exploded, eating the kelp and so
“deforesting” the kelp forests and denuding the ecosystem
(figure 31.7). As a result, fish species that live in the kelp
forest, like sculpins and greenlings (a cod relative), are de-
clining. This chain reaction demonstrates why sea otters
are considered to be a keystone species.

Commercial whaling appears to have initiated a series
of changes that have led to orcas feeding on sea otters,
with disastrous effects on their kelp forest ecosystem.

Kelp forests
Severely thinned by
the sea urchins, the
kelp beds no longer
support a diversity
of fish species,
which may lead to a
decline in
populations of
eagles that feed on
the fish.

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Disruption of the kelp forest ecosystem. Overharvesting by commercial whalers altered the balance of fish in the ocean ecosystem,
inducing killer whales to feed on sea otters, a keystone species of the kelp forest ecosystem.

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 631
