Preserving Nonreplaceable
Resources

Among the many ways ecosystems are suffering damage,
one class of problem stands out as more serious than the
rest: consuming or destroying resources that we cannot re-
place in the future. While a polluted stream can be cleaned
up, No one can restore an extinct species. In the United
States, we are consuming three nonreplaceable resources at
alarming rates: topsoil, groundwater, and biodiversity. We
will briefly discuss the first two of these in this chapter,
with a more detailed discussion of biodiversity in the fol-
lowing chapter.

Topsoil

The United States is one of the most productive agricul-
tural countries on earth, largely because much of it is
covered with particularly fertile soils. Our midwestern
farm belt sits astride what was once a great prairie. The
topsoil of that ecosystem accumulated bit by bit from
countless generations of animals and plants until, by the
time humans began to plow it, the rich soil extended
down several feet.

We can never replace this rich topsoil, the capital
upon which our country’s greatness is built, yet we are al-
lowing it to be lost at a rate of centimeters every decade.
By repeatedly tilling (turning the soil over) to eliminate
weeds, we permit rain to wash more and more of the top-
soil away, into rivers, and eventually out to sea. Our
country has lost one-quarter of its topsoil since 1950!
New approaches are desperately needed to lessen our re-
liance on intensive cultivation. Some possible solutions
include using genetic engineering to make crops resistant
to weed-killing herbicides and terracing to recapture lost
topsoil.

Groundwater

A second resource we cannot replace is groundwater,
water trapped beneath the soil within porous rock reser-
voirs called aquifers (figure 30.11). This water seeped into
its underground reservoir very slowly during the last ice
age over 12,000 years ago. We should not waste this trea-
sure, for we cannot replace it.

In most areas of the United States, local governments
exert relatively little control over the use of groundwater.
As a result, a large portion is wasted watering lawns, wash-
ing cars, and running fountains. A great deal more is inad-
vertently polluted by poor disposal of chemical wastes—
and once pollution enters the groundwater, there is no
effective means of removing it.

          
    
    
  

SOUTH DAKOTA

 

 

Dell
mer
KANSAS
COLORADO
x Bi Wichita
NEW
ES) OKLAHOMA

 

 

Vy

Ogallala Aquifer water depths
0-30m = [}30-120m ff 120-350 m

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 30.11

‘The Ogallala Aquifer. This massive deposit of groundwater lies
under eight states, mainly Texas, Kansas, and Nebraska. Excessive
pumping of this water for irrigation and other uses has caused the
water level to drop 30 meters in some places. Continued excessive
use of this kind endangers the survival of the Ogallala Aquifer, as
it takes hundreds or even thousands of years for aquifers to
recharge.

 

Topsoil and groundwater are essential for agriculture
and other human activities. Replenishment of these
resources occurs at a very slow rate. Current levels of
consumption are not sustainable and will cause serious
problems in the near future.

 

Chapter 30 The Future of the Biosphere 623
