 

Overview of the
Biodiversity Crisis
Extinction is a fact of life, as normal and nec-
essary as species formation is to a stable
world ecosystem. Most species, probably all,
go extinct eventually. More than 99% of
species known to science (most from the fos-
sil record) are now extinct. However, current
rates are alarmingly high. Taking into ac-
count the rapid and accelerating loss of habi-
tat that is occurring at present, especially in
the tropics, it has been calculated that as
much as 20% of the world’s biodiversity may
be lost during the next 30 years. In addition,
many of these species may be lost before we
are even aware of their extinction. Scientists
estimate that no more than 15% of the
world’s eukaryotic organisms have been dis-
covered and given scientific names, and this
proportion probably is much lower for tropi-
cal species.

These losses will not just affect poorly
known groups. As many as 50,000 species of — vulture.
the world’s total of 250,000 species of plants,
4000 of the world’s 20,000 species of butter-
flies, and nearly 2000 of the world’s 9000 species of birds
could be lost during this short period of time. Considering
that our species has been in existence for only 500,000
years of the world’s 4.5-billion-year history, and that our
ancestors developed agriculture only about 10,000 years
ago, this is an astonishing—and dubious—accomplishment.

Extinctions Due to Prehistoric Humans

A great deal can be learned about current rates of extinction
by studying the past, and in particular the impact of human-
caused extinctions. In prehistoric times, Homo sapiens
wreaked havoc whenever they entered a new area. For ex-
ample, at the end of the last ice age, approximately 12,000
years ago, the fauna of North America was composed of a
diversity of large mammals similar to Africa today: mam-
moths and mastodons, horses, camels, giant ground-sloths,
saber-toothed cats, and lions, among others (figure 31.2).
Shortly after humans arrived, 74 to 86% of the megafauna
(that is, animals weighing more than 100 pounds) became
extinct. These extinctions are thought to have been caused
by hunting, and indirectly by burning and clearing forests
(some scientists attribute these extinctions to climate
change, but that hypothesis doesn’t explain why the end of
earlier ice ages was not associated with mass extinctions, nor
does it explain why extinctions occurred primarily among
larger animals, with smaller species relatively unaffected).

626 = Part VIII The Global Environment

FIGURE 31.2

 

North America before human inhabitants. Animals found in North America prior
to the migration of humans included large mammals and birds such as the ancient
North American camel, saber-toothed cat, giant ground-sloth, and the teratorn

Similar results have followed the arrival of humans
around the globe. Forty thousand years ago, Australia was
occupied by a wide variety of large animals, including mar-
supials similar in size and ecology to hippos and leopards, a
kangaroo nine feet tall, and a 20-foot-long monitor lizard.
These all disappeared, at approximately the same time as
humans arrived. Smaller islands have also been devastated.
On Madagscar, at least 15 species of lemurs, including one
the size of a gorilla, a pygmy hippopotamus , and the flight-
less elephant bird, Aepyornis, the largest bird to ever live
(more than 3 meters tall and weighing 450 kilograms) all
perished. On New Zealand, 30 species of birds went extinct,
including all 13 species of moas, another group of large,
flightless birds. Interestingly, one continent that seems to
have been spared these megafaunal extinctions is Africa. Sci-
entists speculate that this lack of extinction in prehistoric
Africa may have resulted because much of human evolution
occurred in Africa. Consequently, other African species had
been coevolving with humans for several million years and
thus had evolved counteradaptations to human predation.

Extinctions in Historical Time

Historical extinction rates are best known for birds and
mammals because these species are conspicuous—rela-
tively large and well studied. Estimates of extinction rates
for other species are much rougher. The data presented
