Case Study: Overexploitation—
Whales

Whales, the largest living animals, are rare in the world’s
oceans today, their numbers driven down by commercial
whaling. Commercial whaling began in the sixteenth cen-
tury, and reached its apex in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Before the advent of cheap high-
grade oils manufactured from petroleum in the early
twentieth century, oil made from whale blubber was an
important commercial product in the worldwide market-
place. In addition, the fine lattice-like structure used by
baleen whales to filter-feed plankton from seawater
(termed “baleen,” but sometimes called “whalebone”
even though it is actually made of keratin, like finger-
nails) was used in undergarments. Because a whale is such
a large animal, each individual captured is of significant
commercial value.

Right whales were the first to bear the brunt of commer-
cial whaling. They were called right whales because they
were slow, easy to capture, and provided up to 150 barrels
of blubber oil and abundant whalebone, making them the
“right” whale for a commercial whaler to hunt.

As the right whale declined in the eighteenth century,
whalers turned to other species, the gray, humpback (figure
31.13), and bowhead. As their numbers declined, whalers
turned to the blue, largest of all whales, and when they
were decimated, to smaller whales: the fin, then the Sei,
then the sperm whales. As each species of whale became
the focus of commercial whaling, its numbers inevitably
began a steep decline (figure 31.14).

Hunting of right whales was made illegal in 1935. By
then, all three species had been driven to the brink of ex-
tinction, their numbers less than 5% of what they used to
be. Protected since, their numbers have not recovered in
either the North Atlantic or North Pacific. By 1946 sev-
eral other species faced imminent extinction, and whaling
nations formed the International Whaling Commission
(IWC) to regulate commercial whale hunting. Like hav-
ing the fox guard the hen house, the IWC for decades did
little to limit whale harvests, and whale numbers contin-
ued a steep decline. Finally, in 1974, when numbers of all
but the small minke whales had been driven down, the
IWC banned hunting of blue, gray, and humpback
whales, and instituted partial bans on other species. The
rule was violated so often, however, that the IWC in 1986
instituted a worldwide moratorium on all commercial
killing of whales. While some commercial whaling con-
tinues, often under the guise of harvesting for scientific
studies, annual whale harvests have dropped dramatically
in the last 15 years.

Some species appear to be recovering, while others do
not. Humpback numbers have more than doubled since the
early 1960s, increasing nearly 10% annually, and Pacific
gray whales have fully recovered to their previous numbers
of about 20,000 animals after being hunted to less than

636 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

FIGURE 31.13

A humpback whale. Only 5000 to 10,000 humpback whales
remain, out of a world population estimated to have been 100,000.

 

 
  
 
 
   
 

30] — Fin
— Sperm
— Blue

25>) — Minke
— Sei

Humpback

Number of whales (in thousands)

 

 

 

 

o4
1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990)
Year
FIGURE 31.14

A history of commercial whaling. These data show the world
catch of whales in the twentieth century. Each species in turn is
hunted until its numbers fall so low that hunting it becomes
commercially unprofitable.

1000. Right, sperm, fin, and blue whales have not recov-
ered, and no one knows whether they will.

 

Commercial whaling, by overharvesting, has driven
most large whale species to the brink of extinction.
Stopping the harvest has allowed recovery of some but
not all species.

 
