Case Study: Loss of Genetic
Variation—Prairie Chickens

The greater prairie chicken (Tympanuchus cupido pinnatus) is
a showy 2-pound wild bird renowned for its flamboyant
mating rituals (figure 31.18). Abundant in many midwest-
ern states, the prairie chickens in Illinois have in the last six
decades undergone a population collapse. Once, enormous
numbers of birds covered the state, but with the introduc-
tion of the steel plow in 1837, the first that could slice
through the deep dense root systems of prairie grasses, the
Illinois prairie began to be replaced by farmland, and by
the turn of the century the prairie had vanished. By 1931,
the subspecies known as the heath hen (Tympanuchus cupido
cupido) became extinct in Ilinois. The greater prairie
chicken fared little better in Ilinois, its numbers falling to
25,000 statewide in 1933, then to 2000 in 1962. In sur-
rounding states with less intensive agriculture, it continued
to prosper.

In 1962, a sanctuary was established in an attempt to
preserve the prairie chicken, and another in 1967. But pri-
vately owned grasslands kept disappearing, with their
prairie chickens, and by the 1980s the birds were extinct in
Illinois except for the two preserves. And there they were
not doing well. Their numbers kept falling. By 1990, the
egg hatching rate, which had averaged between 91 and
100%, had dropped to an extremely low 38%. By the mid-
1990s, the count of males dropped to as low as six in each
sanctuary.

What was wrong with the sanctuary populations? One
reasonable suggestion was that because of very small popu-
lation sizes and a mating ritual where one male may domi-
nate a flock, the Illinois prairie chickens had lost so much
genetic variability as to create serious inbreeding problems.
To test this idea, biologists at the University of Illinois
compared DNA from frozen tissue samples of birds that
died in Illinois between 1974 and 1993 and found that in
recent years, Illinois birds had indeed become genetically
less diverse. Extracting DNA from tissue in the roots of
feathers from stuffed birds collected in the 1930s from the
same population, the researchers found little genetic differ-
ence between the Illinois birds of the 1930s and present-
day prairie chickens of other states. However, present-day
Illinois birds had lost fully one-third of the genetic diver-
sity of birds living in the same place before the population
collapse of the 1970s.

Now the stage was set to halt the Illinois prairie chick-
en’s race toward extinction. Wildlife managers began to
transplant birds from genetically diverse populations of
Minnesota, Kansas, and Nebraska to Illinois. Between
1992 and 1996, a total of 518 out-of-state prairie chick-
ens were brought in to interbreed with the Illinois birds,
and hatching rates were back up to 94% by 1998. It looks
like the Illinois prairie chickens have been saved from
extinction.

 

FIGURE 31.18
A male prairie chicken performing a mating ritual. He inflates
bright orange air sacs, part of his esophagus, into balloons on each
side of his head. As air is drawn into the sacs, it creates a three-
syllable “boom-boom-boom” that can be heard for miles.

 

 

 

 

 

 

&
€
@
2
&
5
—
ry
&
1 2 3 4 5 6
Population size (log)
FIGURE 31.19

Small populations lose much of their genetic variability. The
percentage of polymorphic genes in isolated populations of the
tree Halocarpus bidwilli in the mountains of New Zealand is a
sensitive function of population size.

The key lesson to be learned is the importance of not al-
lowing things to go too far, not to drop down to a single
isolated population (figure 31.19). Without the outlying
genetically different populations, the prairie chickens in
Illinois could not have been saved. The black-footed ferrets
discussed on the previous page are particularly endangered
because they exist as a single isolated population.

 

When their numbers fell, Illinois prairie chickens lost
much of their genetic variability, resulting in
reproductive failure and the threat of immediate
extinction. Breeding with genetically more variable
birds appears to have reversed the decline.

 

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 639
