 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1831 1882

FIGURE 31.11

Fragmentation of woodland habitat. From the time of settlement of Cadiz Township, Wisconsin, the forest has been progressively
reduced from a nearly continuous cover to isolated woodlots covering less than 1% of the original area.

per month, less than 20% of bats were lost, but caves with
more than four visits per month suffered population de-
clines of between 86 and 95%.

Habitat Fragmentation

Loss of habitat by a species frequently results not only in a
lowering of population numbers, but also in fragmentation
of the population into unconnected patches (figure 31.11).

A habitat may become fragmented in unobvious ways,
such as when roads and habitation intrude into forest. The
effect is to carve up the populations living in the habitat
into a series of smaller populations, often with disastrous
consequences. Although detailed data are not available,
fragmentation of wildlife habitat in developed temperate
areas is thought to be very substantial.

As habitats become fragmented and shrink in size, the
relative proportion of the habitat that occurs on the bound-
ary, or edge, increases. Edge effects can significantly de-
grade a population’s chances of survival. Changes in micro-
climate (temperature, wind, humidity, etc.) near the edge
may reduce appropriate habitat for many species more than
the physical fragmentation suggests. In isolated fragments
of rain forest, for example, trees on the edge are exposed to
direct sunlight and, consequently, hotter and drier condi-
tions than they are accustomed to in the cool, moist forest
interior. As a result, within 100 meters of the forest edge,
tree biomass decreased by 36% in the first 17 years after
fragment isolation in one study.

Also, increasing habitat edges opens up opportunities for
parasites and predators, both more effective at edges. As
fragments decrease in size, the proportion of habitat that is
distant from any edge decreases and, consequently, more
and more of the habitat is within the range of these preda-
tors. Habitat fragmentation is thought to have been re-
sponsible for local extinctions in a wide range of species.

The impact of habitat fragmentation can be seen clearly
in a major study done in Manaus, Brazil, as the rain forest
was commercially logged. Landowners agreed to preserve

 

FIGURE 31.12

A study of habitat fragmentation. Biodiversity was monitored in
the isolated patches of rain forest in Manaus, Brazil, before and
after logging. Fragmentation led to significant species loss within
patches.

patches of rain forest of various sizes, and censuses of these
patches were taken before the logging started, while they
were still part of a continuous forest. After logging, species
began to disappear from the now-isolated patches (figure
31.12). First to go were the monkeys, which have large
home ranges. Birds that prey on ant colonies followed, dis-
appearing from patches too small to maintain enough ant
colonies to support them.

Because some species like monkeys require large
patches, this means that large fragments are indispensable
if we wish to preserve high levels of biodiversity. The take-
home lesson is that preservation programs will need to pro-
vide suitably large habitat fragments to avoid this impact.

 

Habitat loss is probably the greatest cause of extinction.
As habitats are destroyed, remaining habitat becomes
fragmented, increasing the threat to many species.

 

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 635
