Case Study: Habitat Loss and
Fragmentation—Songbirds

Every year since 1966, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
has organized thousands of amateur ornithologists and bird
watchers in an annual bird count called the Breeding Bird
Survey. In recent years, a shocking trend has emerged.
While year-round residents that prosper around humans,
like robins, starlings, and blackbirds, have increased their
numbers and distribution over the last 30 years, forest
songbirds have declined severely. The decline has been
greatest among long-distance migrants such as thrushes,
orioles, tanagers, catbirds, vireos, buntings, and warblers.
These birds nest in northern forests in the summer, but
spend their winters in South or Central America or the
Caribbean Islands.

In many areas of the eastern United States, more than
three-quarters of the neotropical migrant bird species have
declined significantly. Rock Creek Park in Washington,
D.C., for example, has lost 90 percent of its long distance
migrants in the last 20 years. Nationwide, American red-
starts declined about 50% in the single decade of the 1970s.
Studies of radar images from National Weather Service
stations in Texas and Louisiana indicate that only about
half as many birds fly over the Gulf of Mexico each spring
compared to numbers in the 1960s. This suggests a loss of
about half a billion birds in total, a devastating loss.

The culprit responsible for this widespread decline ap-
pears to be habitat fragmentation and loss. Fragmentation
of breeding habitat and nesting failures in the summer
nesting grounds of the United States and Canada have had
a major negative impact on the breeding of woodland song-
birds. Many of the most threatened species are adapted to
deep woods and need an area of 25 acres or more per pair
to breed and raise their young. As woodlands are broken up
by roads and developments, it is becoming increasingly dif-
ficult to find enough contiguous woods to nest successfully.

A second and perhaps even more important factor seems
to be the availability of critical winter habitat in Central
and South America. Living in densely crowded limited
areas, the availability of high-quality food is critical. Studies
of the American redstart clearly indicate that birds with
better winter habitat have a superior chance of successfully
migrating back to their breeding grounds in the spring.
Peter Marra and Richard Holmes of Dartmouth College
and Keith Hobson of the Canadian Wildlife Service cap-
tured birds, took blood samples, and measured the levels of
the stable carbon isotope '°C. Plants growing in the best
overwintering habitats in Jamaica and Honduras (man-
groves and wetland forests) have low levels of 3C, and so
do the redstarts that feed on them. Sixty-five percent of the
wet forest birds maintained or gained weight over the win-
ter. Plants growing in substandard dry scrub, by contrast,
have high levels of 8C, and so do the redstarts that feed on
them. Scrub-dwelling birds lost up to 11% of their body
mass over the winter. Now here’s the key: birds that winter

640 = Part VIII The Global Environment

  

 
  
  
 

© Males

@ Females e

 

  

-25.0
May 12

Stable carbon isotope values (*8C)

 

May17  May22,— May 27 June 1

 

FIGURE 31.20

The American redstart, a migratory songbird whose

numbers are in serious decline. The graph presents data on the
level of !3C in redstarts arriving at summer breeding grounds.
Early arrivals, with the best shot at reproductive success, have
lower levels of °C, indicating they wintered in more favorable
mangrove-wetland forest habitats.

in the substandard scrub leave later in the spring on the
long flight to northern breeding grounds, arrive at their
summer homes, and have fewer young. You can see this
clearly in the redstart study (figure 31.20): the proportion
of 3C carbon in birds arriving in New Hampshire breeding
grounds increases as spring wears on and scrub-overwinter-
ing stragglers belatedly arrive. Thus, loss of mangrove
habitat in the neotropics is having a real negative impact.
As the best habitat disappears, overwintering birds fare
poorly, and this leads to population declines. Unfortu-
nately, the Caribbean lost about 10% of its mangroves in
the 1980s, and continues to lose about 1% a year. This loss
of key habitat appears to be a driving force in the looming
extinction of songbirds.

 

Fragmentation of summer breeding grounds and loss of
high-quality overwintering habitat seem both to be
contributing to a marked decline in migratory songbird
species.

 
