 

Theories about the Origin of Cells

The evolution of cells required early organic molecules
to assemble into a functional, interdependent unit. Cells,
discussed in the next chapter, are essentially little bags of
fluid. What the fluid contains depends on the individual
cell, but every cell’s contents differ from the environ-
ment outside the cell. Therefore, an early cell may have
floated along in a dilute “primordial soup,” but its inte-
rior would have had a higher concentration of specific
organic molecules.

Cell Origins: The Importance of Bubbles

How did these “bags of fluid” evolve from simple organic
molecules? As you can imagine, the answer to this ques-
tion is a matter for debate. Scientists favoring an “ocean’s
edge” scenario for the origin of life have proposed that
bubbles may have played a key role in this evolutionary
step. A bubble, such as those produced by soap solutions,
is a hollow spherical structure. Certain molecules, partic-
ularly those with hydrophobic regions, will spontaneously
form bubbles in water. The structure of the bubble shields
the hydrophobic regions of the molecules from contact
with water. If you have ever watched the ocean surge
upon the shore, you may have noticed the foamy froth
created by the agitated water. The edges of the primitive
oceans were more than likely very frothy places bom-
barded by ultraviolet and other ionizing radiation, and ex-
posed to an atmosphere that may have contained methane
and other simple organic molecules.

Oparin’s Bubble Theory

The first bubble theory is attributed to Alexander
Oparin, a Russian chemist with extraordinary insight. In
the mid-1930s, Oparin suggested that the present-day at-
mosphere was incompatible with the creation of life. He
proposed that life must have arisen from nonliving matter
under a set of very different environmental circumstances
some time in the distant history of the earth. His was the
theory of primary abiogenesis (primary because all liv-
ing cells are now known to come from previously living
cells, except in that first case). At the same time, J. B. S.
Haldane, a British geneticist, was also independently es-
pousing the same views. Oparin decided that in order for
cells to evolve, they must have had some means of devel-
oping chemical complexity, separating their contents
from their environment by means of a cell membrane,
and concentrating materials within themselves. He
termed these early, chemical-concentrating bubblelike
structures protobionts.

66 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

Ils had little internal structure.

Oparin’s theories were published in English in 1938,
and for awhile most scientists ignored them. However,
Harold Urey, an astronomer at the University of
Chicago, was quite taken with Oparin’s ideas. He con-
vinced one of his graduate students, Stanley Miller, to
follow Oparin’s rationale and see if he could “create” life.
The Urey-Miller experiment has proven to be one of the
most significant experiments in the history of science. As
a result Oparin’s ideas became better known and more
widely accepted.

A Host of Bubble Theories

Different versions of “bubble theories” have been cham-
pioned by numerous scientists since Oparin. The bubbles
they propose go by a variety of names; they may be called
microspheres, protocells, protobionts, micelles, liposomes, or
coacervates, depending on the composition of the bubbles
(lipid or protein) and how they form. In all cases, the
bubbles are hollow spheres, and they exhibit a variety of
cell-like properties. For example, the lipid bubbles called
coacervates form an outer boundary with two layers that
resembles a biological membrane. They grow by accumu-
lating more subunit lipid molecules from the surrounding
medium, and they can form budlike projections and
divide by pinching in two, like bacteria. They also can
contain amino acids and use them to facilitate various
acid-base reactions, including the decomposition of
glucose. Although they are not alive, they obviously have
many of the characteristics of cells.

A Bubble Scenario

It is not difficult to imagine that a process of chemical evo-
lution involving bubbles or microdrops preceded the origin
of life (figure 4.8). The early oceans must have contained
untold numbers of these microdrops, billions in a spoonful,
each one forming spontaneously, persisting for a while, and
then dispersing. Some would, by chance, have contained
amino acids with side groups able to catalyze growth-
promoting reactions. Those microdrops would have
survived longer than ones that lacked those amino acids,
because the persistence of both proteinoid microspheres
and lipid coacervates is greatly increased when they carry
out metabolic reactions such as glucose degradation and
when they are actively growing.

Over millions of years, then, the complex bubbles that
were better able to incorporate molecules and energy from
the lifeless oceans of the early earth would have tended to
persist longer than the others. Also favored would have been
the microdrops that could use these molecules to expand in
size, growing large enough to divide into “daughter”
