Case Study: Introduced Species—
Lake Victoria Cichlids

Lake Victoria, an immense shallow freshwater sea about
the size of Switzerland in the heart of equatorial East
Africa, had until 1954 been home to an incredibly diverse
collection of over 300 species of cichlid fishes (figure
31.15). These small, perchlike fishes range from 2 to 10
inches in length, with males coming in endless varieties of
colors. Today, all of these cichlid species are threatened,
endangered, or extinct.

What happened to bring about the abrupt loss of so
many endemic cichlid species? In 1954, the Nile perch,
Lates niloticus, a commercial fish with a voracious ap-
petite, was introduced on the Ugandan shore of Lake
Victoria. Nile perch, which grow to over 4 feet in length,
were to form the basis of a new fishing industry (figure
31.16). For decades, these perch did not seem to have a
significant impact—over 30 years later, in 1978, Nile
perch still made up less than 2% of the fish harvested
from the lake.

Then something happened to cause the Nile perch to
explode and to spread rapidly through the lake, eating their
way through the cichlids. By 1986, Nile perch constituted
nearly 80% of the total catch of fish from the lake, and the
endemic cichlid species were virtually gone. Over 70% of
cichlid species disappeared, including all open-water
species.

So what happened to kick-start the mass extinction of
the cichlids? The trigger seems to have been eutrophica-
tion. Before 1978, Lake Victoria had high oxygen levels at
all depths, down to the bottom layers exceeding 60 meters
depth. However, by 1989 high inputs of nutrients from
agricultural runoff and sewage from towns and villages had
led to algal blooms that severely depleted oxygen levels in
deeper parts of the lake. Cichlids feed on algae, and initially
their population numbers are thought to have risen in re-
sponse to this increase in their food supply, but unlike simi-
lar algal blooms of the past, the Nile perch was now pre-
sent to take advantage of the situation. With a sudden
increase in its food supply (cichlids), the numbers of Nile
perch exploded, and the greater numbers of them simply
ate all available cichlids.

Since 1990 the situation has been compounded by a sec-
ond factor, the introduction into Lake Victoria of a floating
water weed from South America, the water hyacinth Eichor-
nia crassipes. Extremely fecund under eutrophic conditions,
thick mats of water hyacinth soon covered entire bays and
inlets, choking off the coastal habitats of non-open-water
cichlids.

 

Lake Victoria’s diverse collection of cichlid species is
being driven to extinction by an introduced species, the
Nile perch. A normal increase in cichlid numbers due to
algal blooms led to an explosive increase in perch,
which then ate their way through the cichlids.

 

   

<>

FIGURE 31.15

Lake Victoria cichlids. Cichlid fishes are extremely diverse and
occupy different niches. Some species feed on arthropods, others
on dense stands of plants; there are fish-eaters, and still other
species feed on fish eggs and larvae.

 

FIGURE 31.16

Victor and vanquished. The Nile perch (larger fishes in
foreground), a commercial fish introduced into Lake Victoria as a
potential food source, is responsible for the virtual extinction of
hundreds of species of cichlid fishes (smaller fishes in tub).

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 637
