Habitat Loss

As figure 31.8 and table 31.3 indicate, habitat loss is the
single most important cause of extinction. Given the
tremendous amounts of ongoing destruction of all types of
habitat, from rain forest to ocean floor, this should come as
no surprise. Natural habitats may be adversely affected by
human influences in four ways: (1) destruction, (2) pollu-
tion, (3) human disruption, and (4) habitat fragmentation.

Destruction

A proportion of the habitat available to a particular species
may simply be destroyed. This is a common occurrence in
the “clear-cut” harvesting of timber, in the burning of trop-
ical forest to produce grazing land, and in urban and indus-
trial development. Forest clearance has been, and is, by far
the most pervasive form of habitat disruption (figure 31.9).
Many tropical forests are being cut or burned at a rate of
1% or more per year.

Biologists often use the well-established observation that
larger areas support more species (see figure 29.24) to esti-
mate the effect of reductions in habitat available to a
species. As we saw in chapter 30, a relationship usually ex-
ists between the size of an area and the number of species it
contains. Although this relationship varies according to ge-
ographic area, type of organism, and type of area (for ex-
ample, oceanic islands, patches of habitat on the mainland),
a general result is that a tenfold increase in area usually
leads to approximately a doubling in number of species.
This relationship suggests, conversely, that if the area of a
habitat is reduced by 90%, so that only 10% remains, then
half of all species will be lost. Evidence for this theory
comes from a study of extinction rates of birds on habitat
islands (that is, islands of a particular type of habitat sur-
rounded by unsuitable habitat) in Finland where the extinc-
tion rate was found to be inversely proportional to island
size (figure 31.10).

Pollution

Habitat may be degraded by pollution to the extent that
some species can no longer survive there. Degradation oc-
curs as a result of many forms of pollution, from acid rain
to pesticides. Aquatic environments are particularly vulner-
able; many northern lakes in both Europe and North
America, for example, have been essentially sterilized by
acid rain.

Human Disruption

Habitat may be so disturbed by human activities as to
make it untenable for some species. For example, visitors
to caves in Alabama and Tennessee produced significant
population declines in bats over an eight-year period,
some as great as 100%. When visits were fewer than one

634 = Part VII The Global Environment

   

_
Before human 1950 1985
colonization

FIGURE 31.9

Extinction and habitat destruction. The rain forest covering
the eastern coast of Madagascar, an island off the coast of East
Africa, has been progressively destroyed as the island’s human
population has grown. Ninety percent of the original forest cover
is now gone. Many species have become extinct, and many others
are threatened, including 16 of Madagascar’s 31 primate species.

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.5|-
e
e

04

8

had e

e

B 03- °.

8 °

fe

2 0.2 ee é

5 e

e
O14 ° -
e
e
0.0 Lee tl
102 1 102
Area (km2)

FIGURE 31.10

Extinction and the species-area relationship. The data present
percent extinction rates as a function of habitat area for birds on a
series of Finnish islands. Smaller islands experience far greater
local extinction rates.
