Many Approaches Exist for
Preserving Endangered Species

 

Once you understand the reasons why a particular species
is endangered, it becomes possible to think of designing a
recovery plan. If the cause is commercial overharvesting,
regulations can be designed to lessen the impact and pro-
tect the threatened species. If the cause is habitat loss,
plans can be instituted to restore lost habitat. Loss of ge-
netic variability in isolated subpopulations can be coun-
tered by transplanting individuals from genetically differ-
ent populations. Populations in immediate danger of
extinction can be captured, introduced into a captive
breeding program, and later reintroduced to other suit-
able habitat.

Of course, all of these solutions are extremely expensive.
As Bruce Babbitt, Interior Secretary in the Clinton admin-
istration, noted, it is much more economical to prevent
such “environmental trainwrecks” from occurring than it is
to clean them up afterwards. Preserving ecosystems and
monitoring species before they are threatened is the most
effective means of protecting the environment and prevent-
ing extinctions.

 

Habitat Restoration

Conservation biology typically concerns itself with preserv-
ing populations and species in danger of decline or extinc-
tion. Conservation, however, requires that there be some-
thing left to preserve, while in many situations,
conservation is no longer an option. Species, and in some
cases whole communities, have disappeared or have been
irretrievably modified. The clear-cutting of the temperate
forests of Washington State leaves little behind to con-
serve; nor does converting a piece of land into a wheat field
or an asphalt parking lot. Redeeming these situations re-
quires restoration rather than conservation.

Three quite different sorts of habitat restoration pro-
grams might be undertaken, depending very much on the
cause of the habitat loss.

Pristine Restoration. In situations where all species have
been effectively removed, one might attempt to restore the
plants and animals that are believed to be the natural in-
habitants of the area, when such information is available.
When abandoned farmland is to be restored to prairie (fig-
ure 31.21), how do you know what to plant? Although it is
in principle possible to reestablish each of the original
species in their original proportions, rebuilding a commu-
nity requires that you know the identity of all of the origi
nal inhabitants, and the ecologies of each of the species.
We rarely ever have this much information, so no restora-
tion is truly pristine.

 

sful recovery plans will need to be multidimensional.

 

(b)

FIGURE 31.21

The University of Wisconsin-Madison Arboretum has
pioneered restoration ecology. (a) The restoration of the
prairie was at an early stage in November, 1935. (b) The prairie as
it looks today. This picture was taken at approximately the same
location as the 1935 photograph.

Removing Introduced Species. Sometimes the habitat
of a species has been destroyed by a single introduced
species. In such a case, habitat restoration involves re-
moval of the introduced species. Restoration of the once-
diverse cichlid fishes to Lake Victoria will require more
than breeding and restocking the endangered species. Eu-
trophication will have to be reversed, and the introduced
water hyacinth and Nile perch populations brought under
control or removed.

It is important to act quickly if an introduced species is
to be removed. When aggressive African bees (the so-called
“killer bees”) were inadvertently released in Brazil, they re-
mained in the local area only one season. Now they occupy
much of the Western hemisphere.

Cleanup and Rehabilitation. Habitats seriously de-
graded by chemical pollution cannot be restored until the
pollution is cleaned up. The successful restoration of the
Nashua River in New England, discussed in chapter 30,
is one example of how a concerted effort can succeed in
restoring a heavily polluted habitat to a relatively pristine
condition.

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 641
