Captive Propagation

Recovery programs, particularly those focused on one or a
few species, often must involve direct intervention in nat-
ural populations to avoid an immediate threat of extinction.
Earlier we learned how introducing wild-caught individuals
into captive breeding programs is being used in an attempt
to save ferret and prairie chicken populations in immediate
danger of disappearing. Several other such captive propaga-
tion programs have had significant success.

Case History: The Peregrine Falcon. American popu-
lations of birds of prey such as the peregrine falcon (Falco
peregrinus) began an abrupt decline shortly after World
War II. Of the approximately 350 breeding pairs east of the
Mississippi River in 1942, all had disappeared by 1960. The
culprit proved to be the chemical pesticide DDT
(dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) and related organochlo-
rine pesticides. Birds of prey are particularly vulnerable to
DDT because they feed at the top of the food chain, where
DDT becomes concentrated. DDT interferes with the de-
position of calcium in the bird’s eggshells, causing most of
the eggs to break before they hatch.

The use of DDT was banned by federal law in 1972,
causing levels in the eastern United States to fall quickly.
There were no peregrine falcons left in the eastern United
States to reestablish a natural population, however. Falcons
from other parts of the country were used to establish a
captive breeding program at Cornell University in 1970,
with the intent of reestablishing the peregrine falcon in the
eastern United States by releasing offspring of these birds
By the end of 1986, over 850 birds had been released in 13
eastern states, producing an astonishingly strong recovery

(figure 31.22).

Case History: The California Condor. Numbers of
the California condor (Gymmogyps californianus), a large
vulturelike bird with a wingspan of nearly 3 meters, have
been declining gradually for the last 200 years. By 1985
condor numbers had dropped so low the bird was on the
verge of extinction. Six of the remaining 15 wild birds
disappeared that year alone. The entire breeding popula-
tion of the species consisted of the 6 birds remaining in
the wild, and an additional 21 birds in captivity. In a last-
ditch attempt to save the condor from extinction, the re-
maining birds were captured and placed in a captive
breeding population. The breeding program was set up
in zoos, with the goal of releasing offspring on a large
5300-ha ranch in prime condor habitat. Birds were iso-
lated from human contact as much as possible, and
closely related individuals were prevented from breeding.
By the end of 1999 the captive population of California
condors had reached over 110 individuals. Twenty-nine
captive-reared condors have been released successfully in
California at two sites in the mountains north of Los An-
geles, after extensive prerelease training to avoid power
poles and people, all of the released birds seem to be

642 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

100|- @—e Pairs observed
@—® Pairs nesting
20 |. &—® Pairs producing offspring
3
£
i
i
& 60;
o
g
E aol
6
5
3
5
2 207
0 poy oy iy yp pp
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990
Year
FIGURE 31.22

Captive propagation. The peregrine falcon has been
reestablished in the eastern United States by releasing captive-
bred birds over a period of 10 years.

doing well. Twenty additional birds released into the
Grand Canyon have adapted well. Biologists are waiting
to see if the released condors will breed in the wild and
successfully raise a new generation of wild condors.

Case History: Yellowstone Wolves. The ultimate
goal of captive breeding programs is not simply to pre-
serve interesting species, but rather to restore ecosystems
to a balanced functional state. Yellowstone Park has been
an ecosystem out of balance, due in large part to the sys-
tematic extermination of the gray wolf (Canis /upus) in the
park early in this century. Without these predators to
keep their numbers in check, herds of elk and deer ex-
panded rapidly, damaging vegetation so that the elk
themselves starve in times of scarcity. In an attempt to
restore the park’s natural balance, two complete wolf
packs from Canada were released into the park in 1995
and 1996. The wolves adapted well, breeding so success-
fully that by 1998 the park contained nine free-ranging
packs, a total of 90 wolves.

While ranchers near the park have been unhappy about
the return of the wolves, little damage to livestock has been
noted, and the ecological equilibrium of Yellowstone Park
seems well on the way to recovery. Elk are congregating in
larger herds, and their populations are not growing as
rapidly as in years past. Importantly, wolves are killing coy-
otes and their pups, driving them out of some areas. Coy-
otes, the top predators in the absence of wolves, are known
to attack cattle on surrounding ranches, so reintroduction
of wolves to the park may actually benefit the cattle ranch-
ers that are opposed to it.
