3. When the bubbles persisted
long enough to rise to the surface,

they popped, releasing their
contents to the air.

 

2. The gases, concentrated
inside the bubbles, reacted |
to produce simple organic
molecules.

 

 

 

1. Volcanoes erupted under

the sea, releasing gases
enclosed in bubbles.

FIGURE 4.8

 

4, Bombarded by the sun's ultraviolet
radiation, lightning, and other energy
sources, the simple organic molecules
released from the bubbles reacted to
form more complex organic molecules.

 

Bs; __|5. The more complex organic
~ > @ | molecules fell back into the
__| sea in raindrops. There, they
could again be enclosed in
bubbles and begin the
process again.

 

‘A current bubble hypothesis. In 1986 geophysicist Louis Lerman proposed that the chemical processes leading to the evolution of life

took place within bubbles on the ocean’s surface.

microdrops with features similar to those of their “parent”
microdrop. The daughter microdrops have the same favor-
able combination of characteristics as their parent, and
would have grown and divided, too. When a way to facilitate
the reliable transfer of new ability from parent to offspring
developed, heredity—and life—began.

Current Thinking
Whether the early bubbles that gave rise to cells were lipid

or protein remains an unresolved argument. While it is
true that lipid microspheres (coacervates) will form readily
in water, there appears to be no mechanism for their heri-
table replication. On the other hand, one cam imagine a
heritable mechanism for protein microspheres. Although
protein microspheres do not form readily in water, Sidney
Fox and his colleagues at the University of Miami have
shown that they can form under dry conditions.

The discovery that RNA can act as an enzyme to assem-
ble new RNA molecules on an RNA template has raised

the interesting possibility that neither coacervates nor pro-
tein microspheres were the first step in the evolution of
life. Perhaps the first components were RNA molecules,
and the initial steps on the evolutionary journey led to
increasingly complex and stable RNA molecules. Later,
stability might have improved further when a lipid (or
possibly protein) microsphere surrounded the RNA. At
present, those studying this problem have not arrived at a
consensus about whether RNA evolved before or after a
bubblelike structure that likely preceded cells.

Eventually, DNA took the place of RNA as the replicator
in the cell and the storage molecule for genetic information.
DNA, because it is a double helix, stores information in a
more stable fashion than RNA, which is single-stranded.

Little is known about how the first cells originated.
Current hypotheses involve chemical evolution within
bubbles, but there is no general agreement about their
composition, or about how the process occurred.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 67
