Conservation of Ecosystems

Habitat fragmentation is one of the most pervasive enemies
of biodiversity conservation efforts. As we have seen, some
species simply require large patches of habitat to thrive,
and conservation efforts that cannot provide suitable habi-
tat of such a size are doomed to failure. As it has become
clear that isolated patches of habitat lose species far more
rapidly than large preserves do, conservation biologists
have promoted the creation, particularly in the tropics, of
so-called megareserves, large areas of land containing a
core of one or more undisturbed habitats (figure 31.25).
The key to devoting such large tracts of land to reserves
successfully over a long period of time is to operate the re-
serve in a way compatible with local land use. Thus, while
no economic activity is allowed in the core regions of the
megareserve, the remainder of the reserve may be used for
nondestructive harvesting of resources. Linking preserved
areas to carefully managed land zones creates a much larger
total “patch” of habitat than would otherwise be economi-
cally practical, and thus addresses the key problem created
by habitat fragmentation. Pioneering these efforts, a series
of eight such megareserves have been created in Costa Rica
(figure 31.26) to jointly manage biodiversity and economic
activity.

In addition to this focus on maintaining large enough
reserves, in recent years, conservation biologists also have
recognized that the best way to preserve biodiversity is to
focus on preserving intact ecosystems, rather than focusing
on particular species. For this reason,
attention in many cases is turning to

 

 

@ Core (Conservation and Monitoring) [TA] Transition Area
@ Batter (Research, Education, Tourism) x4 Human Settlements

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[ER] Experimental Research '§ Facilities for Research (R), Education (E),
ffU] Traditional Use Tourism (7), Monitoring (M)

[Ra] Rehabilitation

FIGURE 31.25

Design of a megareserve. A megareserve, or biosphere reserve,
recognizes the need for people to have access to resources. Critical
ecosystems are preserved in the core zone. Research and tourism
is allowed in the buffer zone. Sustainable resource harvesting and
permanent habitation is allowed in the multiple-use areas
surrounding the buffer.

 

identifying those ecosystems most in
need of preservation and devising the
means to protect not only the species
within the ecosystem, but the function-
ing of the ecosystem itself.

       
   
 
    

Efforts are being undertaken
worldwide to preserve biodiversity
in megareserves designed to
counter the influences of habitat
fragmentation. Focusing on the
health of entire ecosystems, rather
than of particular species, can often
be a more effective means of
preserving biodiversity.

 

Isla del Coco NP.

4

FIGURE 31.26
Biopreserves in Costa Rica. Costa Rica
has placed about 12% of its land into

 
   
    
    

  

Cabo Banc AsouteBogealResenelt

NICARAGUA
$ we

Gon veges
rr.

La Seva
Bolagical

   
 
 

cela
VielaNP,

Lomas Bafbudal «Lake Arenal

BoogeafApesene \

 

 
   
   

Prone 4 Sune chee

Bologeal esene|

Pacific Ocean

Ista del Cafo iy
Bidlogca Reserve

 

 

national parks and eight megareserves.

 

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 645
