Preserving Keystone Species

Keystone species are species that exert
a particularly strong influence on the
structure and functioning of a particu-
lar ecosystem. The sea otters of figure
31.7 are a keystone species of the kelp
forest ecosystem, and their removal can
have disastrous consequences. There is
no hard-and-fast line that allows us to
clearly identify keystone species. It is
rather a qualitative concept, a state-
ment that a species plays a particularly
important role in its community. Key
stone species are usually characterized
by measuring the strength of their im-
pact on their community. Community
importance measures the change in
some quantitative aspect of the ecosys-
tem (species richness, productivity, nu-
trient cycling) per unit of change in the
abundance of a species.

 

Case Histo: Flying Foxes. The

severe decline of many species of FIGURE 31.24
pteropodid bats, or “flying foxes,”
the Old World tropics is an example of
how the loss of a keystone species can
have dramatic effects on the other
species living within an ecosystem,
sometimes even leading to a cascade of
further extinctions (figure 31.24).
These bats have very close relationships with important
plant species on the islands of the Pacific and Indian
Oceans. The family Pteropodidae contains nearly 200
species, approximately a quarter of them in the genus Prero-
pus, and is widespread on the islands of the South Pacific,
where they are the most important—and often the only-
pollinators and seed dispersers. A study in Samoa found
that 80 to 100% of the seeds landing on the ground during
the dry season were deposited by flying foxes. Many species
are entirely dependent on these bats for pollination. Some
have evolved features like night-blooming flowers that pre-
vent any other potential pollinators from taking over the
role of the fruit bats.

In Guam, where the two local species of flying fox have
recently been driven extinct or nearly so, the impact on the
ecosystem appears to be substantial. Botanists have found
some plant species are not fruiting, or are doing so only
marginally, with fewer fruits than normal. Fruits are not
being dispersed away from parent plants, so offspring
shoots are being crowded out by the adults.

Flying foxes are being driven to extinction by human
hunting. They are hunted for food, for sport, and by or-
chard farmers, who consider them pests. Flying foxes are
particularly vulnerable because they live in large, easily
seen groups of up to a million individuals. Because they

 

 

644 = Part VIII The Global Environment

 

in Preserving keystone species. ‘The flying fox is a keystone species in many Old World
tropical islands. It pollinates many of the plants, and is a key disperser of seeds. Its
elimination by hunting and habitat loss is having a devastating effect on the ecosystems of
many South Pacific islands.

move in regular and predictable patterns and can be easily
tracked to their home roost, hunters can easily bag thou-
sands at a time.

Species preservation programs aimed at preserving par-
ticular species of flying foxes are only just beginning. One
particularly successful example is the program to save the
Rodrigues fruit bat, Pteropus rodricensis, which occurs only
on Rodrigues Island in the Indian Ocean near Madagascar.
The population dropped from about 1000 individuals in
1955 to fewer than 100 by 1974, the drop reflecting largely
the loss of the fruit bat’s forest habitat to farming. Since
1974 the species has been legally protected, and the forest
area of the island is being increased through a tree-planting
program. Eleven captive breeding colonies have been es-
tablished, and the bat population is now increasing rapidly.
The combination of legal protection, habitat restoration,
and captive breeding has in this instance produced a very
effective preservation program.

 

Recovery programs at the species level must deal with
habitat loss and fragmentation, and often with a marked
reduction in genetic diversity. Captive breeding
programs that stabilize genetic diversity and pay careful
attention to habitat preservation and restoration are
typically involved in successful recoveries.

 
