CHAPTER 31 CONSERVATION BIOLOGY

TIPS FOR MASTERING KEY
CONCEPTS

Around the world, species are going extinct at an
accelerating rate, primarily due to the activities of
humans, and at great cost ecologically and
economically. In the new discipline of conservation
biology, scientists are studying which species are
most vulnerable and why, and are designing
conservation and recovery plans in an effort to stem
the losses. There have been, and will continue to be,
both successes and failures in these complex,
imperative efforts.

31.1 The new science of conservation biology

is focused on conserving biodiversity.

e Extinction of species is a natural process, but
humans have greatly increased the rate of this
loss of biodiversity.

e There are pockets of high biodiversity (hot spots)

that still remain scattered around the world.

e With loss of biodiversity, we are losing species
that contribute (in the form of food, shelter,
clothing, medicine, fuel, and aesthetics) to our

quality of life and financial well being, as well as

contribute to ecosystem stability.

31.2 Vulnerable species are more likely to

become extinct.

e Species are more in danger of going extinct if
they have a limited geographic distribution, a
small and/or declining population size, low

genetic diversity, or are used by humans in some

way.
e Because of the ecological interdependence of

organisms, the loss or decline of one species can

have a cascading impact throughout an
ecosystem and endanger other species.

MAP OF UNDERSTANDING

31.3 Causes of endangerment usually reflect
human activities.

As humans alter the environment around them,
especially on a large scale and short time frame,
it has a negative impact on other species.

The degradation, fragmentation and outright loss
of habitat caused by humans is the single biggest
factor contributing to species extinction today.
Other significant factors include overexploitation
of species and natural resources by humans,
species introduced into an area by humans that
compete with or eat the native species, human
disruption of ecological relationships in an
ecosystem, and loss of genetic diversity.

31.4 Successful recovery plans will need to be
multidimensional.

The first step in trying to save a species from
extinction or restore an ecosystem is to
understand why they are threatened - which also
requires knowing their basic biology.

There are many possible options for helping
promote species and ecosystem conservation and
recovery: restoring habitat, regulating
exploitation, removing introduced species,
maintaining or increasing genetic diversity,
captive breeding and reintroduction of species
into their former habitats.

Since all organisms need a suitable place in
which to live and are dependent on other
organisms, it is more effective to focus on
preserving and restoring whole ecosystems rather
than individual species.

The larger the protected area, the greater the
chances of species survival, but cost and human
needs will play important roles in determining
sizes of reserve.

The maps given below show the relationship of the concepts to each other. They should help you organize the

information.

LOSS OF BIODIVERSITY

an

Why Happening

a

Causes = human activities
overexploitation
introduced species
habitat loss

ecological disruption

Why Care

|

Importance of biodiversity
interdependence of organisms
ecosystem function and stability
economic value of species
quality of life value of species

How to Prevent

NN

Solutions
regulate exploitation

establish protected areas

restore degraded habitat

breed in captivity

breed for increased genetic diversity
reintroduce species into former habitat
