Sustaining Genetic Diversity

One of the chief obstacles to a successful species recovery
program is that a species is generally in serious trouble by
the time a recovery program is instituted. When popula-
tions become very small, much of their genetic diversity is
lost (see figure 31.19), as we have seen clearly in our exami-
nation of the case histories of prairie chickens and black-
footed ferrets. If a program is to have any chance of suc-
cess, every effort must be made to sustain as much genetic
diversity as possible.

Case History: The Black Rhino. All five species of
rhinoceros are critically endangered. The three Asian
species live in forest habitat that is rapidly being de-
stroyed, while the two African species are illegally killed
for their horns. Fewer than 11,000 individuals of all five
species survive today. The problem is intensified by the
fact that many of the remaining animals live in very small,
isolated populations. The 2400 wild-living individuals of
the black rhino, Diceros bicornis, live in approximately
75 small widely separated groups (figure 31.23) consisting
of six subspecies adapted to local conditions throughout
the species’ range. All of these subspecies appear to have
low genetic variability; in three of the subspecies, only a
few dozen animals remain. Analysis of mitochondrial
DNA suggests that in these populations most individuals
are genetically very similar.

This lack of genetic variability represents the greatest
challenge to the future of the species. Much of the range
of the black rhino is still open and not yet subject to
human encroachment. To have any significant chance of
success, a species recovery program will have to find a way
to sustain the genetic diversity that remains in this species.
Heterozygosity could be best maintained by bringing all
black rhinos together in a single breeding population, but
this is not a practical possibility. A more feasible solution
would be to move individuals between populations. Man-
aging the black rhino populations for genetic diversity
could fully restore the species to its original numbers and
much of its range.

Placing black rhinos from a number of different loca-
tions together in a sanctuary to increase genetic diversity
raises a potential problem: local subspecies may be adapted
in different ways to their immediate habitats—what if these
local adaptations are crucial to their survival? Homogeniz-
ing the black rhino populations by pooling their genes risks
destroying such local adaptations, if they exist, perhaps at
great cost to survival.

 

 

Equator

\

Black African Rhino
[Present distribution

 

Former distribution

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 31.23
Sustaining genetic diversity. The black rhino (a) is highly
endangered, living in 75 small, widely separated populations ().
Only about 2400 individuals survive in the wild.

Chapter 31 Conservation Biology 643
