 

Viruses and Simple
Organisms

Discovering the Virus Responsible
for Hepatitis C

You may not be aware that our country is in the midst of
an epidemic of this potentially fatal liver disease. Almost
4 million Americans are infected with the hepatitis C
virus, most of them without knowing it. Some 9000 peo-
ple will die this year in the United States from liver can-
cer and chronic liver failure brought on by the virus, and
the number is expected to triple in the next decade. In
the first years of the new century, the number of annual
US. deaths caused by hepatitis C is predicted to overtake
deaths caused by AIDS.

Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. Researchers in the
1940s identified two distinct forms. One, called infectious
hepatitis or hepatitis A, is transmitted by contact with feces
from infected individuals. A second form of hepatitis, called
serum hepatitis or hepatitis B, is passed only through the
blood. Hepatitis B virus was isolated in the mid-1960s, he-
patitis A virus a decade later. This led in the 1970s to the
development of tests for the two viruses. Disturbingly, a
substantial proportion of hepatitis cases did not appear to
be caused by either of these two viruses.

Clearly another virus was at work. At first, investigators
thought it wouldn't be long before it was isolated. How-
ever, it was not until 1990 that researchers succeeded in
isolating the virus responsible for these "non-A, non-B"
cases, a virus that we now call hepatitis C virus (HCV).

HCV was difficult to isolate because it cannot be grown
reliably in a laboratory culture of cells. Making the prob-
lem even more difficult, HCV is a strictly primate virus. It
infects only humans and our close relatives—chimpanzees
and tamarins. Because it is very expensive to maintain
these animals in research laboratories, only small numbers
of animals can be employed in any one study. Thus, the
virus could not be isolated by the traditional means of pu-
rification from extracts of infected cells. What finally suc-
ceeded, after 15 years of failed attempts at isolation, was
molecular technology. HCV was the first virus isolated en-
tirely by cloning the infectious nucleic acid.

The successful experiment was carried out by Michael
Houghton and fellow researchers at Chiron, a California

Electron
micrograph
of hepatitis
C virus.

biotechnology company. What they did was shotgun clone
the DNA of infected cells, and then screen for HCV.

The genetic material of HCV, like that of many other
viruses, is RNA. So the first step was to convert HCV RNA
to DNA, so that it could be cloned. There was no need to
attempt to achieve entire faithful copies, a touchy and diffi-
cult task, because they did not wish to replicate HCV, only
identify it. So the researchers took the far easier route of
copying the virus RNA as a series of segments, each carry-
ing some part of the virus genome.

Next, they inserted these DNA copies of HCV genes
into a bacteriophage, and allowed the bacteriophage to in-
fect Escherichia coli bacteria. In such a "shotgun" experi-
ment, millions of bacterial cells are infected with bacterio-
phages. The researchers grew individual infected cells to
form discrete colonies on plates of solid culture media. The
colonies together constituted a "clone library." The prob-
lem then is to screen the library for colonies that had suc-
cessfully received HCV.

To understand how they did this, focus on the quarry, a
cell infected with an HCV gene. Once inside a bacterial
cell, an HCV gene fragment becomes just so much more
DNA, not particularly different from all the rest. The cel-
lular machinery of the bacteria reads it just like bacterial
genes, manufacturing the virus protein that the inserted
HCV gene encodes. The secret is to look for cells with
HCV proteins.

How to identify an HCV protein from among a back-
ground of thousands of bacterial proteins? Houghton and
his colleagues tested each colony for its ability to cause a
visible immune reaction with serum isolated from HCV-
infected chimpanzees.

The test is a very simple and powerful one, because its
success does not depend on knowing the identity of the
genes you seek. The serum of HCV-infected animals con-
tains antibodies directed against a broad range of HCV
proteins encountered while combating the animal's HCV
infection. The serum can thus be used as a probe for the
presence of HCV proteins in other cells.

Out of a million bacterial clones tested, just one was
found that reacted with the chimp HCV serum, but not
with serum from the same chimp before infection.

647
