How We Classify
Organisms

Concept Outline

32.1 Biologists name organisms in a systematic way.

The Classification of Organisms. Biologists name
organisms using a binomial system.

Species Names. Every kind of organism is assigned a
unique name.

The Taxonomic Hierarchy. ‘The higher groups into
which an organism is placed reveal a great deal about the
organism.

What Is a Species? Species are groups of similar
organisms that tend not to interbreed with individuals of
other groups.

32.2 Scientists construct phylogenies to understand
the evolutionary relationships among organisms.

Evolutionary Classifications. Traditional and cladistic
interpretations of evolution differ in the emphasis they
place on particular traits.

32.3 All living organisms are grouped into one of a few
major categories.

The Kingdoms of Life. Living organisms are grouped
into three great groups called domains, and within domains
into kingdoms.

Domain Archaea (Archaebacteria). The oldest domain
consists of primitive bacteria that often live in extreme
environments.

Domain Bacteria (Eubacteria). ‘Too small to see with
the unaided eye, eubacteria are more numerous than any
other organism.

Domain Eukarya (Eukaryotes). ‘There are four
kingdoms of eukaryotes, three of them entirely or
predominantly multicellular. Two of the most important
characteristics to have evolved among the eukaryotes are
multicellularity and sexuality.

Viruses: A Special Case. Viruses are not organisms, and
thus do not belong to any kingdom.

 

FIGURE 32.1

Biological diversity. All living things are assigned to particular
classifications based on characteristics such as their anatomy,
development, mode of nutrition, level of organization, and
biochemical composition. Coral reefs, like the one seen here, are
home to a variety of living things.

Il organisms share many biological characteristics.

They are composed of one or more cells, carry out
metabolism and transfer energy with ATP, and encode
hereditary information in DNA. All species have evolved
from simpler forms and continue to evolve. Individuals live
in populations. These populations make up communities
and ecosystems, which provide the overall structure of life
on earth. So far, we have stressed these common themes,
considering the general principles that apply to all organ-
isms. Now we will consider the diversity of the biological
world and focus on the differences among groups of organ-
isms (figure 32.1). For the rest of the text, we will examine
the different kinds of life on earth, from bacteria and amoe-
bas to blue whales and sequoia trees.

649
