Species Names

Taxonomy is the science of classify-
ing living things, and a group of or-
ganisms at a particular level in a clas-
sification system is called a taxon
(plural, taxa). By agreement among
taxonomists throughout the world, no
two organisms can have the same
name. So that no one country is fa-
vored, a language spoken by no coun-
try—Latin—is used for the names.
Because the scientific name of an or-
ganism is the same anywhere in the
world, this system provides a standard
and precise way of communicating,
whether the language of a particular
biologist is Chinese, Arabic, Spanish,
or English. This is a great improve-
ment over the use of common names,
which often vary from one place to
the next. As you can see in figure
32.3, corn in Europe refers to the
plant Americans call wheat; a bear is a
large placental omnivore in the
United States but a koala (a vegetar-
ian marsupial) in Australia; and a
robin is a very different bird in Eu-
rope and North America.

Also by agreement, the first word
of the binomial name is the genus to
which the organism belongs. This
word is always capitalized. The sec-
ond word refers to the particular
species and is not capitalized. The two
words together are called the scien-
tific name and are written in italics or
distinctive print: for example, Homo
sapiens. Once a genus has been used in
the body of a text, it is often abbrevi-
ated in later uses. For example, the di-
nosaur Tyrannosaurus rex becomes T.
rex, and the potentially dangerous
bacterium Escherichia coli is known as
E. coli. The system of naming animals,
plants, and other organisms estab-
lished by Linnaeus has served the sci-
ence of biology well for nearly 230
years.

By convention, the first part of a
binomial species name identifies
the genus to which the species
belongs, and the second part
distinguishes that particular
species from other species in the
genus.

 

 

(b)

 

FIGURE 32.3

Common names make poor labels. The common names corn (a), bear (b), and robin (0)
bring clear images to our minds (photos on /ef#), but the images are very different to
someone living in Europe or Australia (photos on right). There, the same common names
are used to label very different species.

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms 651
