The Earliest Cells

What do we know about the earliest life-forms? The fossils
found in ancient rocks show an obvious progression from
simple to complex organisms, beginning about 3.5 billion
years ago. Life may have been present earlier, but rocks of
such great antiquity are rare, and fossils have not yet been
found in them.

Microfossils

The earliest evidence of life appears in microfossils, fos-
silized forms of microscopic life (figure 4.9). Microfossils
were small (1 to 2 micrometers in diameter) and single-
celled, lacked external appendages, and had little evidence of
internal structure. Thus, they physically resemble present-
day bacteria (figure 4.10), although some ancient forms
cannot be matched exactly. We call organisms with this sim-
ple body plan prokaryotes, from the Greek words meaning
“before” and “kernel,” or “nucleus.” The name reflects their
lack of a nucleus, a spherical organelle characteristic of the
more complex cells of eukaryotes.

Judging from the fossil record, eukaryotes did not appear
until about 1.5 billion years ago. Therefore, for at least 2
billion years—nearly a half of the age of the earth—bacteria
were the only organisms that existed.

Ancient Bacteria: Archaebacteria

Most organisms living today are adapted to the relatively
mild conditions of present-day earth. However, if we
look in unusual environments, we encounter organisms
that are quite remarkable, differing in form and metabo-
lism from other living things. Sheltered from evolution-
ary alteration in unchanging habitats that resemble
earth’s early environment, these living relics are the sur-
viving representatives of the first ages of life on earth. In
places such as the oxygen-free depths of the Black Sea or
the boiling waters of hot springs and deep-sea vents, we
can find bacteria living at very high temperatures without
oxygen.

‘These unusual bacteria are called archaebacteria, from
the Greek word for “ancient ones.” Among the first to be
studied in detail have been the methanogens, or
methane-producing bacteria, among the most primitive
bacteria that exist today. These organisms are typically
simple in form and are able to grow only in an oxygen-free
environment; in fact, oxygen poisons them. For this reason
they are said to grow “without air,” or anaerobically
(Greek an, “without” + aer, “air” + bios, “life”). The
methane-producing bacteria convert CO? and H) into
methane gas (CH4). Although primitive, they resemble all
other bacteria in having DNA, a lipid cell membrane, an
exterior cell wall, and a metabolism based on an energy-
carrying molecule called ATP.

68 — PartI_ The Origin of Living Things

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 4.9

Cross-sections of fossil bacteria. These microfossils from the
Bitter Springs formation of Australia are of ancient cyanobacteria,
far too small to be seen with the unaided eye. In this electron
micrograph, the cell walls are clearly evident.

 

FIGURE 4.10

The oldest microfossil. This ancient bacterial fossil, discovered
by J. William Schopf of UCLA in 3.5-billion-year-old rocks in
western Australia, is similar to present-day cyanobacteria, as you
can see by comparing it to figure 4.11.
