  

Evolutionary Classifications

After naming and classifying some 1.5 million organisms,
what have biologists learned? One very important advan-
tage of being able to classify particular species of plants, an-
imals, and other organisms is that individuals of species
that are useful to humans as sources of food and medicine
can be identified. For example, if you cannot tell the fungus
Penicillium from Aspergillus, you have little chance of pro-
ducing the antibiotic penicillin. In a thousand ways, just
having names for organisms is of immense importance in
our modern world.

Taxonomy also enables us to glimpse the evolutionary
history of life on earth. The more similar two taxa are,
the more closely related they are likely to be. By looking
at the differences and similarities between organisms, bi-
ologists can construct an evolutionary tree, or phy-
logeny, inferring which organisms evolved from which
other ones, in what order, and when. The reconstruction
and study of phylogenies is called systematics. Within a
phylogeny, a grouping can be either monophyletic, para-
phyletic, or polyphyletic. A monophyletic group in-
cludes the most recent common ancestor of the group
and all of its descendants. A paraphyletic group includes
the most recent common ancestor of the group but not
all of its descendants. And, a polyphyletic group does
not include the most recent common ancestor of all the
members of the group. Monophyletic groups are com-
monly assigned names, but systematists will not assign a
taxonomic classification to a polyphyletic group. Para-
phyletic groups may be considered taxa by some scien-
tists, although they do not accurately represent the evo-
lutionary relationships among the members of the group

(figure 32.6).

 

Cladistics

A simple and objective way to construct a phylogenetic
tree is to focus on key characters that a group of organ-
isms share because they have inherited them from a com-
mon ancestor. A clade is a group of organisms related by
descent, and this approach to constructing a phylogeny is
called cladistics. Cladistics infers phylogeny (that is,
builds family trees) according to similarities derived from
a common ancestor, so-called derived characters. A de-
rived character that is unique to a particular clade is
sometimes called a synapomorphy. The key to the ap-
proach is being able to identify morphological, physio-
logical, or behavioral traits that differ among the organ-
isms being studied and can be attributed to a common
ancestor. By examining the distribution of these traits
among the organisms, it is possible to construct a clado-

654 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

entists construct phylogenies to understand the evolutionary
onships among organisms.

 

Monophyletic group
oe
+ se Ss &
oe RY x x
& CF SS A eo
@)
Paraphyletic group

 

Polyphyletic group

x & »« Sf
OS XC KS Kg

 

(c)

FIGURE 32.6

(@ Amonophyletic group consists of the most recent common.
ancestor and all of its descendants. All taxonomists accept
monophyletic groups in their classifications and in the above
example would give the name “Apes” to the orangutans, gorillas,
chimpanzees, and humans. () A paraphyletic group consists of the
most recent common ancestor and some of its descendants.
Taxonomists differ in their acceptance of paraphyletic groups. For
example, some taxonomists arbitrarily group orangutans, gorillas,
and chimpanzees into the paraphyletic family Pongidae, separate
from humans. Other taxonomists do not use the family Pongidae
in their classifications because gorillas and chimpanzees are more
closely related to humans than to orangutans. (c) A polyphyletic
group does not contain the most recent common ancestor of the
group, and taxonomists do not assign taxa to polyphyletic groups.
For example, sharks and whales could be classified in the same
group because they have similar shapes, anatomical features, and
habitats. However, their similarities reflect convergent evolution,
not common ancestry.
