What Is a Species?

In the previous section we discussed how species are named
and grouped, but how do biologists decide when one or-
ganism is distinct enough from another to be called its own
species? In chapter 22, we reviewed the nature of species
and saw there are no absolute criteria for the definition of
this category. Looking different, for example, is not a use-
ful criterion: different individuals that belong to the same
species (for example, dogs) may look very unlike one an-
other, as different as a Chihuahua and a St. Bernard. These
very different-appearing individuals are fully capable of hy-
bridizing with one another.

The biological species concept (figure 32.5) essentially
says that two organisms that cannot interbreed and produce
fertile offspring are different species. This definition of a
species can be useful in describing sexually reproducing
species that regularly outcross—interbreed with individu-
als other than themselves. However, in many groups of or-
ganisms, including bacteria, fungi, and many plants and an-
imals, asexual reproduction—reproduction without
sex—predominates. Among them, hybridization cannot be
used as a criterion for species recognition.

Defining Species

Despite such difficulties, biologists generally agree on the
organisms they classify as species based on the similarity of
morphological features and ecology. As a practical defini-
tion, we can say that species are groups of organisms that
remain relatively constant in their characteristics, can be
distinguished from other species, and do not normally in-
terbreed with other species in nature.

Evolutionary Species Concept

This simple definition of species leaves many problems un-
solved. How, for instance, are we to compare living species
with seemingly similar ones now extinct? Much of the dis-
agreement among alternative species concepts relates to
solving this problem. When do we assign fossil specimens a
unique species name, and when do we assign them to
species living today? If we trace the lineage of two sister
species backwards through time, how far must we go before
the two species converge on their common ancestor? It is
often very hard to know where to draw a sharp line be-
tween two closely related species.

To address this problem, biologists have added an evo-
lutionary time dimension to the biological species concept.
A current definition of an evolutionary species is a single
lineage of populations that maintains its distinctive identity from
other such lineages. Unlike the biological species concept, the
evolutionary species concept applies to both asexual and
sexually reproducing forms. Abrupt changes in diagnostic
features mark the boundaries of different species in evolu-
tionary time.

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 32.5

The biological species
concept. Horses (2) and
donkeys (b) are not the
same species, because the
offspring they produce
when they interbreed,
mules (c), are sterile.

(°)

How Many Species Are There?

Scientists have described and named a total of 1.5 million
species, but doubtless many more actually exist. Some
groups of organisms, such as flowering plants, vertebrate
animals, and butterflies, are relatively well known with an
estimated 90% of the total number of species that actually
exist in these groups having already been described. Many
other groups, however, are very poorly known. It is gener-
ally accepted that only about 5% of all species have been
recognized for bacteria, nematodes (roundworms), fungi,
and mites (a group of organisms related to spiders).

By taking representative samples of organisms from dif-
ferent environments, such as the upper branches of tropical
trees or the deep ocean, scientists have estimated the total
numbers of species that may actually exist to be about 10
million, about 15% of them marine organisms.

Most Species Live in the Tropics

Most species, perhaps 6 or 7 million, are tropical. Presently
only 400,000 species have been named in tropical Asia,
Africa, and Latin America combined, well under 10% of all
species that occur in the tropics. This is an incredible gap
in our knowledge concerning biological diversity in a world
that depends on biodiversity for its sustainability.

These estimates apply to the number of eukaryotic or-
ganisms only. There is no functional way of estimating the
numbers of species of prokaryotic organisms, although it is
clear that only a very small fraction of all species have been
discovered and characterized so far.

 

Species are groups of organisms that differ from one
another in recognizable ways and generally do not
interbreed with one another in nature.

 

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms 653
