| 32.1 Biologists name organisms in a systematic way.

The Classification
of Organisms

Organisms were first classified more than
2000 years ago by the Greek philosopher
Aristotle, who categorized living things as
either plants or animals. He classified ani-
mals as either land, water, or air dwellers,
and he divided plants into three kinds based
on stem differences. This simple classifica-
tion system was expanded by the Greeks and
Romans, who grouped animals and plants
into basic units such as cats, horses, and
oaks. Eventually, these units began to be
called genera (singular, genus), the Latin
word for “groups.” Starting in the Middle
Ages, these names began to be systemati-
cally written down, using Latin, the lan-
guage used by scholars at that time. Thus,
cats were assigned to the genus Felis, horses
to Equus, and oaks to Quercus—names that
the Romans had applied to these groups.
For genera that were not known to the Romans, new
names were invented.

The classification system of the Middle Ages, called the
polynomial system, was used virtually unchanged for hun-
dreds of years.

FIGURE 32.2

The Polynomial System

Until the mid-1700s, biologists usually added a series of
descriptive terms to the name of the genus when they
wanted to refer to a particular kind of organism, which
they called a species. These phrases, starting with the
name of the genus, came to be known as polynomials
(poly, “many”; nomial, “name”), strings of Latin words and
phrases consisting of up to 12 or more words. One name
for the European honeybee, for example, was Apis pubes-
cens, thorace subgriseo, abdomine fusco, pedibus posticis glabris
utrinque margine ciliatis. As you can imagine, these poly-
nomial names were cumbersome. Even more worrisome,
the names were altered at will by later authors, so that a
given organism really did not have a single name that was
its alone.

The Binomial System

A much simpler system of naming animals, plants, and
other organisms stems from the work of the Swedish biolo-
gist Carolus Linnacus (1707-1778). Linnacus devoted his
life to a challenge that had defeated many biologists before
him—cataloging all the different kinds of organisms. In the
1750s he produced several major works that, like his earlier

650 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

Quercus rubra
(Red oak)

Quercus phellos
(Willow oak)

‘Two species of oaks. (a) Willow oak, Queraus phellos. (b) Red oak, Quercus rubra.
Although they are both oaks (Quercus), these two species differ sharply in leaf shape
and size and in many other features, including geographical range.

books, employed the polynomial system. But as a kind of
shorthand, Linnaeus also included in these books a two-
part name for each species. For example, the honeybee be-
came Apis mellifera. These two-part names, or binomials
(bi, “two”) have become our standard way of designating
species.

A Closer Look at Linnaeus

To illustrate Linnaeus’s work further, let’s consider how he
treated two species of oaks from North America, which by
1753 had been described by scientists. He grouped all oaks in
the genus Quercus, as had been the practice since Roman
times. Linnaeus named the willow oak of the southeastern
United States (figure 32.2) Quercus foliis lanceolatis inte-
gerrimis glabris (Soak with spear-shaped, smooth leaves with
absolutely no teeth along the margins”). For the common red
oak of eastern temperate North America (figure 32.25), Lin-
naeus devised a new name, Quercus foliis obtuse-sinuatis
setaceo-mucronatis (“oak with leaves with deep blunt lobes
bearing hairlike bristles”). For cach of these species, he also
presented a shorthand designation, the binomial names Quer-
cus phellos and Quercus rubra. These have remained the official
names for these species since 1753, even though Linnaeus did
not intend this when he first used them in his book. He con-
sidered the polynomials the true names of the species.

 

Two-part (“binomial”) Latin names, first utilized by
Linnaeus, are now universally employed by biologists to
name particular organisms.

 
