Class Reptilia
Class

Mammalia
l

|

Mammals Turtles Crocodilians Birds Lizards and

snakes
... Dinosaurs

Early reptiles

Class Aves

a

  

(a) Traditional phylogeny and taxonomic classification

FIGURE 32.8

nde ces

Mammalia

Reptilia
\ f

Archosaurs

CS
5

_ Lizards and
Mammals Turtles Crocodilians Birds Dinosaurs snakes

4

(b) Cladogram and cladistic classification

 

Traditional and cladistic interpretations of vertebrate classification. Traditional and cladistic taxonomic analyses of the same set of
data often produce different results: in these two classifications of vertebrates, notice particularly the placement of the birds. (a) In the
traditional analysis, key characteristics such as feathers and hollow bones are weighted more heavily than others, placing the birds in their
own group and the reptiles in a paraphyletic group. (6) Cladistic analysis gives equal weight to these and many other characters and places
birds in the same grouping with crocodiles, reflecting the close evolutionary relationship between the two. Also, in the traditional
phylogeny, the branch leading to the dinosaurs is shorter because the length corresponds to evolutionary time. In cladograms, branch

lengths do not correspond to evolutionary time.

Traditional Taxonomy

Weighting characters lies at the core of traditional taxon-
omy. In this approach, taxa are assigned based on a vast
amount of information about the morphology and biology
of the organism gathered over a long period of time. Tradi-
tional taxonomists consider both the common descent and
amount of adaptive evolutionary change when grouping or-
ganisms. The large amount of information used by tradi-
tional taxonomists permits a knowledgeable weighting of
characters according to their biological significance. In tra~
ditional taxonomy, the full observational power and judg-
ment of the biologist is brought to bear—and also any bi-
ases he or she may have. For example, in classifying the
terrestrial vertebrates, traditional taxonomists place birds in
their own class (Aves), giving great weight to the characters
that made powered flight possible, such as feathers. How-
ever, cladists (figure 32.8) lumps birds in among the rep-
tiles with crocodiles. This accurately reflects their true an-

656 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

cestry but ignores the immense evolutionary impact of a
derived character such as feathers.

Overall, classifications based on traditional taxonomy
are information-rich, while classifications based on clado-
grams need not be. Traditional taxonomy is often used
when a great deal of information is available to guide char-
acter weighting, while cladistics is a good approach when
little information is available about how the character af-
fects the life of the organism. DNA sequence comparisons,
for example, lend themselves well to cladistics—you have a
great many derived characters (DNA sequence differences)
but little or no idea of what impact the sequence differ-
ences have on the organism.

 

A phylogeny may be represented as a cladogram based
on the order in which groups evolved. Traditional
taxonomists weight characters according to assumed
importance.

 
