The Taxonomic Hierarchy

In the decades following Linnaeus, taxonomists began to
group organisms into larger, more inclusive categories.
Genera with similar properties were grouped into a cluster
called a family, and similar families were placed into the
same order (figure 32.4). Orders with common properties
were placed into the same class, and classes with similar
characteristics into the same phylum (plural, phyla). For
historical reasons, phyla may also be called divisions among
plants, fungi, and algae. Finally, the phyla were assigned to
one of several great groups, the kingdoms. Biologists cur-
rently recognize six kingdoms: two kinds of bacteria (Ar-
chaebacteria and Eubacteria), a largely unicellular group of
eukaryotes (Protista), and three multicellular groups
(Fungi, Plantae, and Animalia). In order to remember the
seven categories of the taxonomic hierarchy in their proper
order, it may prove useful to memorize a phrase such as
“kindly pay cash or furnish good security” (kingdom-phy-
lum-class—order—family—genus-species).

In addition, an eighth level of classification, called do-
mains, is sometimes used. Biologists recognize three do-
mains, which will be discussed later in this chapter. The
scientific names of the taxonomic units higher than the
genus level are capitalized but not printed distinctively,
italicized, or underlined.

 

652 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

The categories at the different levels may include many,
a few, or only one taxon. For example, there is only one liv-
ing genus of the family Hominidae, but several living gen-
era of Fagaceae. To someone familiar with classification or
with access to the appropriate reference books, each taxon
implies both a set of characteristics and a group of organ-
isms belonging to the taxon. For example, a honeybee has
the species (level 1) name Apis mellifera. Its genus name
(level 2) Apis is a member of the family Apidae (level 3). All
members of this family are bees, some solitary, others liv-
ing in hives as A. mellifera does. Knowledge of its order
(level 4), Hymenoptera, tells you that A. mellifera is likely
able to sting and may live in colonies. Its class (level 5) In-
secta indicates that A. mellifera has three major body seg-
ments, with wings and three pairs of legs attached to the
middle segment. Its phylum (level 6), Arthropoda, tells us
that the honeybee has a hard cuticle of chitin and jointed
appendages. Its kingdom (level 7), Animalia, tells us that A.
mellifera is a multicellular heterotroph whose cells lack cell
walls.

 

Species are grouped into genera, genera into families,
families into orders, orders into classes, and classes into
phyla. Phyla are the basic units within kingdoms; such a
system is hierarchical.

 

FIGURE 32.4

The hierarchical system
used in classifying an
organism. The organism is
first recognized as a eukaryote
(domain: Eukarya). Second,
within this domain, it is an
animal (kingdom: Animalia).
Among the different phyla of
animals, it is a vertebrate
(phylum: Chordata,
subphylum: Vertebrata). The
organism’s fur characterizes it
asa mammal (class:
Mammalia). Within this class,
itis distinguished by its
gnawing teeth (order:
Rodentia). Next, because it
has four front toes and five
back toes, it is a squirrel
(family: Sciuridae). Within
this family, it is a tree squirrel
(genus: Sciurus), with gray fur
and white-tipped hairs on the
tail (species: Sciurus
carolinensis, the eastern gray
squirrel).

Eastern gray squirrel
Sciurus carolinensis
