 

 

FIGURE 32.7

 

 

 

ones | Jews Lungs Amniotic Hair —-Notail_—_Bipedal | 4 ctadogram. Morphological data for a group
of seven vertebrates is tabulated. A “1”
Lamprey | 0 0 0 0 0 indicates the presence of a trait, or derived
character, and a “0” indicates the absence of
Shark 1 0 0 0 0 the trait. A tree, or cladogram, diagrams the
proposed evolutionary relationships among
Salamander 1 1 0 0 0 the organisms based on the presence of

    
 
 
 

derived characters. The derived characters
between the cladogram branch points are

 

 
 
 
 

Tiger

Gorilla

 

shared by all organisms above the branch
point and are not present in any below it. The
0 outgroup, in this case the lamprey, does not
possess any of the derived characters.

 

 

 

gram (figure 32.7), a branching diagram that represents
the phylogeny.

In traditional phylogenies, proposed ancestors will
often be indicated at the nodes between branches, and the
lengths of branches correspond to evolutionary time, with
extinct groups having shorter branches. In contrast, clado-
grams are not true family trees in that they do not identify
ancestors, and the branch lengths do not reflect evolution-
ary time (see figure 32.6). Instead, they convey compara-
tive information about relative relationships. Organisms
that are closer together on a cladogram simply share a
more recent common ancestor than those that are farther
apart. Because the analysis is comparative, it is necessary to
have something to anchor the comparison to, some solid
ground against which the comparisons can be made. To
achieve this, each cladogram must contain an outgroup, a
rather different organism (but not too different) to serve as
a baseline for comparisons among the other organisms
being evaluated, the ingroup. For example, in figure 32.7,
the lamprey is the outgroup to the clade of animals that
have jaws.

Cladistics is a relatively new approach in biology and has
become popular among students of evolution. This is be-
cause it does a very good job of portraying the order in
which a series of evolutionary events have occurred. The
great strength of a cladogram is that it can be completely
objective. In fact, most cladistic analyses involve many
characters, and computers are required to make the com-
parisons.

Sometime it is necessary to “weight” characters, or take
into account the variation in the “strength” of a character,
such as the size or location of a fin or the effectiveness of
a lung. To reduce a systematist’s bias even more, many
analyses will be run through the computer with the traits
weighted differently each time. Under this procedure,
several different cladograms will be constructed, the goal
being to choose the one that is the most parsimonious,
or simplest and thus most likely. Reflecting the impor-
tance of evolutionary processes to all fields of biology,
most taxonomy today includes at least some element of
cladistic analysis.

 

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms 655
