 

 

 

 

How the hepatitis C virus was discovered. Michael Houghton and fellow researchers identified the virus responsible for hepatitis C by
making DNA copies of RNA from the cells of infected chimpanzees. They then cloned this DNA, using bacteriophages to carry it into
bacterial cells. Colonies of the bacteria were then tested with serum from infected chimps. Any colony that produced an immune reaction

would have to contain the virus.

Using this clone as a tochold, the researchers were able
to go back and fish out the rest of the virus genome from
infected cells. From the virus genome, it was a straightfor-
ward matter to develop a diagnostic antibody test for the
presence of the HCV virus.

Using the diagnostic test, researchers found hepatitis C
to be far more common than had been supposed. This is a
problem of major proportions, because hepatitis C virus is
unlike hepatitis A or B in a very important respect: it causes
chronic disease. Most viruses cause a brief, intense infec-
tion and then are done. Hepatitis A, for example, typically
lasts a few weeks. Ninety percent of people with hepatitis C
have it for years, many of them for decades.

All during these long years of infection, damage is being
done to the liver. Cells of the immune system called cyto-
toxic T cells recognize hepatitis C virus proteins on the
surface of liver cells, and kill the infected cells. Over the
years, many dead liver cells accumulate, and in response
the cells around them begin to secrete collagen and other
proteins to cover the mess. This eventually produces pro-
tein fibers interlacing the liver, fibers which disrupt the
flow of materials through the liver's many internal pas-
sages. Imagine dropping bricks and rubble on a highway—
it gets more and more difficult for traffic to move as the
rubble accumulates.

If this fibrosis progresses far enough, it results in com-
plete blockage, cirrhosis, a serious condition which may in-
duce fatal liver failure, and which often induces primary
liver cancer. About 20% of patients develop cirrhosis
within 20 years of infection.

Luckily, hepatitis C is a very difficult virus to transmit.
Direct blood contact is the only known path of direct trans-
mission. Sexual transmission does not seem likely, although
the possibility is still being investigated. Married partners
of infected individuals rarely get the virus, and its incidence
among promiscuous gay men is no higher than among the
population at large.

648 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

Why not move vigorously to produce a vaccine directed
against hepatitis C? This turns out to be particularly difficult
for this virus, because antibodies directed against it appear to
be largely ineffective. Those few individuals who do succeed
in clearing the virus from their bodies gain no immunity to
subsequent infection. They produce antibodies directed
against the virus, but the antibodies don't protect them. It ap-
pears that hepatitis C virus evades our antibody defenses by
high mutation rates, just as the AIDS virus does. By the time
antibodies are being produced against one version of the
virus, some of the viruses have already mutated to a different
form that the antibody does not recognize. Like chasing a
burglar who is constantly changing his disguise, the antibod-
ies never learn to recognize the newest version of the virus.

To date, attempts to develop a drug to combat hepatitis
C virus focus on the virus itself. This virus carries just one
gene, a very big one. When it infects liver cells, this gene
is translated into a single immense "polyprotein." Enzymes
then cut the polyprotein into 10 functional pieces. Each
piece plays a key role in building new viruses in infected
liver cells. Some of these proteins form parts of the virus
body, others are enzymes needed to replicate the virus
gene. As you might expect, each of these 10 proteins is
being investigated as a potential target for a drug to fight
the virus, although no success is reported as yet.

Other attempts to fight hepatitis C focus on the part of
our immune system that attacks infected liver cells. Unlike
the ineffective antibody defense, our bodies’ cytotoxic T cells
clearly are able to detect and attack cells carrying hepatitis C
proteins. A vaccine that stimulates these cytotoxic T cells
might eliminate all infected cells at the start of an infection,
stopping the disease in its tracks before it got started. A seri-
ous effort is being made to develop such a vaccine.

It doesn't look like an effective remedy is going to be
available anytime soon. In the meantime, as the death rates
from hepatitis C exceed those for AIDS in the next few
years, we can hope research will further intensify.

 
