Chapter 52

Summary

32.1 Biologists name organisms in a systematic way.

=)
Vj
www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

* Biologists give every species a two-part (binomial)
name that consists of the name of its genus plus a
distinctive specific epithet.

* In the hierarchical system of classification used in
biology, genera are grouped into families, families
into orders, orders into classes, classes into phyla, and
phyla into kingdoms.

* There are perhaps 10 million species of plants,
animals, fungi, and eukaryotic microorganisms, but
only about 1. 5 million of them have been assigned
names. About 15% of the total number of species are
marine; the remainder are mostly terrestrial.

1, What was the polynomial
system? Why didn’t this system
become the standard for naming
particular species?

2. From the most specific to the
most general, what are the
names of the groups in the
hierarchical taxonomic system?
Which two are given special
consideration in the way in
which they are printed? What
are these distinctions?

 

* Hierarchies

* Book Review:
Ship Fever by Barrett

32.2 Scientists construct phylogenies to understand the evolutionary relationships among organisms.

 

¢ Taxonomists may use different approaches to classify
organisms.

* Cladistic systems of classification arrange organisms
according to evolutionary relatedness based on the
presence of shared, derived traits.

* Traditional taxonomy classifies organisms based on
large amounts of information, giving due weight to
the evolutionary significance of certain characters.

3. What types of features are
emphasized in a cladistic
classification system? What is
the resulting relationship of
organisms that are classified in
this manner?

4. What does it mean when
characters are weighted?

32.3 All living organisms are grouped into one of a few major categories.

 

 

 

¢ A fundamental division among organisms is between
prokaryotes, which lack a true nucleus, and
eukaryotes, which have a true nucleus and several
membrane-bound organelles.

¢ Prokaryotes, or bacteria, are assigned to two quite
different kingdoms, Archaebacteria and Eubacteria.

© The eukaryotic kingdoms are more closely related
than are the two kingdoms of prokaryotes. Many
distinctive evolutionary lines of unicellular eukaryotes
exist, most are in the Protista kingdom.

¢ Three of the major evolutionary lines of eukaryotic
organisms that consist principally or entirely of
multicellular organisms are recognized as separate
kingdoms: Plantae, Animalia, and Fungi.

¢ True multicellularity and sexuality are found only
among eukaryotes. Multicellularity confers the
advantages of functional specialization. Sexuality
permits genetic variation among descendants.

¢ Viruses are not organisms and are not included in the
classification of organisms. They are self-replicating
portions of the genomes of organisms.

664 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

5. Is there a greater fundamental
difference between plants and
animals or between prokaryotes
and eukaryotes? Explain.

6. From which of the four
eukaryotic kingdoms have the
other three evolved?

7. What is the apparent origin of
the organelles found in almost
all eukaryotes?

8. What defines if a collection of
cells is truly multicellular? Did
multicellularity arise once or
many times in the evolutionary
process? What advantages do
multicellular organisms have

over unicellular ones?

9, What are the three major
types of life cycles in eukaryotes?
Describe the major events of
each.

 

* Art Activity:
Organism
Classification

* Kingdoms
* Three Domains
* Phylogeny

* Book Review:
Thowim Way Leg
by Flannery
