Viruses: A Special Case

Viruses pose a challenge to biologists as they do not possess
the fundamental characteristics of living organisms. Viruses
appear to be fragments of nucleic acids originally derived
from the genome of a living cell. Unlike all living organ-
isms, viruses are acellular—that is, they are not cells and do
not consist of cells. They do not have a metabolism; in
other words, viruses do not carry out photosynthesis, cellu-
lar respiration, or fermentation. The one characteristic of
life that they do display is reproduction, which they do by
hijacking the metabolism of living cells.

Viruses thus present a special classification problem. Be-
cause they are not organisms, we cannot logically place
them in any of the kingdoms. Viruses are really just com-
plicated associations of molecules, bits of nucleic acids usu-
ally surrounded by a protein coat. But, despite their sim-
plicity, viruses are able to invade cells and direct the genetic
machinery of these cells to manufacture more of the mole-
cules that make up the virus (figure 32.15). Viruses can in-
fect organisms at all taxonomic levels.

 

Viruses are not organisms and are not classified in the
kingdoms of life.

 

FIGURE 32.15

Viruses are cell parasites. In this micrograph, several T4
bacteriophages (viruses) are attacking an Escherichia coli bacterium.
Some of the viruses have already entered the cell and are
reproducing within it.

 

Table 32.2 Characteristics of the Six Kingdoms

 

Means of Genetic

Recombination, Mode of Nervous
if Present Nutrition Motility Multicellularity System
Conjugation, transduction, _ Autotrophic (chemo- Bacterial flagella, gliding Absent None

transformation

Fertilization and meiosis

Fertilization and meiosis

Fertilization and meiosis

Fertilization and meiosis

synthetic, photosyn-
thetic) or heterotrophic

Photosynthetic or het-
erotrophic, or combina-
tion of both

Absorption

Photosynthetic
chlorophylls a and b

Digestion

or nonmotile

9 +2 cilia and flagella;
amoeboid, contractile fibrils

Nonmotile

None in most forms,

9 +2 cilia and flagella in
gametes of some forms
9 +2 cilia and flagella,
contractile fibrils

Absent in most forms

Present in most forms

Present in all forms

Present in all forms

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms

Primitive mechanisms
for conducting stimuli
in some forms

None

None

Present, often complex

663
