Domain Archaea (Archaebacteria)

The term archaebacteria (Greek, archaio, ancient) refers to
the ancient origin of this group of bacteria, which seem to
have diverged very early from the eubacteria (figure
32.10). This conclusion comes largely from comparisons
of genes that encode ribosomal RNAs. The last several
years have seen an explosion of DNA sequence informa-
tion from microorganisms, information which paints a
more complex picture. It had been thought that by se-
quencing numerous microbes we could eventually come up
with an accurate picture of the phylogeny of the earliest
organisms on earth. The new whole-genome DNA se-
quence data described in chapter 19 tells us that it will not
be that simple. Comparing whole-genome sequences leads
evolutionary biologists to a variety of trees, some of which
contradict each other. It appears that during their early
evolution microorganisms have swapped genetic informa-
tion, making constructing phylogenetic trees very difficult.

As an example of the problem, we can look at Thermo-
toga, a thermophile found on Volcano Island off Italy. The
sequence of one of its RNAs places it squarely within the
eubacteria near an ancient microbe called Aquifer. Recent
DNA sequencing, however, fails to support any consistent
relationship between the two microbes. There is disagree-
ment as to the serious effect of gene swapping on the abil-
ity of evolutionary biologists to provide accurate phyloge-
nies from molecular data. For now, we will provisionally
accept the tree presented in figure 32.10. Over the next few
years we can expect to see considerable change in accepted
viewpoints as more and more data is brought to bear.

Today, archaebacteria inhabit some of the most extreme
environments on earth. Though a diverse group, all archae-
bacteria share certain key characteristics (table 32.1). Their
cell walls lack peptidoglycan (an important component of
the cell walls of eubacteria), the lipids in the cell mem-
branes of archaebacteria have a different structure than
those in all other organisms, and archaebacteria have dis-
tinctive ribosomal RNA sequences. Some of their genes
possess introns, unlike those of other bacteria.

The archaebacteria are grouped into three general cate-
gories, methanogens, extremophiles, and nonextreme ar-
chaebacteria, based primarily on the environments in which
they live or their specialized metabolic pathways.

Methanogens obtain their energy by using hydrogen
gas (Hp) to reduce carbon dioxide (CO) to methane gas
(CHg). They are strict anaerobes, poisoned by even traces
of oxygen. They live in swamps, marshes, and the intestines
of mammals. Methanogens release about 2 billion tons of
methane gas into the atmosphere each year.

Extremophiles are able to grow under conditions that
seem extreme to us.

Thermopbiles (“heat lovers”) live in very hot places, typi-
cally from 60° to 80°C. Many thermophiles are au-
totrophs and have metabolisms based on sulfur. Some

658 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

Pee
arene)
(Eukaryotes)

LPT

Nota
Mera Cos-tel 1E))

 

Common ancestor

FIGURE 32.10

An evolutionary relationship among the three domains.
Eubacteria are thought to have diverged early from the
evolutionary line that gave rise to the archaebacteria and
eukaryotes.

thermophilic archaebacteria form the basis of food webs
around deep-sea thermal vents where they must with-
stand extreme temperatures and pressures. Other types,
like Su/folobus, inhabit the hot sulfur springs of Yellow-
stone National Park at 70° to 75°C. The recently de-
scribed Pyrolobus fumarii holds the current record for
heat stability, with a 106°C temperature optimum and
113°C maximum—it is so heat tolerant that it is not
killed by a one-hour treatment in an autoclave (121°C)!
Halopbiles (“salt lovers”) live in very salty places like the
Great Salt Lake in Utah, Mono Lake in California, and
the Dead Sea in Israel. Whereas the salinity of seawater
is around 3%, these bacteria thrive in, and indeed re-
quire, water with a salinity of 15 to 20%.

pH-tolerant archacbacteria grow in highly acidic (pH =
0.7) and very basic (pH = 11) environments.
Pressure-tolerant archaebacteria have been isolated from

ocean depths that require at least 300 atmospheres of
pressure to survive, and tolerate up to 800 atmospheres!

 

Nonextreme archaebacteria grow in the same envi-
ronments eubacteria do. As the genomes of archaebacteria
have become better known, microbiologists have been able
to identify signature sequences of DNA present in all ar-
chaebacteria and in no other organisms. When samples
from soil or seawater are tested for genes matching these
signal sequences, many of the bacteria living there prove to
be archaebacteria. Clearly, archaebacteria are not restricted
to extreme habitats, as microbiologists used to think.

 

Archaebacteria are poorly understood bacteria that
inhabit diverse environments, some of them extreme.

 
