 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

     
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 
  

 

Key: [_] Haploid Diploid
1 1 1
Haploid Rea Gametes Meiosis Spores. [ Meiosis
calls @ @
@. Reproductive Spore-forming
cell cell
OQ
ae @ |
individuals eyo foiptia (eee ae
So ©}, inelvicual so (diploid)
Gametes [,Syngamy Gametes. | Syngamy Gamer? [, Syngam

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) Zygotic meiosis

FIGURE 32.14

(b) Gametic meiosis

(0) Sporic meiosis

Diagrams of the three major kinds of life cycles in eukaryotes. (a) Zygotic meiosis, (J) gametic meiosis, and (2) sporic meiosis.

Eukaryotic Life Cycles

Eukaryotes are characterized by three major types of life

gametes that fuse to form the zygote. The zygote is

the first cell of the multicellular diploid phase. This

 

cycles (figure 32.14):

1. In the simplest cycle, found in algae, the zygote is the
only diploid cell. Such a life cycle is said to be charac-
terized by zygotic meiosis, because the zygote im-
mediately undergoes meiosis.

2. In most animals, the gametes are the only haploid
cells. Animals exhibit gametic meiosis, meiosis pro-
ducing gametes which fuse, giving rise to a zygote.

3. Plants show a regular alternation of generations be-
tween a multicellular haploid phase and a multicel-
lular diploid phase. The diploid phase undergoes
meiosis producing haploid spores that give rise to
the haploid phase, and the haploid phase produces

kind of life cycle is characterized by alternation of
generations and has sporic meiosis.

The characteristics of the six kingdoms are outlined in

table 32.2.

 

Eukaryotic cells acquired mitochondria and chloroplasts
by endosymbiosis, mitochondria being derived from
purple bacteria and chloroplasts from cyanobacteria.
‘The complex differentiation that we associate with
advanced life-forms depends on multicellularity and
sexuality, which must have been highly advantageous to
have evolved independently so often.

 

Table 32.2 Characteristics of the Six Kingdoms

 

Nuclear
Kingdom Cell Type Envelope Mitochondria Chloroplasts Cell Wall
Archaebacteria Prokaryotic Absent Absent None (photosynthetic Noncellulose (polysaccharide
and Eubacteria membranes in some types) plus amino acids)
Protista Eukaryotic Present Present or absent Present (some forms) Present in some forms,
various types
Fungi Eukaryotic Present Present or absent Absent Chitin and other noncellulose
polysaccharides
Plantae Eukaryotic Present Present Present Cellulose and other
polysaccharides
Animalia Eukaryotic Present Present Absent Absent
662 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
