Viruses

 

Concept Outline

33.1 Viruses are strands of nucleic acid encased within
a protein coat.

The Discovery of Viruses. The first virus to be isolated
proved to consist of two chemicals, one a protein and the
other a nucleic acid.

‘The Nature of Viruses. Viruses occur in all organisms.
Able to reproduce only within living cells, viruses are not
themselves alive.

33.2 Bacterial viruses exhibit two sorts of reproductive
cycles.

Bacteriophages. Some bacterial viruses, called
bacteriophages, rupture the cells they infect, while others
integrate themselves into the bacterial chromosome to
become a stable part of the bacterial genome.

Cell Transformation and Phage Conversion.
Integrated bacteriophages sometimes modify the host
bacterium they infect.

33.3 HIV is a complex animal virus.

AIDS. The animal virus HIV infects certain key cells of
the immune system, destroying the ability of the body to
defend itself from cancer and disease. The HIV infection
cycle is typically a lytic cycle, in which the HIV RNA first
directs the production of a corresponding DNA, and this
DNA then directs the production of progeny virus
particles.

The Future of HIV Treatment. Combination therapies
and chemokines offer promising avenues of AIDS therapy.

33.4 Nonliving infectious agents are responsible for
many human diseases.

Disease Viruses. Some of the most serious viral diseases
have only recently infected human populations, the result
of transfer from other hosts.

Prions and Viroids. In some instances, proteins and
“naked” RNA molecules can also transmit diseases.

 

 

FIGURE 33.1

Influenza viruses. A virus has been referred to as “a piece of bad
news wrapped up in a protein.” How can something as “simple” as
a virus have such a profound effect on living organisms? (30,000)

W: start our exploration of the diversity of life with
iruses. Viruses are genetic elements enclosed in
protein and are not considered to be organisms, as they
cannot reproduce independently. Because of their disease-
producing potential, viruses are important biological enti-
ties. The virus particles you see in figure 33.1 produce the
important disease influenza. Other viruses cause AIDS,
polio, flu, and some can lead to cancer. Many scientists
have attempted to unravel the nature of viral genes and
how they work. For more than four decades, viral studies
have been thoroughly intertwined with those of genetics
and molecular biology. In the future, it is expected that
viruses will be one of the principal tools used to experimen-
tally carry genes from one organism to another. Already,
viruses are being employed in the treatment of human ge-
netic diseases.

665
