 

The Discovery of Viruses

The border between the living and the nonliving is very
clear to a biologist. Living organisms are cellular and able
to grow and reproduce independently, guided by informa-
tion encoded within DNA. The simplest creatures living on
earth today that satisfy these criteria are bacteria. Even
simpler than bacteria are viruses. As you will learn in this
section, viruses are so simple that they do not satisfy the
criteria for “living.”

Viruses possess only a portion of the properties of or-
ganisms. Viruses are literally “parasitic” chemicals, seg-
ments of DNA or RNA wrapped in a protein coat. They
cannot reproduce on their own, and for this reason they are
not considered alive by biologists. They can, however, re-
produce within cells, often with disastrous results to the
host organism. Earlier theories that viruses represent a kind
of halfway point between life and nonlife have largely been
abandoned. Instead, viruses are now viewed as detached
fragments of the genomes of organisms due to the high de-
gree of similarity found among some viral and eukaryotic
genes.

Viruses vary greatly in appearance and size. The smallest
are only about 17 nanometers in diameter, and the largest
are up to 1000 nanometers (1 micrometer) in their greatest
dimension (figure 33.2). The largest viruses are barely visi-
ble with a light microscope, but viral morphology is best
revealed using the electron microscope. Viruses are so
small that they are comparable to molecules in size; a hy-
drogen atom is about 0.1 nanometer in diameter, and a
large protein molecule is several hundred nanometers in its
greatest dimension.

Biologists first began to suspect the existence of
viruses near the end of the nineteenth century. European
scientists attempting to isolate the infectious agent re-
sponsible for hoof-and-mouth disease in cattle concluded
that it was smaller than a bacterium. Investigating the
agent further, the scientists found that it could not multi-
ply in solution—it could only reproduce itself within liv-
ing host cells that it infected. The infecting agents were
called viruses.

The true nature of viruses was discovered in 1933,
when the biologist Wendell Stanley prepared an extract of
a plant virus called tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) and at-
tempted to purify it. To his great surprise, the purified
TMV preparation precipitated (that is, separated from so-
lution) in the form of crystals. This was surprising because
precipitation is something that only chemicals do—the
TMV virus was acting like a chemical off the shelf rather
than an organism. Stanley concluded that TMV is best re-
garded as just that—chemical matter rather than a living
organism.

Within a few years, scientists disassembled the TMV
virus and found that Stanley was right. TMV was not cellu-

666 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

are strands of nucleic acid encased within a protein coat.

    

riley

 

Influenza
wirus T4 bacteriophage
Vaccinia virus
(cowpox)
HIV-1
Herpes simplex (als)

virus

 

Tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV)

a - gS

Rhinovirus Adenovirus Poliovirus
(common (respiratory (polio)
cold) virus)
KK F
jéonm Ebola virus
FIGURE 33.2

Viral diversity. A sample of the extensive diversity and small size
viruses is depicted. At the scale these viruses are shown, a human
hair would be nearly 8 meters thick.

lar but rather chemical. Each particle of TMV virus is in
fact a mixture of two chemicals: RNA and protein. The
‘TMV virus has the structure of a Twinkie, a tube made of
an RNA core surrounded by a coat of protein. Later work-
ers were able to separate the RNA from the protein and
purify and store each chemical. Then, when they reassem-
bled the two components, the reconstructed TMV particles
were fully able to infect healthy tobacco plants and so
clearly were the virus itself, not merely chemicals derived
from it. Further experiments carried out on other viruses
yielded similar results.

 

Viruses are chemical assemblies that can infect cells and
replicate within them. They are not alive.

 
