indicates clearly that mitochondria are
the descendants of purple bacteria that
were incorporated into eukaryotic cells
early in the history of the group. Chloro-
plasts are derived from cyanobacteria
that became symbiotic in several groups
of protists early in their history.

Some biologists suggest that basal
bodies, centrioles, flagella, and cilia
may have arisen from endosymbiotic
spirochaete-like bacteria. Even today,
so many bacteria and unicellular pro-
tists form symbiotic alliances that the
incorporation of smaller organisms with
desirable features into eukaryotic cells
appears to be a relatively common
process.

Key Characteristics
of Eukaryotes

Multicellularity. The unicellular

body plan has been tremendously suc-

cessful, with unicellular prokaryotes

and cukaryotes constituting about half of the biomass on
earth. Yet a single cell has limits. The evolution of multi-
cellularity allowed organisms to deal with their environ-
ments in novel ways. Distinct types of cells, tissues, and
organs can be differentiated within the complex bodies of
multicellular organisms. With such a functional division
within its body, a multicellular organism can do many
things, like protect itself, resist drought efficiently, regu-
late its internal conditions, move about, seck mates and
prey, and carry out other activities on a scale and with a
complexity that would be impossible for its unicellular
ancestors. With all these advantages, it is not surprising
that multicellularity has arisen independently so many
times.

True multicellularity, in which the activities of individ-
ual cells are coordinated and the cells themselves are in
contact, occurs only in eukaryotes and is one of their
major characteristics. The cell walls of bacteria occasion-
ally adhere to one another, and bacterial cells may also be
held together within a common sheath. Some bacteria
form filaments, sheets, or three-dimensional aggregates
(figure 32.13), but the individual cells remain independent
of each other, reproducing and carrying on their meta-
bolic functions and without coordinating with the other
cells. Such bacteria are considered colonial, but none are
truly multicellular. Many protists also form similar colo-
nial aggregates of many cells with little differentiation or
integration.

Other protists—the red, brown, and green algae, for ex-
ample—have independently attained multicellularity. Cer-

 

 

FIGURE 32.13

Colonial bacteria. No bacteria are
truly multicellular. These gliding
bacteria, Stigmatella aurantiaca, have
aggregated into a structure called a
fruiting body; within, some cells
transform into spores.

tain forms of multicellular green algae
were ancestors of the plants (see chapters
35 and 37), and, like the other photosyn-
thetic protists, are considered plants in
some classification schemes. In the sys-
tem adopted here, the plant kingdom in-
cludes only multicellular land plants, a
group that arose from a single ancestor
in terrestrial habitats and that has a
unique set of characteristics. Aquatic
plants are recent derivatives.

Fungi and animals arose from unicel-
lular protist ancestors with different
characteristics. As we will see in subse-

quent chapters, the groups that seem to
have given rise to each of these king-
doms are still in existence.

Sexuality. Another major characteris-
tic of eukaryotic organisms as a group is
sexuality. Although some interchange of
genetic material occurs in bacteria (see
chapter 34), it is certainly not a regular,
predictable mechanism in the same
sense that sex is in eukaryotes. The sex-
ual cycle characteristic of eukaryotes alternates between
syngamy, the union of male and female gametes producing
a cell with two sets of chromosomes, and meiosis, cell divi-
sion producing daughter cells with one set of chromo-
somes. This cycle differs sharply from any exchange of ge-
netic material found in bacteria.

Except for gametes, the cells of most animals and plants
are diploid, containing two sets of chromosomes, during
some part of their life cycle. A few eukaryotes complete
their life cycle in the haploid condition, with only one set
of chromosomes in each cell. As we have seen, in diploid
cells, one set of chromosomes comes from the male parent
and one from the female parent. These chromosomes seg-
regate during meiosis. Because crossing over frequently oc-
curs during meiosis (see chapter 12), no two products of a
single meiotic event are ever identical. As a result, the off-
spring of sexual, eukaryotic organisms vary widely, thus
providing the raw material for evolution.

Sexual reproduction, with its regular alternation be-
tween syngamy and meiosis, produces genetic variation.
Sexual organisms can adapt to the demands of their envi-
ronments because they produce a variety of progeny.

In many of the unicellular phyla of protists, sexual re-
production occurs only occasionally. Meiosis may have
originally evolved as a means of repairing damage to DNA,
producing an organism better adapted to survive changing
environmental conditions. The first eukaryotes were prob-
ably haploid. Diploids seem to have arisen on a number of
separate occasions by the fusion of haploid cells, which
then eventually divided by meiosis.

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms 661
