Domain Eukarya (Eukaryotes)

For at least 2 billion years, bacteria ruled the earth. No
other organisms existed to eat them or compete with
them, and their tiny cells formed the world’s oldest fossils.
The third great domain of life, the eukaryotes, appear in
the fossil record much later, only about 1.5 billion years
ago. Metabolically, eukaryotes are more uniform than
bacteria. Each of the two domains of prokaryotic organ-
isms has far more metabolic diversity than all eukaryotic
organisms taken together. However, despite the metabolic
similarity of eukaryotic cells, their structure and function
allowed larger cell sizes and, eventually, multicellular life
to evolve.

Four Kingdoms of Eukaryotes

The first eukaryotes were unicellular organisms. A wide
variety of unicellular eukaryotes exist today, grouped to-
gether in the kingdom Protista on the basis that they do
not fit into any of the other three kingdoms of eukaryotes.
Protists are a fascinating group containing many organ-
isms of intense interest and great biological significance.
They vary from the relatively simple, single-celled
amoeba to multicellular organisms like kelp that can be 20
meters long.

Fungi, plants, and animals are largely multicellular king-
doms, each a distinct evolutionary line from a single-celled
ancestor that would be classified in the kingdom Protista.

Thermophiles

Because of the size and ecological dominance of plants, ani-
mals, and fungi, and because they are predominantly multi-
cellular, we recognize them as kingdoms distinct from Pro-
tista, even though the amount of diversity among the
protists is much greater than that within or between the
fungi, plants, and animals.

Symbiosis and the Origin of Eukaryotes

The hallmark of eukaryotes is complex cellular organiza-
tion, highlighted by an extensive endomembrane system
that subdivides the eukaryotic cell into functional compart-
ments. Not all of these compartments, however, are de-
rived from the endomembrane system. With few excep-
tions, all modern eukaryotic cells possess energy-producing
organelles, the mitochondria, and some eukaryotic cells
possess chloroplasts, which are energy-harvesting or-
ganelles. Mitochondria and chloroplasts are both believed
to have entered early eukaryotic cells by a process called
endosymbiosis (endo, inside). We discussed the theory of
the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria and chloroplasts
in chapter 5; also see figure 32.12. Both organelles contain
their own ribosomes, which are more similar to bacterial ri-
bosomes than to eukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosomes. They
manufacture their own inner membranes. They divide in-
dependently of the cell and contain chromosomes similar
to those in bacteria. Mitochondria are about the size of
bacteria and contain DNA. Comparison of the nucleotide
sequence of this DNA with that of a variety of organisms

 

 

 

ENC

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Halophiles
Methanogens
Nonphotosynthetic protists
Ancestral
eukaryotic
Oricinal cell
riginal Brown algae
call cigee
Red algae
ee
Photosynthetic
protste ocean
Mitochondria
Purple bacteria Chloroplasts
Photosynthetic bacteria
Other bacteria
FIGURE 32.12

Diagram of the evolutionary relationships among the six kingdoms of organisms. The colored lines indicate symbiotic events.

660 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
