Unusual Cell Structures

When the details of cell wall and membrane structure of
the methane-producing bacteria were examined, they
proved to be different from those of all other bacteria. Ar-
chaebacteria are characterized by a conspicuous lack of a
protein cross-linked carbohydrate material called peptido-
glycan in their cell walls, a key compound in the cell walls
of most modern bacteria. Archaebacteria also have unusual
lipids in their cell membranes that are not found in any
other group of organisms. There are also major differences
in some of the fundamental biochemical processes of me-
tabolism, different from those of all other bacteria. The
methane-producing bacteria are survivors from an earlier
time when oxygen gas was absent.

Earth’s First Organisms?

Other archaebacteria that fall into this classification are
some of those that live in very salty environments like the
Dead Sea (extreme halophiles—‘“salt lovers”) or very hot
environments like hydrothermal volcanic vents under the
ocean (extreme thermophiles—heat lovers”). Ther-
mophiles have been found living comfortably in boiling
water. Indeed, many kinds of thermophilic archaebacteria
thrive at temperatures of 110°C (230°F). Because these
thermophiles live at high temperatures similar to those that
may have existed when life first evolved, microbiologists
speculate that thermophilic archacbacteria may be relics of
earth’s first organisms.

Just how different are extreme thermophiles from other
organisms? A methane-producing archaebacteria called
Methanococcus isolated from deep-sea vents provides a star-
tling picture. These bacteria thrive at temperatures of 88°C
(185°F) and crushing pressures 245 times greater than at
sea level. In 1996 molecular biologists announced that they
had succeeded in determining the full nucleotide sequence
of Methanococcus. This was possible because archaebacterial
DNA is relatively small—it has only 1700 genes, coded in a
DNA molecule only 1,739,933 nucleotides long (a human
cell has 2000 times more!). The thermophile nucleotide se-
quence proved to be astonishingly different from the DNA
sequence of any other organism ever studied; fully two-
thirds of its genes are unlike any ever known to science be-
fore! Clearly these archaebacteria separated from other life
on earth a long time ago. Preliminary comparisons to the
gene sequences of other bacteria suggest that archaebacte-
ria split from other types of bacteria over 3 billion years
ago, soon after life began.

Eubacteria

The second major group of bacteria, the eubacteria, have
very strong cell walls and a simpler gene architecture. Most
bacteria living today are eubacteria. Included in this group
are bacteria that have evolved the ability to capture the en-
ergy of light and transform it into the energy of chemical

 

FIGURE 4.11

Living cyanobacteria. Although not multicellular, these bacteria
often aggregate into chains such as those seen here.

bonds within cells. These organisms are photosynthetic, as
are plants and algae.

One type of photosynthetic eubacteria that has been im-
portant in the history of life on earth is the cyanobacteria,
sometimes called “blue-green algae” (figure 4.11). They
have the same kind of chlorophyll pigment that is most
abundant in plants and algae, as well as other pigments
that are blue or red. Cyanobacteria produce oxygen as a
result of their photosynthetic activities, and when they
appeared at least 3 billion years ago, they played a decisive
role in increasing the concentration of free oxygen in the
earth’s atmosphere from below 1% to the current level of
21%. As the concentration of oxygen increased, so did the
amount of ozone in the upper layers of the atmosphere.
The thickening ozone layer afforded protection from
most of the ultraviolet radiation from the sun, radiation
that is highly destructive to proteins and nucleic acids.
Certain cyanobacteria are also responsible for the accu-
mulation of massive limestone deposits.

 

All bacteria now living are members of either
Archaebacteria or Eubacteria.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 69
