The Kingdoms of Life

The earliest classification systems recognized only two
kingdoms of living things: animals and plants (figure
32.92). But as biologists discovered microorganisms and
learned more about other organisms, they added kingdoms
in recognition of fundamental differences discovered
among organisms (figure 32.9). Most biologists now use a
six-kingdom system first proposed by Carl Woese of the
University of Illinois (figure 32.90).

In this system, four kingdoms consist of eukaryotic or-
ganisms. The two most familiar kingdoms, Animalia and
Plantae, contain only organisms that are multicellular dur-
ing most of their life cycle. The kingdom Fungi contains
multicellular forms and single-celled yeasts, which are
thought to have multicellular ancestors. Fundamental dif-
ferences divide these three kingdoms. Plants are mainly sta-
tionary, but some have motile sperm; fungi have no motile
cells; animals are mainly motile. Animals ingest their food,
plants manufacture it, and fungi digest it by means of se-
creted extracellular enzymes. Each of these kingdoms prob-
ably evolved from a different single-celled ancestor.

The large number of unicellular eukaryotes are arbitrar-
ily grouped into a single kingdom called Protista (see
chapter 35). This kingdom includes the algae, all of which
are unicellular during parts of their life cycle.

 

(a) A two-kingdom system—Linnaeus

anisms are grouped into one of a few major categories.

The remaining two kingdoms, Archaebacteria and Eu-
bacteria, consist of prokaryotic organisms, which are vastly
different from all other living things (see chapter 34). Ar-
chaebacteria are a diverse group including the
methanogens and extreme thermophiles, and differ from
the other bacteria, members of the kingdom Eubacteria.

Domains

As biologists have learned more about the archaebacteria, it
has become increasingly clear that this ancient group is
very different from all other organisms. When the full ge-
nomic DNA sequences of an archaebacterium and a eubac-
terium were first compared in 1996, the differences proved
striking. Archaebacteria are as different from eubacteria as
eubacteria are from eukaryotes. Recognizing this, biologists
are increasingly adopting a classification of living organ-
isms that recognizes three domains, a taxonomic level
higher than kingdom (figure 32.94). Archaebacteria are in
one domain, eubacteria in a second, and eukaryotes in the

third.

 

Living organisms are grouped into three general
categories called domains. One of the domains, the
eukaryotes, is subdivided into four kingdoms: protists,
fungi, plants, and animals.

 

(b) A five-kingdom system—Whittaker

(0) Asix-kingdom system—Woese

(d) Athree-domain system—Woese

 

 

 

Eukarya

 

 

FIGURE 32.9

Different approaches to classifying living organisms. (2) Linnaeus popularized a two-kingdom approach, in which the fungi and the
photosynthetic protists were classified as plants, and the nonphotosynthetic protists as animals; when bacteria were described, they too
were considered plants. (b) Whittaker in 1969 proposed a five-kingdom system that soon became widely accepted. (c) Woese has
championed splitting the bacteria into two kingdoms for a total of six kingdoms, or even assigning them separate domains (d).

Chapter 32 How We Classify Organisms 657
