| 44 The first eukaryotic cells were larger and more complex than bacteria.

All fossils more than 1.5 billion years old are generally sim-
ilar to one another structurally. They are small, simple
cells; most measure 0.5 to 2 micrometers in diameter, and
none are more than about 6 micrometers in diameter.
These simple cells eventually evolved into larger, more
complex forms—the first eukaryotic cells.

The First Eukaryotic Cells

In rocks about 1.5 billion years old, we begin to see the first
microfossils that are noticeably different in appearance
from the earlier, simpler forms (figure 4.12). These cells
are much larger than bacteria and have internal membranes
and thicker walls. Cells more than 10 micrometers in diam-
eter rapidly increased in abundance. Some fossilized cells
14 billion years old are as much as 60 micrometers in di-
ameter; others, 1.5 billion years old, contain what appear to
be small, membrane-bound structures. Indirect chemical
traces hint that eukaryotes may go as far back as 2.7 billion
years, although no fossils as yet support such an early ap-
pearance of eukaryotes.

These early fossils mark a major event in the evolution
of life: a new kind of organism had appeared (figure 4.13).
These new cells are called eukaryotes, from the Greek
words for “true” and “nucleus,” because they possess an in-
ternal structure called a nucleus. All organisms other than
the bacteria are eukaryotes.

 

US
100 jum

FIGURE 4.12
Microfossil of a primitive eukaryote. This multicellular alga is
between 900 million and 1 billion years old.

Origin of the Nucleus and ER

Many bacteria have infoldings of their outer membranes
extending into the cytoplasm and serving as passageways
to the surface. The network of internal membranes in

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

°
z/9 Millions
&|S Geological evidence of years Life forms
2|2 a
o\s
ao 570
Gest mulcear fossil 600 Appearance of first multicellular organisms
9
8 Appearance of first eukaryotes
& | Oldest compartmentalized fossil cells t~ 1500 7 . _
z 5 Appearance of aerobic (oxygen-using) respiration
cle] , Appearance of oxygen-forming photosynthesis
g Disappearance of iron from oceans and [- 2500 (cyanobacteria)
5 formation of iron oxides
= a Appearance of chemoautotrophs (sulfate respiration)
a | 3800 ~) Appearance of life (prokaryotes): anaerobic
(methane-producing) bacteria and anaerobic (hydrogen
sulfide—forming) photosynthesis
Oldest dated rocks '— 4500 | Formation of the earth
FIGURE 4.13

The geological timescale. The periods refer to different stages in the evolution of life on earth. The timescale is calibrated by examining
rocks containing particular kinds of fossils; the fossils are dated by determining the degree of spontaneous decay of radioactive isotopes

locked within rock when it was formed.

70 Part The Origin of Living Things
