 

@) Combination Therapy

Replication HIV

5-P

  

@) Vaccine or

Drug Therapy

  
   
 

tat or rev

Vaccine incorporating
defective nef

3+0OH

 

 

1

Replication
proteins

RNA

Capsid
proteins

nef protein
x inhibitor

 

v Vv
Envelope ice
mais protein

 

 

 

 

@) Blocking Receptors

Mutated
coreceptor

   

blocking receptor|

 

CD4* cell

 

 

 

@) Disabling Receptors

    

© Blocking Replication with CAF

°
fe K—> Replication
CAF

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 33.8

Research is currently underway to develop new treatments for HIV. Among them are these five: (1) Combination therapy involves
using two drugs, AZT to block replication of the virus and protease inhibitors to block the production of critical viral proteins. (2) Using a
defective form of the viral gene nef, scientists may be able to construct an HIV vaccine. Also, drug therapy that inhibits nef’s protein product
is being tested. (3) Other research focuses on the use of chemokine chemicals to block receptors (CXCR4 and CCRS), thereby disabling the
mechanism HIV uses to enter CD4* T cells. (4) Producing mutations that will disable receptors may also be possible. (5) Lastly, CAF, an
antiviral factor which acts inside the CD4* T cell, may be able to b/ock replication of HIV.

Disabling Receptors

A 32-base-pair deletion in the gene that codes for the CCRS
receptor appears to block HIV infection. Individuals at high
risk of HIV infection who are homozygous for this mutation
do not seem to develop AIDS. In one study of 1955 people,
scientists found no individuals who were infected and ho-
mozygous for the mutated allele. The allele seems to be
more common in Caucasian populations (10 to 11%) than in

African-American populations (2%), and absent in African
and Asian populations. Treatment for AIDS involving dis-
ruption of CCRS looks promising, as research indicates that
people live perfectly well without CCRS5. Attempts to block
or disable CCRS are being sought in numerous laboratories.

 

A cure for AIDS is not yet in hand, but many new
approaches look promising.

 

Chapter 33. Viruses 673
