33.3 HIV is a complex animal virus.
AIDS

A diverse array of viruses occur among animals. A good
way to gain a general idea of what they are like is to look at
one animal virus in detail. Here we will look at the virus
responsible for a comparatively new and fatal viral disease,
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). AIDS was
first reported in the United States in 1981. It was not long
before the infectious agent, a retrovirus called human im-
munodeficiency virus (HIV), was identified by laboratories
in France and the United States. Study of HIV revealed it
to be closely related to a chimpanzee virus, suggesting a
recent host expansion to humans in central Africa from
chimpanzees.

Infected humans have little resistance to infection, and
nearly all of them eventually die of diseases that nonin-
fected individuals easily ward off. Few who contract
AIDS survive more than a few years untreated. The risk
of HIV transmission from an infected individual to a
healthy one in the course of day-to-day contact is essen-
tially nonexistent. However, the transfer of body fluids,
such as blood, semen, or vaginal fluid, or the use of non-
sterile needles, between infected and healthy individuals
poses a severe risk. In addition, HIV-infected mothers
can pass the virus on to their unborn children during
fetal development.

The incidence of AIDS is growing very rapidly in the
United States. It is estimated that over 33 million people
worldwide are infected with HIV. Many—perhaps all of
them—will eventually come down with AIDS. Over 16
million people have died already since the outbreak of the
epidemic. AIDS incidence is already very high in many
African countries and is growing at 20% worldwide. The
AIDS epidemic is discussed further in chapter 57.

How HIV Compromises the Immune System

In normal individuals, an army of specialized cells patrols
the bloodstream, attacking and destroying any invading
bacteria or viruses. In AIDS patients, this army of de-
fenders is vanquished. One special kind of white blood
cell, called a CD4* T cell (discussed further in chapter
57) is required to rouse the defending cells to action. In
AIDS patients, the virus homes in on CD4* T cells, in-
fecting and killing them until none are left (figure 33.6).
Without these crucial immune system cells, the body
cannot mount a defense against invading bacteria or
viruses. AIDS patients die of infections that a healthy
person could fight off.

Clinical symptoms typically do not begin to develop until
after a long latency period, generally 8 to 10 years after the
initial infection with HIV. During this long interval, carriers
of HIV have no clinical symptoms but are apparently fully in-

670 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

FIGURE 33.6

‘The AIDS virus. HIV particles exit an infected CD4* T cell
(both shown in false color). The free virus particles are able to
infect neighboring CD4* T cells.

fectious, which makes the spread of HIV very difficult to con-
trol. The reason why HIV remains hidden for so long seems
to be that its infection cycle continues throughout the 8- to
10-year latent period without doing serious harm to the in-
fected person. Eventually, however, a random mutational
event in the virus allows it to quickly overcome the immune
defense, starting AIDS.

The HIV Infection Cycle

The HIV virus infects and eliminates key cells of the im-
mune system, destroying the body’s ability to defend itself
from cancer and infection. The way HIV infects humans
(figure 33.7) provides a good example of how animal
viruses replicate. Most other viral infections follow a simi-
lar course, although the details of entry and replication dif-
fer in individual cases.

Attachment. When HIV is introduced into the human
bloodstream, the virus particle circulates throughout the
entire body but will only infect CD4* cells. Most other ani-
mal viruses are similarly narrow in their requirements; he-
patitis goes only to the liver, and rabies to the brain.

How does a virus such as HIV recognize a specific kind
of target cell? Recall from chapter 7 that every kind of cell
in the human body has a specific array of cell-surface glyco-
protein markers that serve to identify them to other, similar
cells. Each HIV particle possesses a glycoprotein (called
gp120) on its surface that precisely fits a cell-surface
marker protein called CD4 on the surfaces of immune sys-
tem cells called macrophages and T cells. Macrophages are
infected first.
