 

CCRS or CXCR4
coreceptor

 

  
     

 

 

 

    

a a

cp4*
receptor cell

 

 

 

 

Reverse
transcriptase

 

 

The gp120 glycoprotein on the surface of HIV attaches to CD4 and
one of two coreceptors on the surface of a CD4* cell. The viral
contents enter the cell by endocytosis.

 

 

Reverse transcriptase catalyzes the synthesis of a DNA copy of
the viral RNA. The host cell then synthesizes a complementary
strand of DNA.

 

 

 

 

 

       
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 = 7 Viral exit by
Niral —_> exocytosis in
S_Lrrotens macrophages
ees
Sy Vil exitby
cell lysis in
T cells
; fj j Complete HIV particles are assembled. In macrophages, HIV buds
ope cote prarded PN, directs the synthesis out of the cell by exocytosis. In T cells, however, HIV ruptures the
Proteins. cell, releasing free HIV back into the bloodstream.
FIGURE 33.7

‘The HIV infection cycle. The cycle begins and ends with free HIV particles present in the bloodstream of its human host. These free

viruses infect white blood cells called CD4* T cells.

Entry into Macrophages. After docking onto the CD4
receptor of a macrophage, HIV requires a second
macrophage receptor, called CCRS, to pull itself across the
cell membrane. After gp120 binds to CD4, it goes through a
conformational change that allows it to bind to CCRS. The
current model suggests that after the conformational change,
the second receptor passes the gp120-CD4 complex through
the cell membrane, triggering passage of the contents of the
HIV virus into the cell by endocytosis, with the cell mem-
brane folding inward to form a deep cavity around the virus.

Replication. Once inside the macrophage, the HIV parti-
cle sheds its protective coat. This leaves virus RNA floating
in the cytoplasm, along with a virus enzyme that was also
within the virus shell. This enzyme, called reverse tran-
scriptase, synthesizes a double strand of DNA complemen-
tary to the virus RNA, often making mistakes and so intro-
ducing new mutations. This double-stranded DNA directs
the host cell machinery to produce many copies of the virus.
HIV does not rupture and kill the macrophage cells it in-
fects. Instead, the new viruses are released from the cell by
exocytosis. HIV synthesizes large numbers of viruses in this
way, challenging the immune system over a period of years.

Entry into T Cells. During this time, HIV is con-
stantly replicating and mutating. Eventually, by chance,
HIV alters the gene for gp120 in a way that causes the
gp120 protein to change its second-receptor allegiance.
This new form of gp120 protein prefers to bind instead
to a different second receptor, CXCR4, a receptor that
occurs on the surface of T lymphocyte CD4* cells. Soon
the body’s T lymphocytes become infected with HIV.
This has deadly consequences, as new viruses exit the cell
by rupturing the cell membrane, effectively killing the in-
fected T cell. Thus, the shift to the CXCR4 second re-
ceptor is followed swiftly by a steep drop in the number
of T cells. This destruction of the body’s T cells blocks
the immune response and leads directly to the onset of
AIDS, with cancers and opportunistic infections free to
invade the defenseless body.

 

HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is an RNA virus that
replicates inside human cells by first making a DNA
copy of itself. It is only able to gain entrance to those
cells possessing a particular cell surface marker
recognized by a glycoprotein on its own surface.

 

Chapter 33. Viruses 671
