Lysis of
cell

  
  

/

Assembly

of new SA

viruses ZA

using O

bacterial

cell <6 J =

machinery J

    
  

Uninfected cell

 

Bacterial
chromosome

  
   

Virus attaching

to cell wall

FIGURE 33.5
Lytic and lysogenic cycles ofa___—Replication of
bacteriophage. In the lytic cycle, __ vegetative
the bacteriophage exists as viral virus
DNA free in the bacterial host .
cell’s cytoplasm; the viral DNA heeded ah A
directs the production of new / ~L__O injected into cel
viral particles by the host cell Induction of % | /
until the virus kills the cell by prophage to aN Reduction to

vegetative virus

lysis. In the lysogenic cycle, the
bacteriophage DNA is integrated
into the large, circular DNA
molecule of the host bacterium
and is reproduced along with the
host DNA as the bacterium
replicates. It may continue to
replicate and produce lysogenic
bacteria or enter the lytic cycle
and kill the cell. Bacteriophages
are much smaller relative to their
hosts than illustrated in this
diagram.

Cell Transformation and Phage
Conversion

During the integrated portion of a lysogenic reproductive
cycle, virus genes are often expressed. The RNA poly-
merase of the host cell reads the viral genes just as if they
were host genes. Sometimes, expression of these genes has
an important effect on the host cell, altering it in novel
ways. The genetic alteration of a cell’s genome by the in-
troduction of foreign DNA is called transformation.
When the foreign DNA is contributed by a bacterial virus,
the alteration is called phage conversion.

Phage Conversion of the Cholera-Causing
Bacterium

An important example of this sort of phage conversion di-
rected by viral genes is provided by the bacterium responsi-
ble for an often-fatal human disease. The disease-causing

prophage
(>)
Viral DNA integrated

\ J into bacterial chromosome

Reproduction of lysogenic bacteria

bacteria Vibrio cholerae usually exists in a harmless form, but
a second disease-causing, virulent form also occurs. In this
latter form, the bacterium causes the deadly disease
cholera, but how the bacteria changed from harmless to
deadly was not known until recently. Research now shows
that a bacteriophage that infects V. cholerae introduces into
the host bacterial cell a gene that codes for the cholera
toxin. This gene becomes incorporated into the bacterial
chromosome, where it is translated along with the other
host genes, thereby converting the benign bacterium to a
disease-causing agent. The transfer occurs through bacter-
ial pili (see chapter 34); in further experiments, mutant bac-
teria that did not have pili were resistant to infection by the
bacteriophage. This discovery has important implications
in efforts to develop vaccines against cholera, which have
been unsuccessful up to this point.

 

Bacteriophages convert Vibrio cholerae bacteria from.
harmless gut residents into disease-causing agents.

 

Chapter 33. Viruses 669
