| 33.4 Nonliving infectious agents are responsible for many human diseases.

Disease Viruses

Humans have known and feared diseases caused by viruses
for thousands of years. Among the diseases that viruses
cause (table 33.1) are influenza, smallpox, infectious hepati-
tis, yellow fever, polio, rabies, and AIDS, as well as many
other diseases not as well known. In addition, viruses have
been implicated in some cancers and leukemias. For many
autoimmune diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and
rheumatoid arthritis, and for diabetes, specific viruses have
been found associated with certain cases. In view of their
effects, it is easy to see why the late Sir Peter Medawar,
Nobel laureate in Physiology or Medicine, wrote, “A virus
is a piece of bad news wrapped in protein.” Viruses not
only cause many human diseases, but also cause major
losses in agriculture, forestry, and in the productivity of
natural ecosystems.

Influenza

Perhaps the most lethal virus in human history has been
the influenza virus. Some 22 million Americans and Euro-
peans died of flu within 18 months in 1918 and 1919, an as-
tonishing number.

Types. Flu viruses are animal retroviruses. An individ-
ual flu virus resembles a rod studded with spikes com-
posed of two kinds of protein (figure 33.9). There are
three general “types” of flu virus, distinguished by their
capsid (inner membrane) protein, which is different for

Coils of RNA

 

@ (b)
FIGURE 33.9

each type: Type A flu virus causes most of the serious flu
epidemics in humans, and also occurs in mammals and
birds. Type B and Type C viruses, with narrower host
ranges, are restricted to humans and rarely cause serious
health problems.

Subtypes. Different strains of flu virus, called subtypes,
differ in their protein spikes. One of these proteins,
hemagglutinin (H) aids the virus in gaining access to the
cell interior. The other, neuraminidase (N) helps the
daughter virus break free of the host cell once virus repli-
cation has been completed. Parts of the H molecule con-
tain “hot spots” that display an unusual tendency to
change as a result of mutation of the virus RNA during
imprecise replication. Point mutations cause changes in
these spike proteins in 1 of 100,000 viruses during the
course of each generation. These highly variable seg-
ments of the H molecule are targets against which the
body’s antibodies are directed. The high variability of
these targets improves the reproductive capacity of the
virus and hinders our ability to make perfect vaccines.
Because of accumulating changes in the H and N mole-
cules, different flu vaccines are required to protect
against different subtypes. Type A flu viruses are cur-
rently classified into 13 distinct H subtypes and 9 distinct
N subtypes, each of which requires a different vaccine to
protect against infection. Thus, the type A virus that
caused the Hong Kong flu epidemic of 1968 has type 3 H
molecules and type 2 N molecules, and is called

A(H3N2).

Envelope (outer
lipid membrane)

Capsid (inner protein

    
  

membrane) Neuraminidase

Hemagglutinin

‘The influenza virus. (2) TEM of the so-called “bird flu” influenza virus, A(HSN1), which first infected humans in Hong Kong in 1997.
(®) Diagram of an influenza virus. The coiled RNA has been revealed by cutting through the outer lipid-rich envelope, with its two kinds

of projecting spikes, and the inner protein capsid.

674 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
