It is no accident that new strains of flu usually originate
in the far east. The most common hosts of influenza virus
are ducks, chickens, and pigs, which in Asia often live in
close proximity to each other and to humans. Pigs are sub-
ject to infection by both bird and human strains of the
virus, and individual animals are often simultaneously in-
fected with multiple strains. This creates conditions favor-
ing genetic recombination between strains, producing new
combinations of H and N subtypes. The Hong Kong flu,
for example, arose from recombination between A(H3N8)
[from ducks] and A(H2N2) [from humans]. The new strain
of influenza, in this case A(H3N2), then passed back to hu-
mans, creating an epidemic because the human population
has never experienced that H N combination before.

A potentially deadly new strain of flu virus emerged in
Hong Kong in 1997, A(HSNI). Unlike all previous in-
stances of new flu strains, A(HSN1) passed to humans di-
rectly from birds, in this case chickens. ACH5N1) was first
identified in chickens in 1961, and in the spring of 1997
devastated flocks of chickens in Hong Kong. Fortunately,
this strain of flu virus does not appear to spread easily from
person to person, and the number of human infections by
A(HSN1) remains small. Public health officials remain con-
cerned that the genes of A(HSN1) could yet mix with those
of a human strain to create a new strain that could spread
widely in the human population, and to prevent this or-
dered the killing of all 1.2 million chickens in Hong Kong
in 1997.

Emerging Viruses

Sometimes viruses that originate in one organism pass to
another, thus expanding their host range. Often, this ex-
pansion is deadly to the new host. HIV, for example, arose
in chimpanzees and relatively recently passed to humans.
Influenza is fundamentally a bird virus. Viruses that origi-
nate in one organism and then pass to another and cause
disease are called emerging viruses and represent a con-
siderable threat in an age when airplane travel potentially
allows infected individuals to move about the world
quickly, spreading an infection.

Among the most lethal of emerging viruses are a collec-
tion of filamentous viruses arising in central Africa that
cause severe hemorrhagic fever. With lethality rates in ex-
cess of 50%, these so-called filoviruses are among the most
lethal infectious diseases known. One, Ebola virus (figure
33.10), has exhibited lethality rates in excess of 90% in iso-
lated outbreaks in central Africa. The outbreak of Ebola
virus in the summer of 1995 in Zaire killed 245 people out
of 316 infected—a mortality rate of 78%. The latest out-
break occurred in Gabon, West Africa, in February 1996.
The natural host of Ebola is unknown.

Another type of emerging virus caused a sudden out-
break of a hemorrhagic-type infection in the southwestern
United States in 1993. This highly fatal disease was soon
attributed to the hantavirus, a single-stranded RNA virus

676 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

FIGURE 33.10

The Ebola virus. This virus, with a fatality rate that can exceed
90%, appears sporadically in West Africa. Health professionals are
scrambling to identify the natural host of the virus, which is
unknown, so they can devise strategies to combat transmission of
the disease.

associated with rodents. The hantavirus is transmitted to
humans through rodent fecal contamination in areas of
human habitation. Although hantavirus has been known for
some period of time, this particular outbreak was attributed
to the presence of an unusually large rodent population in
the area following a higher than normal amount of rainfall
the previous winter.

Viruses and Cancer

Through epidemiological studies and research, scientists
have established a link between some viral infections and
the subsequent development of cancer. Examples include
the association between chronic hepatitis B infections and
the development of liver cancer and the development of
cervical carcinoma following infections with certain strains
of papillomaviruses. It has been suggested that viruses con-
tribute to about 15% of all human cancer cases worldwide.
Viruses are capable of altering the growth properties of
human cells they infect by triggering the expression of
oncogenes (cancer-causing genes). Certain viruses can ei-
ther activate host proto-oncogenes (see chapter 18) or
bring in viral oncogenes that become incorporated into the
host genome. Virus-induced cancer is not simply a matter
of infection. The disease involves complex interactions with
cellular genes and requires a series of events in order to de-
velop.

 

Viruses are responsible for some of the most lethal
diseases of humans. Some of the most serious examples
are viruses that have transferred to humans from some
other host. Influenza, a bird virus, has been responsible
for the most devastating epidemics in human history.
Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola have received
considerable public attention.

 
