The Future of HIV Treatment

New discoveries of how HIV works continue to fuel re-
search on devising ways to counter HIV. For example, sci-
entists are testing drugs and vaccines that act on HIV re-
ceptors, researching the possibility of blocking CCRS, and
looking for defects in the structures of HIV receptors in in-
dividuals that are infected with HIV but have not devel-
oped AIDS. Figure 33.8 summarizes some of the recent de-
velopments and discoveries.

Combination Drug Therapy

A variety of drugs inhibit HIV in the test tube. These in-
clude AZT and its analogs (which inhibit virus nucleic acid
replication) and protease inhibitors (which inhibit the
cleavage of the large polyproteins encoded by gag, poll, and
env genes into functional capsid, enzyme, and envelope seg-
ments). When combinations of these drugs were adminis-
tered to people with HIV in controlled studies, their condi-
tion improved. A combination of a protease inhibitor and
two AZT analog drugs entirely eliminated the HIV virus
from many of the patients’ bloodstreams. Importantly, all
of these patients began to receive the drug therapy within
three months of contracting the virus, before their bodies
had an opportunity to develop tolerance to any one of
them. Widespread use of this combination therapy has
cut the U.S. AIDS death rate by three-fourths since its in-
troduction in the mid-1990s, from 49,000 AIDS deaths in
1995 to 36,000 in 1996, and just over 10,000 in 1999.

Unfortunately, this sort of combination therapy does
not appear to actually succeed in eliminating HIV from
the body. While the virus disappears from the blood-
stream, traces of it can still be detected in lymph tissue of
the patients. When combination therapy is discontinued,
virus levels in the bloodstream once again rise. Because
of demanding therapy schedules and many side effects,
long-term combination therapy does not seem a promis-
ing approach.

Using a Defective HIV Gene to Combat AIDS

Recently, five people in Australia who are HIV-positive but
have not developed AIDS in 14 years were found to have all
received a blood transfusion from the same HIV-positive
person, who also has not developed AIDS. This led scien-
tists to believe that the strain of virus transmitted to these
people has some sort of genetic defect that prevents it from
effectively disabling the human immune system. In subse-
quent research, a defect was found in one of the nine genes
present in this strain of HIV. This gene is called nef named
for “negative factor,” and the defective version of nef in the
HIV strain that infected the six Australians seems to be
missing some pieces. Viruses with the defective gene may
have reduced reproductive capability, allowing the immune
system to keep the virus in check.

672 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

This finding has exciting implications for developing a
vaccine against AIDS. Before this, scientists have been un-
successful in trying to produce a harmless strain of AIDS
that can elicit an effective immune response. The Aus-
tralian strain with the defective nef gene has the potential to
be used in a vaccine that would arm the immune system
against this and other strains of HIV.

Another potential application of this discovery is its use
in developing drugs that inhibit HIV proteins that speed
virus replication. It seems that the protein produced from
the nef gene is one of these critical HIV proteins, because
viruses with defective forms of nef do not reproduce, as
seen in the cases of the six Australians. Research is cur-
rently underway to develop a drug that targets the nef
protein.

Chemokines and CAF

In the laboratory, chemicals called chemokines appear to
inhibit HIV infection by binding to and blocking the
CCRS and CXCR4 coreceptors. As you might expect, peo-
ple long infected with the HIV virus who have not devel-
oped AIDS prove to have high levels of chemokines in their
blood.

The search for HIV-inhibiting chemokines is intense.
Not all results are promising. Researchers report that in
their tests, the levels of chemokines were not different be-
tween patients in which the disease was not progressing
and those in which it was rapidly progressing. More
promising, levels of another factor called CAF (CD8* cell
antiviral factor) are different between these two groups. Re-
searchers have not yet succeeded in isolating CAF, which
seems not to block receptors that HIV uses to gain entry to
cells, but, instead, to prevent replication of the virus once it
has infected the cells. Research continues on the use of
chemokines in treatments for HIV infection, cither in-
creasing the amount of chemokines or disabling the CCRS
receptor. However, promising research on CAF suggests
that it may be an even better target for treatment and pre-
vention of AIDS.

One problem with using chemokines as drugs is that
they are also involved in the inflammatory response of
the immune system. The function of chemokines is to at-
tract white blood cells to areas of infection. Chemokines
work beautifully in small amounts and in local areas, but
chemokines in mass numbers can cause an inflammatory
response that is worse than the original infection. Injec-
tions of chemokines may hinder the immune system’s
ability to respond to local chemokines, or they may even
trigger an out-of-control inflammatory response. Thus,
scientists caution that injection of chemokines could
make patients more susceptible to infections, and they
continue to research other methods of using chemokines
to treat AIDS.
