| 33.2 Bacterial viruses exhibit two sorts of reproductive cycles.

Bacteriophages

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria. They are
diverse both structurally and functionally, and are united
solely by their occurrence in bacterial hosts. Many of these
bacteriophages, called phages for short, are large and com-
plex, with relatively large amounts of DNA and proteins.
Some of them have been named as members of a “T” series
(T1, T2, and so forth); others have been given different
kinds of names. To illustrate the diversity of these viruses,
T3 and T7 phages are icosahedral and have short tails. In
contrast, the so-called T-even phages (T2, T4, and T6)
have an icosahedral head, a capsid that consists primarily of
three proteins, a connecting neck with a collar and long
“whiskers,” a long tail, and a complex base plate (figure
33.4).

The Lytic Cycle

During the process of bacterial infection by T4 phage, at
least one of the tail fibers of the phage—they are normally
held near the phage head by the “whiskers”—contacts the
lipoproteins of the host bacterial cell wall. The other tail
fibers set the phage perpendicular to the surface of the bac-
terium and bring the base plate into contact with the cell
surface. The tail contracts, and the tail tube passes through
an opening that appears in the base plate, piercing the bac-
terial cell wall. The contents of the head, mostly DNA, are
then injected into the host cytoplasm.

When a virus kills the infected host cell in which it is
replicating, the reproductive cycle is referred to as a lytic

 

(@) 05 jim

668 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

cycle (figure 33.5). The T-series bacteriophages are all vir-
ulent viruses, multiplying within infected cells and even-
tually lysing (rupturing) them. However, they vary consid-
erably as to when they become virulent within their host
cells.

The Lysogenic Cycle

Many bacteriophages do not immediately kill the cells they
infect, instead integrating their nucleic acid into the
genome of the infected host cell. While residing there, it is
called a prophage. Among the bacteriophages that do this
is the lambda (X) phage of Escherichia coli. We know as
much about this bacteriophage as we do about virtually any
other biological particle; the complete sequence of its
48,502 bases has been determined. At least 23 proteins are
associated with the development and maturation of lambda
phage, and many other enzymes are involved in the inte-
gration of these viruses into the host genome.

The integration of a virus into a cellular genome is
called lysogeny. At a later time, the prophage may exit the
genome and initiate virus replication. This sort of repro-
ductive cycle, involving a period of genome integration, is
called a lysogenic cycle. Viruses that become stably inte-
grated within the genome of their host cells are called lyso-
genic viruses or temperate viruses.

 

Bacteriophages are a diverse group of viruses that
attack bacteria. Some kill their host in a lytic cycle;
others integrate into the host’s genome, initiating a
lysogenic cycle.

 

DNA Capsid
(protein sheath)

   

Head

FIGURE 33.4

A bacterial virus.
Bacteriophages exhibit a
complex structure. (a)
Electron micrograph and
() diagram of the
structure of a T4
bacteriophage.
