Table 33.1 Important Human Viral Diseases

Disease Pathogen Reservoir
AIDS HIV STD
Chicken pox Human herpes- Humans
virus 3 (varicella
zoster)
Ebola Filoviruses Unknown
Hepatitus B Hepatitis B virus Humans
(viral) (HBV)
Herpes Herpes simplex Humans
virus (HSV)
Influenza Influenza viruses Humans, ducks
Measles Paramyxoviruses Humans
Mononucleosis Epstein-Barr Humans
virus (EBV)
Mumps Paramyxovirus Humans
Pneumonia Influenza virus Humans
Polio Poliovirus Humans
Rabies Rhabdovirus Wild and domestic Canidae
(dogs, foxes, wolves,
coyotes), bats, and raccoons
Smallpox Variola virus Formerly humans, now

only exists in two research
labs—may be eliminated

Yellow fever Flavivirus Humans, mosquitoes

Importance of Recombination. The greatest problem
in combating flu viruses arises not through mutation, but
through recombination. Viral genes are readily reas-
sorted by genetic recombination, sometimes putting to-
gether novel combinations of H and N spikes unrecog-
nizable by human antibodies specific for the old
configuration. Viral recombination of this kind seems to
have been responsible for the three major flu pandemics

Vector/Epidemiology

Destroys immune defenses, resulting in death by infection
or cancer. Over 33 million cases worldwide by 1998.

Spread through contact with infected individuals. No cure.
Rarely fatal. Vaccine approved in U.S. in early 1995.

Acute hemorrhagic fever; virus attacks connective tissue,
leading to massive hemorrhaging and death. Peak mortality
is 50-90% if the disease goes untreated. Outbreaks

confined to local regions of central Africa.

Highly infectious through contact with infected body fluids.
Approximately 1% of U.S. population infected. Vaccine
available, no cure. Can be fatal.

Fever blisters; spread primarily through contact with
infected saliva. Very prevalent worldwide. No cure.
Exhibits latency—the disease can be dormant for
several years.

Historically a major killer (22 million died in 18 months in
1918-19); wild Asian ducks, chickens, and pigs are major
reservoirs. The ducks are not affected by the flu virus, which
shuffles its antigen genes while multiplying within them,
leading to new flu strains.

Extremely contagious through contact with infected
individuals. Vaccine available. Usually contracted in
childhood, when it is not serious; more dangerous to adults.

Spread through contact with infected saliva. May last several
weeks; common in young adults. No cure. Rarely fatal.

Spread through contact with infected saliva. Vaccine
available; rarely fatal. No cure.

Acute infection of the lungs, often fatal without treatment.
Acute viral infection of the CNS that can lead to paralysis
and is often fatal. Prior to the development of Salk’s vaccine
in 1954, 60,000 people a year contracted the disease in the
US. alone.

An acute viral encephalomyelitis transmitted by the bite of
an infected animal. Fatal if untreated.

Historically a major killer; the last recorded case of smallpox
was in 1977. A worldwide vaccination campaign wiped out
the disease completely.

Spread from individual to individual by mosquito bites; a
notable cause of death during the construction of the
Panama Canal. If untreated, this disease has a peak
mortality rate of 60%.

(that is, worldwide epidemics) that occurred in the last
century, by producing drastic shifts in H N combina-
tions. The “killer flu” of 1918, AGHINI), killed 40 mil-
lion people. The Asian flu of 1957, AGH2N2), killed over
100,000 Americans. The Hong Kong flu of 1968,
A(H3N2), infected 50 million people in the United States
alone, of which 70,000 died.

Chapter 33. Viruses 675
