The Nature of Viruses
Viral Structure

All viruses have the same basic struc-
ture: a core of nucleic acid surrounded
by protein. Individual viruses contain
only a single type of nucleic acid, either
DNA or RNA. The DNA or RNA
genome may be linear or circular, and
single-stranded or double-stranded.
Viruses are frequently classified by the
nature of their genomes. RNA-based
viruses are known as retroviruses.

Nearly all viruses form a protein
sheath, or capsid, around their nucleic
acid core. The capsid is composed of
one to a few different protein molecules
repeated many times (figure 33.3) In
some viruses, specialized enzymes are
stored within the capsid. Many animal
viruses form an envelope around the
capsid rich in proteins, lipids, and glyco-
protein molecules. While some of the
material of the envelope is derived from the host cell’s
membrane, the envelope does contain proteins derived
from viral genes as well.

Viruses occur in virtually every kind of organism that

FIGURE 33.3

strand of RNA

has been investigated for their presence. However, each
type of virus can replicate in only a very limited number
of cell types. The suitable cells for a particular virus are
collectively referred to as its host range. The size of the
host range reflects the coevolved histories of the virus and
its potential hosts. A recently discovered herpesvirus
turned lethal when it expanded its host range from the
African elephant to the Indian elephant, a situation made
possible through cross-species contacts between elephants
in zoos. Some viruses wreak havoc on the cells they infect;
many others produce no disease or other outward sign of
their infection. Still other viruses remain dormant for
years until a specific signal triggers their expression. A
given organism often has more than one kind of virus.
This suggests that there may be many more kinds of
viruses than there are kinds of organisms—perhaps mil-
lions of them. Only a few thousand viruses have been de-
scribed at this point.

Viral Replication

An infecting virus can be thought of as a set of instruc-
tions, not unlike a computer program. A computer’s oper-
ation is directed by the instructions in its operating pro-
gram, just as a cell is directed by DNA-encoded
instructions. A new program can be introduced into the
computer that will cause the computer to cease what it is
doing and devote all of its energies to another activity,
such as making copies of the introduced program. The

Capsid (protein sheath)

 

(a) Bacteriophage

Envelope
protein

  

Envelope

RNA

 

(b) Tobacco mosaic virus. _(c) Human immunodeficiency
(TMV) virus (HIV)

The structure of a bacterial, plant, and animal virus. (a) Bacterial viruses, called
bacteriophages, often have a complex structure. (b) TMV infects plants and consists of
2130 identical protein molecules (purple) that form a cylindrical coat around the single
(green). The RNA backbone determines the shape of the virus and is
protected by the identical protein molecules packed tightly around it. (c) In the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the RNA core is held within a capsid that is encased by a
protein envelope.

new program is not itself a computer and cannot make
copies of itself when it is outside the computer, lying on
the desk. The introduced program, like a virus, is simply a
set of instructions.

Viruses can reproduce only when they enter cells and
utilize the cellular machinery of their hosts. Viruses code
their genes on a single type of nucleic acid, either DNA or
RNA, but viruses lack ribosomes and the enzymes neces-
sary for protein synthesis. Viruses are able to reproduce be-
cause their genes are translated into proteins by the cell’s
genetic machinery. These proteins lead to the production
of more viruses.

Viral Shape

Most viruses have an overall structure that is either helical
or isometric. Helical viruses, such as the tobacco mosaic
virus, have a rodlike or threadlike appearance. Isometric
viruses have a roughly spherical shape whose geometry is
revealed only under the highest magnification.

The only structural pattern found so far among isomet-
ric viruses is the icosahedron, a structure with 20 equilat-
eral triangular facets, like the adenovirus shown in figure
33.2. Most viruses are icosahedral in basic structure. The
icosahedron is the basic design of the geodesic dome. It is
the most efficient symmetrical arrangement that linear
subunits can take to form a shell with maximum internal
capacity.

 

Viruses occur in all organisms and can only reproduce
within living cells. Most are icosahedral in structure.

 

Chapter 33. Viruses 667
