Prions and Viroids

For decades scientists have been fascinated by a peculiar
group of fatal brain diseases. These diseases have the un-
usual property that it is years and often decades after infec-
tion before the disease is detected in infected individuals.
The brains of infected individuals develop numerous small
cavities as neurons die, producing a marked spongy appear-
ance. Called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
(TSEs), these diseases include scrapie in sheep, “mad cow”
disease in cattle, and kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in
humans.

TSEs can be transmitted by injecting infected brain tis-
sue into a recipient animal’s brain. TSEs can also spread via
tissue transplants and, apparently, food. Kuru was common
in the Fore people of Papua New Guinea, when they prac-
ticed ritual cannibalism, literally eating the brains of in-
fected individuals. Mad cow disease spread widely among
the cattle herds of England in the 1990s because cows were
fed bone meal prepared from cattle carcasses to increase
the protein content of their diet. Like the Fore, the British
cattle were literally eating the tissue of cattle that had died
of the disease.

A Heretical Suggestion

In the 1960s, British researchers T. Alper and J. Griffith
noted that infectious TSE preparations remained infectious
even after exposed to radiation that would destroy DNA or
RNA. They suggested that the infectious agent was a pro-
tein. Perhaps, they speculated, the protein usually preferred
one folding pattern, but could sometimes misfold, and then
catalyze other proteins to do the same, the misfolding
spreading like a chain reaction. This heretical suggestion
was not accepted by the scientific community, as it violates
a key tenant of molecular biology: only DNA or RNA act
as hereditary material, transmitting information from one
generation to the next.

Prusiner’s Prions

In the early 1970s, physician Stanley Prusiner, moved by
the death of a patient from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease,
began to study TSEs. Prusiner became fascinated with
Alper and Griffith’s hypothesis. Try as he might, Prusiner
could find no evidence of nucleic acids or viruses in the in-
fectious TSE preparations, and concluded, as Alper and
Griffith had, that the infectious agent was a protein, which
in a 1982 paper he named a prion, for “proteinaceous in-
fectious particle.”

Prusiner went on to isolate a distinctive prion protein,
and for two decades continued to amass evidence that pri-
ons play a key role in triggering TSEs. The scientific com-
munity resisted Prusiner’s renegade conclusions, but even-
tually experiments done in Prusiner’s and other
laboratories began to convince many. For example, when

Misfolded prion
proteins

Normal prion
proteins

 

FIGURE 33.11

How prions arise. Misfolded prions seem to cause normal prion
protein to misfold simply by contacting them. When prions
misfolded in different ways (b/ue) contact normal prion protein
(purple), the normal prion protein misfolds in the same way.

Prusiner injected prions of a different abnormal conforma-
tion into several different hosts, these hosts developed pri-
ons with the same abnormal conformations as the parent
prions (figure 33.11). In another important experiment,
Charles Weissmann showed that mice genetically engi-
neered to lack Prusiner’s prion protein are immune to TSE
infection. However, if brain tissue with the prion protein is
grafted into the mice, the grafted tissue—but not the rest
of the brain—can then be infected with TSE. In 1997,
Prusiner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine for his work on prions.

Viroids

Viroids are tiny, naked molecules of RNA, only a few hun-
dred nucleotides long, that are important infectious disease
agents in plants. A recent viroid outbreak killed over ten
million coconut palms in the Philippines. It is not clear
how viroids cause disease. One clue is that viroid nu-
cleotide sequences resemble the sequences of introns
within ribosomal RNA genes. These sequences are capable
of catalyzing excision from DNA—perhaps the viroids are
catalyzing the destruction of chromosomal integrity.

 

 

Prions are infectious proteins that some scientists
believe are responsible for serious brain diseases. In
plants, naked RNA molecules called viroids can also
transmit disease.

 

Chapter 33. Viruses 677
