{34.2 Bacterial cell structure is more complex than commonly supposed.

The Bacterial Surface

The bacterial cell wall is an important structure because it
maintains the shape of the cell and protects the cell from
swelling and rupturing. The cell wall usually consists of
peptidoglycan, a network of polysaccharide molecules
connected by polypeptide cross-links. In some bacteria, the
peptidoglycan forms a thick, complex network around the
outer surface of the cell. This network is interlaced with
peptide chains. In other bacteria a thin layer of peptidogly-
can is found sandwiched between two plasma membranes.
The outer membrane contains large molecules of lipopoly-
saccharide, lipids with polysaccharide chains attached.
These two major types of bacteria can be identified using a
staining process called a Gram stain. Gram-positive bac-
teria have the thicker peptidoglycan wall and stain a purple
color (figure 34.5). The more common gram-negative
bacteria contain less peptidoglycan and do not retain the
purple-colored dye. Gram-negative bacteria stain red. The
outer membrane layer makes gram-negative bacteria resis-
tant to many antibiotics that interfere with cell wall synthe-
sis in gram-positive bacteria. In some kinds of bacteria, an
additional gelatinous layer, the capsule, surrounds the cell
wall.

 

Gram-positive
bacteria

  

Gram-negative
bacteria

FIGURE 34.5

>

Cell wall 4

Many kinds of bacteria have slender, rigid, helical fla-
gella (singular, flagellum) composed of the protein fla-
gellin (figure 34.6). These flagella range from 3 to 12 mi-
crometers in length and are very thin—only 10 to 20
nanometers thick. They are anchored in the cell wall and
spin, pulling the bacteria through the water like a
propeller.

Pili (singular, pilus) are other hairlike structures that
occur on the cells of some bacteria (see figure 34.4). They
are shorter than bacterial flagella, up to several microme-
ters long, and about 7.5 to 10 nanometers thick. Pili help
the bacterial cells attach to appropriate substrates and ex-
change genetic information.

Some bacteria form thick-walled endospores around
their chromosome and a small portion of the surrounding
cytoplasm when they are exposed to nutrient-poor condi-
tions. These endospores are highly resistant to environ-
mental stress, especially heat, and can germinate to form
new individuals after decades or even centuries.

 

Bacteria are encased within a cell wall composed of one
or more polysaccharide layers. They also may contain
external structures such as flagella and pili.

 

Peptide side
chains

  
 

Cell wall
(peptidoglycan) L_%

Plasma |
membrane

Outer
membrane |

 

|_Peptidoglycan—|

Plasma
membrane

 

 

The Gram stain. The peptidoglycan layer encasing gram-positive bacteria traps crystal violet dye, so the bacteria appear purple in a
Gram-stained smear (named after Hans Christian Gram, who developed the technique). Because gram-negative bacteria have much less
peptidoglycan (located between the plasma membrane and an outer membrane), they do not retain the crystal violet dye and so exhibit the

red background stain (usually a safranin dye).

682 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
