| 34.3 Bacteria exhibit considerable diversity in both structure and metabolism.

Bacterial Diversity

Bacteria are not easily classified according to their
forms, and only recently has enough been learned about
their biochemical and metabolic characteristics to de-
velop a satisfactory overall classification comparable to
that used for other organisms. Early systems for classify-
ing bacteria relied on differential stains such as the
Gram stain. Key bacterial characteristics used in classify-
ing bacteria were:

1. Photosynthetic or nonphotosynthetic

2. Motile or nonmotile

3. Unicellular or multicellular

4, Formation of spores or dividing by transverse
binary fission

With the development of genetic and molecular ap-
proaches, bacterial classifications can at last reflect true
evolutionary relatedness. Molecular approaches include:
(1) the analysis of the amino acid sequences of key pro-
teins; (2) the analysis of nucleic acid base sequences by
establishing the percent of guanine (G) and cytosine (C);
(3) nucleic acid hybridization, which is essentially the
mixing of single-stranded DNA from two species and
determining the amount of base-pairing (closely related
species will have more bases pairing); and (4) nucleic
acid sequencing especially looking at ribosomal RNA.
Lynn Margulis and Karlene Schwartz proposed a useful
classification system that divides bacteria into 16 phyla,
according to their most significant features. Table 34.1
outlines some of the major features of the phyla we
describe.

Kinds of Bacteria

Although they lack the structural complexity of eukary-
otes, bacteria have diverse internal chemistries, metabo-
lisms and unique functions. Bacteria have adapted to
many kinds of environments, including some you might
consider harsh. They have successfully invaded very salty
waters, very acidic or alkaline environments, and very hot
or cold areas. They are found in hot springs where the
temperatures exceed 78°C (172°F) and have been recov-
ered living beneath 435 meters of ice in Antarctica!

Much of what we know of bacteria we have learned
from studies in the laboratory. It is important to under-
stand the limits this has placed on our knowledge: we have
only been able to study those bacteria that can be cultured
in laboratories. Field studies suggest that these represent
but a small fraction of the kinds of bacteria that occur in
soil, most of which cannot be cultured with existing tech-

684 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

niques. We clearly have only scraped the surface of bacte-
rial diversity.

As we learned in chapter 32, bacteria split into two
lines early in the history of life, so different in structure
and metabolism that they are as different from each other
as either is from eukaryotes. The differences are so fun-
damental that biologists assign the two groups of bacteria
to separate domains. One domain, the Archaea, consists
of the archaebacteria (“ancient bacteria”—although they
are actually not as ancient as the other bacterial domain).
It was once thought that survivors of this group were
confined to extreme environments that may resemble
habitats on the early earth. However, the use of genetic
screening has revealed that these “ancient” bacteria live
in nonextreme environments as well. The other more an-
cient domain, the Bacteria, consists of the eubacteria
(“true bacteria”). It includes nearly all of the named
species of bacteria.

Comparing Archaebacteria and Eubacteria

Archaebacteria and eubacteria are similar in that they both
have a prokaryotic cellular but they vary considerably at the
biochemical and molecular level. There are four key areas

in which they differ:

1. Cell wall. Both kinds of bacteria typically have
cell walls covering the plasma membrane that
strengthen the cell. The cell walls of eubacteria are
constructed of carbohydrate-protein complexes
called peptidoglycan, which link together to create
a strong mesh that gives the eubacterial cell wall
great strength. The cell walls of archaebacteria lack
peptidoglycan.

2. Plasma membranes. All bacteria have plasma
membranes with a lipid-bilayer architecture (as de-
scribed in chapter 6). The plasma membranes of eu-
bacteria and archaebacteria, however, are made of
very different kinds of lipids.

3. Gene translation machinery. Eubacteria possess
ribosomal proteins and an RNA polymerase that
are distinctly different from those of eukaryotes.
However, the ribosomal proteins and RNA of
archacbacteria are very similar to those of
eukaryotes.

4. Gene architecture. The genes of eubacteria are
not interrupted by introns, while at least some of the
genes of archaebacteria do possess introns.

 

While superficially similar, bacteria differ from one
another in a wide variety of characteristics.

 
