    

Bacteria

Concept Outline

34.1 Bacteria are the smallest and most numerous
organisms.
‘The Prevalence of Bacteria. ‘The simplest of organisms,
bacteria are thought to be the most ancient. They are the
most abundant living organisms. Bacteria lack the high
degree of internal compartmentalization characteristic of
eukaryotes.

34.2 Bacterial cell structure is more complex than
commonly supposed.

‘The Bacterial Surface. Some bacteria have a secondary
membranelike covering outside of their cell wall.

The Cell Interior. While bacteria lack extensive internal
compartments, they may have complex internal
membranes.

34.3 Bacteria exhibit considerable diversity in both
structure and metabolism.

Bacterial Diversity. There are at least 16 phyla of
bacteria, although many more remain to be discovered.
Bacterial Variation. Mutation and recombination
generate enormous variation within bacterial populations.
Bacterial Metabolism. Bacteria obtain carbon atoms and
energy from a wide array of sources. Some can thrive in the
absence of other organisms, while others must obtain their
energy and carbon atoms from other organisms.

34.4 Bacteria are responsible for many diseases but
also make important contributions to ecosystems.

Human Bacterial Diseases. Many serious human
diseases are caused by bacteria, some of them responsible
for millions of deaths each year.

Importance of Bacteria. Bacteria have had a profound
impact on the world’s ecology, and play a major role in
modern medicine and agriculture.

FIGURE 34.1

Accolony of bacteria. With their enormous adaptability and
metabolic versatility, bacteria are found in every habitat on earth,
carrying out many of the vital processes of ecosystems, including
photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation, and decomposition.

he simplest organisms living on earth today are bacte-

ria, and biologists think they closely resemble the first
organisms to evolve on earth. Too small to see with the un-
aided eye, bacteria are the most abundant of all organisms
(figure 34.1) and are the only ones characterized by
prokaryotic cellular organization. Life on earth could not
exist without bacteria because bacteria make possible many
of the essential functions of ecosystems, including the cap-
ture of nitrogen from the atmosphere, decomposition of
organic matter, and, in many aquatic communities, photo-
synthesis. Indeed, bacterial photosynthesis is thought to
have been the source for much of the oxygen in the earth’s
atmosphere. Bacterial research continues to provide extra-
ordinary insights into genetics, ecology, and disease. An
understanding of bacteria is thus essential.

679
