 

The Prevalence
of Bacteria

Bacteria are the oldest, structurally
simplest, and the most abundant
forms of life on earth. They are also

the only organisms with prokaryotic
cellular organization. Represented in

the oldest rocks from which fossils

have been obtained, 3.5 to 3.8 billion

years old, bacteria were abundant for

over 2 billion years before eukaryotes
appeared in the world (see figure
4.11). Early photosynthetic bacteria
(cyanobacteria) altered the earth’s at- — @)
mosphere with the production of o:
gen which lead to extreme bacterial
and eukaryotic diversity. Bacteria play
a vital role both in productivity and in
cycling the substances essential to all
other life-forms. Bacteria are the only
organisms capable of fixing atmos-
pheric nitrogen.

About 5000 different kinds of bac-
teria are currently recognized, but there are doubtless
many thousands more awaiting proper identification (figure
34.2). Every place microbiologists look, new species are
being discovered, in some cases altering the way we think
about bacteria. In the 1970s and 80s a new type of bac-
terium was analyzed that eventually lead to the classifica-
tion of a new prokaryotic cell type, the archeabacteria (or
Archaea). Even when viewed with an electron microscope,
the structural differences between different bacteria are
minor compared to other groups of organisms. Because the
structural differences are so slight, bacteria are classified
based primarily upon their metabolic and genetic charac-
teristics. Bacteria can be characterized properly only when
they are grown on a defined medium because the charac-
teristics of these organisms often change, depending on
their growth conditions.

Bacteria are ubiquitous on Earth, and live everywhere
eukaryotes do. Many of the other more extreme environ-
ments in which bacteria are found would be lethal to any
other form of life. Bacteria live in hot springs that would
cook other organisms, hypersaline environments that
would dehydrate other cells, and in atmospheres rich in
toxic gases like methane or hydrogen sulfide that would kill
most other organisms. These harsh environments may be
similar to the conditions present on the early Earth, when
life first began. It is likely that bacteria evolved to dwell in
these harsh conditions early on and have retained the abil-
ity to exploit these areas as the rest of the atmosphere has
changed.

 

  

FIGURE 34.2

 

 

680 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

Bacteria are the smallest and most numerous organisms.

er &

 

(b) (°)

The diversity of bacteria. (a) Preudomonas aeruginosa, a rod-shaped, flagellated bacterium
(bacillus). Prendomonas includes the bacteria that cause many of the most serious plant
diseases. (0) Streptocoaus. The spherical individual bacteria (cocci) adhere in chains in the
members of this genus (34,000). (0) Spirillum volutans, one of the spitilla. This large
bacterium, which occurs in stagnant fresh water, has a tuft of flagella at each end (500%).

Bacterial Form

Bacteria are mostly simple in form and exhibit one of three
basic structures: bacillus (plural, bacilli) straight and rod-
shaped, coccus (plural, cocci) spherical-shaped, and spiril-
lus (plural, spirilla) long and helical-shaped, also called
spirochetes. Spirilla bacteria generally do not form associa-
tions with other cells and swim singly through their envi-
ronments. They have a complex structure within their cell
membranes that allow them to spin their corkscrew-shaped
bodies which propels them along. Some rod-shaped and
spherical bacteria form colonies, adhering end-to-end after
they have divided, forming chains (see figure 34.2). Some
bacterial colonies change into stalked structures, grow
long, branched filaments, or form erect structures that re-
lease spores, single-celled bodies that grow into new bacte-
rial individuals. Some filamentous bacteria are capable of
gliding motion, often combined with rotation around a
longitudinal axis. Biologists have not yet determined the
mechanism by which they move.

Prokaryotes versus Eukaryotes

Prokaryotes—eubacteria and archaca—differ from eukary-
otes in numerous important features. These differences
represent some of the most fundamental distinctions that
separate any groups of organisms.

1. Multicellularity. All prokaryotes are fundamentally
single-celled. In some types, individual cells adhere to
