FIGURE 34.3
Approaches to
multicellularity
in bacteria.
Chondromyces
crocatus, one of
the gliding
bacteria. The
rod-shaped
individuals move
together, forming
the composite
spore-bearing
structures shown
here. Millions of
spores, which are
basically
individual
bacteria, are
released from
these structures.

each other within a matrix and form filaments, how-
ever the cells retain their individuality. Cyanobacte-
ria, in particular, are likely to form such associations
but their cytoplasm is not directly interconnected, as
often is the case in multicellular eukaryotes. The ac-
tivities of a bacterial colony are less integrated and
coordinated than those in multicellular eukaryotes. A
primitive form of colonial organization occurs in
gliding bacteria, which move together and form
spore-bearing structures (figure 34.3). Such coordi-
nated multicellular forms are rare among bacteria.

2. Cell size. As new species of bacteria are discovered,
we are finding that the size of prokaryotic cells varies
tremendously, by as much as five orders of magni-
tude. Most prokaryotic cells are only 1 micrometer or
less in diameter. Most eukaryotic cells are well over
10 times that size.

3. Chromosomes. Eukaryotic cells have a membrane-
bound nucleus containing chromosomes made up of
both nucleic acids and proteins. Bacteria do not have
membrane-bound nuclei, nor do they have chromo-
somes of the kind present in eukaryotes, in which
DNA forms a structural complex with proteins. In-
stead, their naked circular DNA is localized in a zone
of the cytoplasm called the nucleoid.

4. Cell division and genetic recombination. Cell divi-
sion in eukaryotes takes place by mitosis and involves
spindles made up of microtubules. Cell division in bac-
teria takes place mainly by binary fission (see chapter
11). True sexual reproduction occurs only in eukaryotes
and involves syngamy and meiosis, with an alternation
of diploid and haploid forms. Despite their lack of sex-
ual reproduction, bacteria do have mechanisms that
lead to the transfer of genetic material. These mecha-

 

 

FIGURE 34.4
Flagella in the common intestinal bacterium, Escherichia coli.
The long strands are flagella, while the shorter hairlike outgrowths
are called pili.

nisms are far less regular than those of eukaryotes and
do not involve the equal participation of the individuals
between which the genetic material is transferred.

5. Internal compartmentalization. In eukaryotes,
the enzymes for cellular respiration are packaged in
mitochondria. In bacteria, the corresponding en-
zymes are not packaged separately but are bound to
the cell membranes (see chapters 5 and 9). The cyto-
plasm of bacteria, unlike that of eukaryotes, contains
no internal compartments or cytoskeleton and no or-
ganelles except ribosomes.

6. Flagella. Bacterial flagella are simple in structure,
composed of a single fiber of the protein flagellin
(figure 34.4; see also chapter 5). Eukaryotic flagella
and cilia are complex and have a 9 + 2 structure of
microtubules (see figure 5.27). Bacterial flagella also
function differently, spinning like propellers, while
eukaryotic flagella have a whiplike motion.

7. Metabolic diversity. Only one kind of photosyn-
thesis occurs in eukaryotes, and it involves the release
of oxygen. Photosynthetic bacteria have several dif-
ferent patterns of anaerobic and aerobic photosynthe-
sis, involving the formation of end products such as
sulfur, sulfate, and oxygen (see chapter 10). Prokary-
otic cells can also be chemoautotrophic, using the en-
ergy stored in chemical bonds of inorganic molecules
to synthesize carbohydrates; eukaryotes are not capa-
ble of this metabolic process.

 

Bacteria are the oldest and most abundant organisms on
earth. Bacteria, or prokaryotes, differ from eukaryotes
in a wide variety of characteristics, a degree of
difference as great as any that separates any groups of
organisms.

 

Chapter 34 Bacteria 681
