DNA

  

Infolding of the Cell wall

plasma membrane

 

Endoplasmic
reticulum (ER)

Nuclear envelope

 

Nucleus

 

Prokaryotic ancestor

Bacterial cell of eukaryotic cells

FIGURE 4.14

Eukaryotic cell

Origin of the nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum. Many bacteria today have infoldings of the plasma membrane (see also figure 34.7).
‘The eukaryotic internal membrane system called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the nuclear envelope may have evolved from such
infoldings of the plasma membrane encasing prokaryotic cells that gave rise to eukaryotic cells.

eukaryotes called endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is thought
to have evolved from such infoldings, as is the nuclear en-
velope, an extension of the ER network that isolates and
protects the nucleus (figure 4.14).

Origin of Mitochondria and Chloroplasts

Bacteria that live within other cells and perform specific
functions for their host cells are called endosymbiotic bacte-
ria. Their widespread presence in nature led Lynn
Margulis to champion the endosymbiotic theory in the
early 1970s. This theory, now widely accepted, suggests
that a critical stage in the evolution of eukaryotic cells in-
volved endosymbiotic relationships with prokaryotic or-
ganisms. According to this theory, energy-producing
bacteria may have come to reside within larger bacteria,
eventually evolving into what we now know as mitochon-
dria. Similarly, photosynthetic bacteria may have come to
live within other larger bacteria, leading to the evolution
of chloroplasts, the photosynthetic organelles of plants
and algae. Bacteria with flagella, long whiplike cellular
appendages used for propulsion, may have become sym-
biotically involved with nonflagellated bacteria to pro-
duce larger, motile cells. The fact that we now witness so
many symbiotic relationships lends general support to
this theory. Even stronger support comes from the obser-
vation that present-day organelles such as mitochondria,
chloroplasts, and centrioles contain their own DNA,
which is remarkably similar to the DNA of bacteria in
size and character.

Sexual Reproduction

Eukaryotic cells also possess the ability to reproduce sexu-
ally, something prokaryotes cannot do effectively. Sexual
reproduction is the process of producing offspring, with
two copies of each chromosome, by fertilization, the union
of two cells that each have one copy of each chromosome.
The great advantage of sexual reproduction is that it allows
for frequent genetic recombination, which generates the
variation that is the raw material for evolution. Not all eu-
karyotes reproduce sexually, but most have the capacity to
do so. The evolution of meiosis and sexual reproduction
(discussed in chapter 12) led to the tremendous explosion
of diversity among the eukaryotes.

Multicellularity

Diversity was also promoted by the development of multi-
cellularity. Some single eukaryotic cells began living in as-
sociation with others, in colonies. Eventually individual
members of the colony began to assume different duties,
and the colony began to take on the characteristics of a sin-
gle individual. Multicellularity has arisen many times
among the eukaryotes. Practically every organism big
enough to see with the unaided eye is multicellular, includ-
ing all animals and plants. The great advantage of multicel-
lularity is that it fosters specialization; some cells devote all
of their energies to one task, other cells to another. Few in-
novations have had as great an impact on the history of life
as the specialization made possible by multicellularity.

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 71
