Flagellum

 
 
  

Hook

Outer membrane

 

Filament

Sleeve

 

 

 

Rod

Peptidoglycan portion
of cell wall

Plasma membrane a

Outer protein ring

 

 

Inner protein ring H*

FIGURE 34.6

 

 

Ht

The flagellar motor of a gram-negative bacterium. A protein filament, composed of the protein flagellin, is attached to a protein shaft
that passes through a sleeve in the outer membrane and through a hole in the peptidoglycan layer to rings of protein anchored in the cell
wall and plasma membrane, like rings of ballbearings. The shaft rotates when the inner protein ring attached to the shaft turns with

respect to the outer ring fixed to the cell wall. The inner ring is an H* ion channel, a proton pump that uses the passage of protons into the

cell to power the movement of the inner ring past the outer one.

The Cell Interior

The most fundamental characteristic of bacterial cells is
their prokaryotic organization. Bacterial cells lack the ex-
tensive functional compartmentalization seen within eu-
karyotic cells.

Internal membranes. Many bacteria possess invagi-
nated regions of the plasma membrane that function in
respiration or photosynthesis (figure 34.7).

Nucleoid region. Bacteria lack nuclei and do not pos-
sess the complex chromosomes characteristic of eukary-
otes. Instead, their genes are encoded within a single
double-stranded ring of DNA that is crammed into one
region of the cell known as the nucleoid region. Many
bacterial cells also possess small, independently replicat-
ing circles of DNA called plasmids. Plasmids contain
only a few genes, usually not essential for the cell’s sur-
vival. They are best thought of as an excised portion of
the bacterial chromosome.

Ribosomes. Bacterial ribosomes are smaller than
those of eukaryotes and differ in protein and RNA con-
tent. Antibiotics such as tetracycline and chlorampheni-
col can tell the difference—they bind to bacterial ribo-
somes and block protein synthesis, but do not bind to
eukaryotic ribosomes.

(@)

 

FIGURE 34.7

Bacterial cells often have complex internal membranes. This
aerobic bacterium (a) exhibits extensive respiratory membranes
within its cytoplasm not unlike those seen in mitochondria. This
cyanobacterium (b) has thylakoid-like membranes that provide a
site for photosynthesis.

 

The interior of a bacterial cell may possess internal
membranes and a nucleoid region.

 

Chapter 34 Bacteria 683
