Bacterial Variation

Bacteria reproduce rapidly, allowing
genetic variations to spread quickly
through a population. Two processes
create variation among bacteria: mu-
tation and genetic recombination.

Mutation

Mutations can arise spontaneously
in bacteria as errors in DNA replica-
tion occur. Certain factors tend to
increase the likelihood of errors oc-
curring such as radiation, ultraviolet
light, and various chemicals. In a
typical bacterium such as Escherichia
coli there are about 5000 genes. It is
highly probably that one mutation
will occur by chance in one out of
every million copies of a gene. With
5000 genes in a bacterium, the laws
of probability predict that 1 out of
every 200 bacteria will have a muta-
tion (figure 34.8). A spoonful of soil
typically contains over a billion bac-
teria and therefore should contain

a

Cells lifted
from colonies

    
  
 
 
   
  
  
  

Mutagen-treated
bacteria are added

 

 

 

 
 
 

Medium
be Supplemented Bacterial lacking
medium growth
——/ factor
}
he =
~ == _B: 2
Sy 4 Incubate
ete ,
= ~_ Colonies
ae as

 

Bacterial cells
are spread Ba

FIGURE 34.8

A mutant hunt in bacteria. Mutations in bacteria can be detected by a technique called
replica plating, which allows the genetic characteristics of the colonies to be investigated
without destroying them. The bacterial colonies, growing on a semisolid agar medium, are
transferred from A to B using a sterile velveteen disc pressed on the plate. Plate A has a
medium that includes special growth factors, while B has a medium that lacks some of these
growth factors. Bacteria that are not mutated can produce their own growth factors and do
not require them to be added to the medium. The colonies absent in B were unable to grow

something on the order of 5 million
mutant individuals!

With adequate food and nutri-
ents, a population of E. coli can dou-
ble in under 20 minutes. Because
bacteria multiply so rapidly, mutations can spread rapidly
in a population and can change the characteristics of that
population.

The ability of bacteria to change rapidly in response to
new challenges often has adverse effects on humans. Re-
cently a number of strains of Staphylococcus aureus associated
with serious infections in hospitalized patients have ap-
peared, some of them with alarming frequency. Unfortu-
nately, these strains have acquired resistance to penicillin and
a wide variety of other antibiotics, so that infections caused
by them are very difficult to treat. Staphylococcus infections
provide an excellent example of the way in which mutation
and intensive selection can bring about rapid change in bac-
terial populations. Such changes have serious medical impli-
cations when, as in the case of Staphylococcus, strains of bacte-
ria emerge that are resistant to a variety of antibiotics.

Recently, concern has arisen over the prevalence of an-
tibacterial soaps in the marketplace. They are marketed as a
means of protecting your family from harmful bacteria;
however, it is likely that their routine use will favor bacteria
that have mutations making them immune to the antibi-
otics contained in them. Ultimately, extensive use of an-
tibacterial soaps could have an adverse effect on our ability
to treat common bacterial infections.

undetected in A.

686 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

on the deficient medium and were thus mutant colonies; they were already present but

Genetic Recombination

Another source of genetic variation in populations of bac-
teria is recombination, discussed in detail in chapter 18.
Bacterial recombination occurs by the transfer of genes
from one cell to another by viruses, or through conjuga-
tion. The rapid transfer of newly produced, antibiotic-
resistant genes by plasmids has been an important factor
in the appearance of the resistant strains of Staphylococcus
aureus discussed earlier. An even more important example
in terms of human health involves the Enterobacteriaceae,
the family of bacteria to which the common intestinal
bacterium, Escherichia coli, belongs. In this family, there
are many important pathogenic bacteria, including the or-
ganisms that cause dysentery, typhoid, and other major
diseases. At times, some of the genetic material from these
pathogenic species is exchanged with or transferred to E.
coli by plasmids. Because of its abundance in the human
digestive tract, E. coli poses a special threat if it acquires
harmful traits.

 

Because of the short generation time of bacteria,
mutation and recombination play an important role in
generating genetic diversity.

 
