  

contributions to ecosystems.

Human Bacterial Diseases

Bacteria cause many diseases in humans, including cholera,
leprosy, tetanus, bacterial pneumonia, whooping cough,
diphtheria and lyme disease (table 34.2). Members of the
genus Streptococcus (see figure 34.2) are associated with
scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, pneumonia, and other infec-
tions. Tuberculosis (TB), another bacterial disease, is still a
leading cause of death in humans. Some of these diseases
like TB are mostly spread through the air in water vapor.
Other bacterial diseases are dispersed in food or water, in-
cluding typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever, and bacillary
dysentery. Typhus is spread among rodents and humans by
insect vectors.

Tuberculosis

Tuberculosis has been one of the great killer diseases for
thousands of years. Currently, about one-third of all people
worldwide are infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the
tuberculosis bacterium (figure 34.9). Eight million new
cases crop up each year, with about 3 million people dying
from the disease annually (the World Health Organization
predicts 4 million deaths a year by 2005). In fact, in 1997,
TB was the leading cause of death from a single infectious
agent worldwide. Since the mid-1980s, the United States
has been experiencing a dramatic resurgence of tuberculo-
sis. TB afflicts the respiratory system and is easily transmit-
The causes of

 

ted from person to person through the ai
this current resurgence of TB include social factors such as
poverty, crowding, homelessness, and incarceration (these
factors have always promoted the spread of TB). The in-
creasing prevalence of HIV infections is also a significant
contributing factor. People with AIDS are much more
likely to develop TB than people with healthy immune sys-
tems.

In addition to the increased numbers of cases—more
than 25,000 nationally as of March 1995—there have been
alarming outbreaks of multidrug-resistant strains of tuber-
culosis—strains resistant to the best available anti-TB med-
ications. Multidrug-resistant TB is particularly concerning
because it requires much more time to treat, is more expen-
sive to treat, and may prove to be fatal.

The basic principles of TB treatment and control are to
make sure all patients complete a full course of medication
so that all of the bacteria causing the infection are killed
and drug-resistant strains do not develop. Great efforts are
being made to ensure that high-risk individuals who are in-
fected but not yet sick receive preventative therapy, which
is 90% effective in reducing the likelihood of developing
active TB.

688 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

_ Bacteria are responsible for many diseases but also make important

 

FIGURE 34.9
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. This color-enhanced image shows
the rod-shaped bacterium responsible for tuberculosis in humans.

Dental Caries

One human disease we do not usually consider bacterial in
origin arises in the film on our teeth. This film, or plaque,
consists largely of bacterial cells surrounded by a polysac-
charide matrix. Most of the bacteria in plaque are filaments
of rod-shaped cells classified as various species of Actino-
myces, which extend out perpendicular to the surface of the
tooth. Many other bacterial species are also present in
plaque. Tooth decay, or dental caries, is caused by the
bacteria present in the plaque, which persists especially in
places that are difficult to reach with a toothbrush. Diets
that are high in sugars are especially harmful to teeth be-
cause lactic acid bacteria (especially Streptococcus sanguis and
S. mutans) ferment the sugars to lactic acid, a substance that
reduces the pH of the mouth, causing the local loss of cal-

 

cium from the teeth. Frequent eating of sugary snacks or
sucking on candy over a period of time keeps the pH level
of the mouth low resulting in the steady degeneration of
the tooth enamel. As the calcium is removed from the
tooth, the remaining soft matrix of the tooth becomes vul-
nerable to attack by bacteria which begin to break down its
proteins and tooth decay progresses rapidly. Fluoride
makes the teeth more resistant to decay because it retards
the loss of calcium. It was first realized that bacteria cause
tooth decay when germ-free animals were raised. Their
teeth do not decay even if they are fed sugary diets.
