Internal
membrane
system

   
   
 

 

Ancestral eukaryotic cell

   

Chloroplast

Eukaryotic cell with chloroplasts

FIGURE 35.3

Endosymbiosis

   

 

  
 

Mitochondrion

Photosynthetic

bacterium

 

‘The theory of endosymbiosis. Scientists propose that ancestral eukaryotic cells, which already had an internal system of membranes,
engulfed aerobic eubacteria, which then became mitochondria in the eukaryotic cell. Chloroplasts may also have originated this way, with

eukaryotic cells engulfing photosynthetic eubacteria.

eukaryotes today or if it is simply a different way of solv-
ing the same problem. There are no fossils in which we
can see the interiors of dividing cells well enough to be
able to trace the history of mitosis.

Endosymbiosis Is Not Rare

Many eukaryotic cells contain other endosymbiotic bacteria
in addition to mitochondria. Plants and algae contain
chloroplasts, bacteria-like organelles that were apparently
derived from symbiotic photosynthetic bacteria. Chloro-
plasts have a complex system of inner membranes and a cir-
cle of DNA. Centrioles, organelles associated with the as-
sembly of microtubules, resemble in many respects
spirochete bacteria, and they contain bacteria-like DNA in-
volved in the production of their structural proteins.

While all mitochondria are thought to have arisen from a
single symbiotic event, it is difficult to be sure with chloro-

plasts. Three biochemically distinct classes of chloroplasts
exist, each resembling a different bacterial ancestor. Red
algae possess pigments similar to those of cyanobacteria;
plants and green algae more closely resemble the photosyn-
thetic bacteria Prochloron; while brown algae and other pho-
tosynthetic protists resemble a third group of bacteria. This
diversity of chloroplasts has led to the widely held belief that
eukaryotic cells acquired chloroplasts by symbiosis at least
three different times. Recent comparisons of chloroplast
DNA sequences, however, suggest a single origin of chloro-
plasts, followed by very different postendosymbiotic histo-
ries. For example, in each of the three main lines, different
genes became relocated to the nucleus, lost, or modified.

 

The theory of endosymbiosis proposes that
mitochondria originated as symbiotic aerobic
eubacteria.

 

Chapter 35° Protists 695
