| 35.1 Eukaryotes probably arose by endosymbiosis.

Endosymbiosis

What was the first eukaryote like? We
cannot be sure, but a good model is
Pelomyxa palustris, a single-celled,
nonphotosynthetic organism that ap-
pears to represent an early stage in
the evolution of eukaryotic cells (fig-
ure 35.2). The cells of Pelomyxa are
much larger than bacterial cells and
contain a complex system of internal
membranes. Although they resemble
some of the largest early fossil eukary-
otes, these cells are unlike those of
any other eukaryote: Pelomyxa lacks
mitochondria and does not undergo
mitosis. Its nuclei divide somewhat as
do those of bacteria, by pinching apart
into two daughter nuclei, around
which new membranes form. Al-
though Pelomyxa cells lack mitochon-
dria, two kinds of bacteria living
within them may play the same role

 

FIGURE 35.2

Pelomyxa palustris. This unique, amoeba-
like protist lacks mitochondria and does not
undergo mitosis. Pelomyxa may represent a

contained a complex system of inter-
nal membranes. The inner membrane
of mitochondria is folded into numer-
ous layers, resembling the folded
membranes of nonsulfur purple bacte-
ria; embedded within this membrane
are the proteins that carry out oxida-
tive metabolism. The engulfed bacte-
ria became the interior portion of the
mitochondria we see today. Host cells
were unable to carry out the Krebs
cycle or other metabolic reactions
necessary for living in an atmosphere
that contained increasing amounts of
oxygen before they had acquired these
bacteria.

During the billion and a half years in
which mitochondria have existed as en-
dosymbionts within eukaryotic cells,
most of their genes have been trans-
ferred to the chromosomes of the host
cells—but not all. Each mitochondrion
still has its own genome, a circular,

that mitochondria do in all other eu-
karyotes. This primitive eukaryote is
so distinctive that it is assigned a phy-
lum all its own, Caryoblastea.

Biologists know very little of the
origin of Pelomyxa, except that in many
of its fundamental characteristics it resembles the archae-
bacteria far more than the eubacteria. Because of this gen-
eral resemblance, it is widely assumed that the first eukary-
otic cells were nonphotosynthetic descendants of
archaebacteria.

What about the wide gap between Pelomyxa and all
other eukaryotes? Where did mitochondria come from?
Most biologists agree with the theory of endosymbiosis,
which proposes that mitochondria originated as symbiotic,
aerobic (oxygen-requiring) eubacteria (figure 35.3). Sym-
biosis (Greek, syn, “together with” + bios, “life”) means liv-
ing together in close association. Recall from chapter 5 that
mitochondria are sausage-shaped organelles 1 to 3 microm-
eters long, about the same size as most eubacteria. Mito-
chondria are bounded by two membranes. Aerobic eubac-
teria are thought to have become mitochondria when they
were engulfed by ancestral eukaryotic cells, much like
Pelomyxa, carly in the history of eukaryotes.

The most similar eubacteria to mitochondria today
are the nonsulfur purple bacteria, which are able to carry
out oxidative metabolism (described in chapter 9). In mi-
tochondria, the outer membrane is smooth and is
thought to be derived from the endoplasmic reticulum of
the host cell, which, like Pelomyxa, may have already

eukaryotic cells.

694 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

very early stage in the evolution of

closed molecule of DNA similar to that
found in eubacteria, on which is located
genes encoding the essential proteins of
oxidative metabolism. These genes are
transcribed within the mitochondrion,
using mitochondrial ribosomes that are
smaller than those of eukaryotic cells, very much like bacte-
rial ribosomes in size and structure. Mitochondria divide by
simple fission, just as bacteria do, replicating and sorting
their DNA much as bacteria do. However, nuclear genes
direct the process, and mitochondria cannot be grown out-
side of the eukaryotic cell, in cell-free culture.

The theory of endosymbiosis has had a controversial
history but has now been accepted by all but a few biolo-
gists. The evidence supporting the theory is so extensive
that in this text we will treat it as established.

What of mitosis, the other typical eukaryotic process
that Pelomyxa lacks? The mechanism of mitosis, now so
common among eukaryotes, did not evolve all at once.
Traces of very different, and possibly intermediate,
mechanisms survive today in some of the eukaryotes. In
fungi and some groups of protists, for example, the nu-
clear membrane does not dissolve and mitosis is confined
to the nucleus. When mitosis is complete in these organ-
isms, the nucleus divides into two daughter nuclei, and
only then does the rest of the cell divide. This separate
nuclear division phase of mitosis does not occur in most
protists, or in plants or animals. We do not know if it
represents an intermediate step on the evolutionary jour-
ney to the form of mitosis that is characteristic of most
