Importance of Bacteria

Bacteria were largely responsible for creating the proper-
ties of the atmosphere and the soil over billions of years.
They are metabolically much more diverse than eukary-
otes, which is why they are able to exist in such a wide
range of habitats. The many autotrophic bacteria—cither
photosynthetic or chemoautotrophic—make major contri-
butions to the carbon balance in terrestrial, freshwater, and
marine habitats. Other heterotrophic bacteria play a key
role in world ecology by breaking down organic com-
pounds. One of the most important roles of bacteria in the
global ecosystem relates to the fact that only a few genera
of bacteria—and no other organisms—have the ability to
fix atmospheric nitrogen and thus make it available for use
by other organisms (see chapter 28).

Bacteria are very important in many industrial
processes. Bacteria are used in the production of acetic
acid and vinegar, various amino acids and enzymes, and
especially in the fermentation of lactose into lactic acid,
which coagulates milk proteins and is used in the produc-
tion of almost all cheeses, yogurt, and similar products. In
the production of bread and other foods, the addition of
certain strains of bacteria can lead to the enrichment of
the final product with respect to its mix of amino acids, a
key factor in its nutritive value. Many products tradition-
ally manufactured using yeasts, such as ethanol, can also

be made using bacteria. The comparative economics of
these processes will determine which group of organisms
is used in the future. Many of the most widely used antibi-
otics, including streptomycin, aureomycin, erythromycin,
and chloromycetin, are derived from bacteria. Most an-
tibiotics seem to be substances used by bacteria to com-
pete with one another and fungi in nature, allowing one
species to exclude others from a favored habitat. Bacteria
can also play a part in removing environmental pollutants

(figure 34.11)

Bacteria and Genetic Engineering

Applying genetic engineering methods to produce im-
proved strains of bacteria for commercial use, as discussed
in chapter 19, holds enormous promise for the future. Bac-
teria are under intense investigation, for example, as non-
polluting insect control agents. Bacillus thuringiensis attacks
insects in nature, and improved, highly specific strains of B.
thuringiensis have greatly increased its usefulness as a bio-
logical control agent. Bacteria have also been extraordinar-
ily useful in our attempts to understand genetics and mole-
cular biology.

 

Bacteria play a major role in modern medicine and
agriculture, and have profound ecological impact.

 

 

FIGURE 34.11

Using bacteria to clean up oil spills. Bacteria can often be used to remove environmental pollutants, such as petroleum hydrocarbons
and chlorinated compounds. In areas contaminated by the Exxon Valdez oil spill (rocks on the /ef?), oil-degrading bacteria produced

dramatic results (rocks on the right).

Chapter 34 Bacteria 691
