Sexually Transmitted Diseases

A number of bacteria cause sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs). Three are particularly important (figure 34.10).

Gonorrhea. Gonorrhea is one of the most prevalent
communicable diseases in North America. Caused by the
bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae, gonorrhea can be transmit-
ted through sexual intercourse or any other sexual contacts
in which body fluids are exchanged, such as oral or anal in-
tercourse. Gonorrhea can infect the throat, urethra, cervix,
or rectum and can spread to the eyes and internal organs,
causing conjunctivitis (a severe infection of the eyes) and
arthritic meningitis (an infection of the joints). Left un-
treated in women, gonorrhea can cause pelvic inflamma-
tory disease (PID), a condition in which the fallopian tubes
become scarred and blocked. PID can eventually lead to
sterility. The incidence of gonorrhea has been on the de-
cline, but it remains a serious threat.

Syphilis. Syphilis, a very destructive STD, was once
prevalent but is now less common due to the advent of
blood-screening procedures and antibiotics. Syphilis is
caused by a spirochete bacterium, Treponema pallidum, that
is transmitted during sexual intercourse or through direct
contact with an open syphilis sore. The bacterium can also
be transmitted from a mother to her fetus, often causing
damage to the heart, eyes, and nervous system of the baby.

Once inside the body, the disease progresses in four dis-
tinct stages. The first, or primary stage, is characterized by
the appearance of a small, painless, often unnoticed sore
called a chancre. The chancre resembles a blister and oc-
curs at the location where the bacterium entered the body
about three weeks following exposure. This stage of the
disease is highly infectious, and an infected person may un-
wittingly transmit the disease to others.

The second stage of syphilis is marked by a rash, a sore
throat, and sores in the mouth. The bacteria can be trans-
mitted at this stage through kissing or contact with an open
sore.

The third stage of syphilis is symptomless. This stage
may last for several years, and at this point, the person is no
longer infectious but the bacteria are still present in the
body, attacking the internal organs. The final stage of
syphilis is the most debilitating, however, as the damage
done by the bacteria in the third stage becomes evident.
Sufferers at this stage of syphilis experience heart disease,
mental deficiency, and nerve damage, which may include a
loss of motor functions or blindness.

Chlamydia. Sometimes called the “silent STD,” chlamy-
dia is caused by an unusual bacterium, Chlamydia trachoma-
tis, that has both bacterial and viral characteristics. Like a
bacterium, it is susceptible to antibiotics, and, like a virus, it
depends on its host to replicate its genetic material; it is an
obligate internal parasite. The bacterium is transmitted
through vaginal, anal, or oral intercourse with an infected
person.

690 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

— Syphilis
— Gonorthea
— Chlamydia

       
 

Number of cases
(per 100,000 people)
i

 

     
 

 

a
1990 1992 1994 1996

Year

a
1984 1986 1988

 

 

 

FIGURE 34.10

Trends in sexually transmitted diseases in the U.S.
Source: CDC, Atlanta, GA.

Chlamydia is called the “silent STD” because women
usually experience no symptoms until after the infection
has become established. In part because of this symptom-
less nature, the incidence of chlamydia has skyrocketed, in-
creasing by more than sevenfold nationally since 1984. The
effects of an established chlamydia infection on the female
body are extremely serious. Chlamydia can cause pelvic in-
flammatory disease (PID), which can lead to sterility.

It has recently been established that infection of the re-
productive tract by chlamydia can cause heart disease.
Chlamydia produce a peptide similar to one produced by
cardiac muscle. As the body’s immune system tries to fight
off the infection, it recognizes this peptide. The similarity
between the bacterial and cardiac peptides confuses the im-
mune system and T cells attack cardiac muscle fibers, inad-
vertently causing inflammation of the heart and other
problems.

Within the last few years, two types of tests for chlamy-
dia have been developed that look for the presence of the
bacteria in the discharge from men and women. The treat-
ment for chlamydia is antibiotics, usually tetracycline (peni-
cillin is not effective against chlamydia). Any woman who
experiences the symptoms associated with this STD should
be tested for the presence of the chlamydia bacterium; oth-
erwise, her fertility may be at risk.

This discussion of STDs may give the impression that
sexual activity is fraught with danger, and in a way, it is. It
is folly not to take precautions to avoid STDs. The best
way to do this is to know one’s sexual partners well enough
to discuss the possible presence of an STD. Condom use
can also prevent transmission of most of the diseases. Re-
sponsibility for protection lies with each individual.

 

Bacterial diseases have a major impact worldwide.
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) are becoming
increasingly widespread among Americans as sexual
activity increases.

 
