Bacterial Metabolism

Bacteria have evolved many mechanisms to acquire the en-
ergy and nutrients they need for growth and reproduction.
Many are autotrophs, organisms that obtain their carbon
from it inorganic CQ). Autotrophs that obtain their energy
from sunlight are called photoautorrophs, while those that
harvest energy from inorganic chemicals are called
chemoautotrophs. Other bacteria are heterotrophs, organ-
isms that obtain at least some of their carbon from organic
molecules like glucose. Heterotrophs that obtain their en-
ergy from sunlight are called photobeterotrophs, while those
that harvest energy from organic molecules are called
chemobeterotrophs.

Photoautotrophs. Many bacteria carry out photosyn-
thesis, using the energy of sunlight to build organic mol-
ecules from carbon dioxide. The cyanobacteria use
chlorophyll @ as the key light-capturing pigment and use
H)O as an electron donor, releasing oxygen gas as a by-
product. Other bacteria use bacteriochlorophyll as their
pigment and H)S as an electron donor, leaving elemen-
tal sulfur as the by-product.

Chemoautotrophs. Some bacteria obtain their energy
by oxidizing inorganic substances. Nitrifiers, for exam-
ple, oxidize ammonia or nitrite to obtain energy, pro-
ducing the nitrate that is taken up by plants. This
process is called nitrogen fixation and is essential in ter-
restrial ecosystems as plants can only absorb nitrogen in
the form of nitrate. Other bacteria oxidize sulfur, hydro-
gen gas, and other inorganic molecules. On the dark
ocean floor at depths of 2500 meters, entire ecosystems
subsist on bacteria that oxidize hydrogen sulfide as it es-
capes from thermal vents.

Photoheterotrophs. The so-called purple nonsulfur
bacteria use light as their source of energy but obtain
carbon from organic molecules such as carbohydrates or
alcohols that have been produced by other organisms.
Chemoheterotrophs. Most bacteria obtain both car-
bon atoms and energy from organic molecules. These
include decomposers and most pathogens.

How Heterotrophs Infect Host Organisms

In the 1980s, researchers studying the disease-causing
species of Yersinia, a group of gram-negative bacteria,
found that they produced and secreted large amounts of
proteins. Most proteins secreted by gram-negative bac-
teria have special signal sequences that allow them to
pass through the bacterium’s double membrane. This
key signal sequence was missing the proteins being se-
creted by Yersinia. These proteins lacked a signal-
sequence that two known secretion mechanisms require
for transport across the double membrane of gram-
negative bacteria. The proteins must therefore have

been secreted by a third type of system, which re-
searchers called the type III system.

As more bacteria species are studied, the genes coding
for the type III system are turning up in other gram-
negative animal pathogens, and even in more distantly
related plant pathogens. The genes seem to be more
closely related to one another than do the bacteria. Fur-
thermore, the genes are similar to those that code for
bacterial flagella.

The role of these proteins is still under investigation,
but it seems that some of the proteins are used to transfer
other virulence proteins into nearby eukaryotic cells.
Given the similarity of the type III genes to the genes
that code for flagella, some scientists hypothesize that the
transfer proteins may form a flagellum-like structure that
shoots virulence proteins into the host cells. Once in the
eukaryotic cells, the virulence proteins may determine
the host’s response to the pathogens. In Yersinia, proteins
secreted by the type III system are injected into
macrophages; they disrupt signals that tell the
macrophages to engulf bacteria. Salmonella and Shigella
use their type III proteins to enter the cytoplasm of eu-
karyotic cells and thus are protected from the immune
system of their host. The proteins secreted by E. coli alter
the cytoskeleton of nearby intestinal eukaryotic cells, re-
sulting in a bulge onto which the bacterial cells can
tightly bind.

Currently, researchers are looking for a way to disarm
the bacteria using knowledge of their internal machinery,
possibly by causing the bacteria to release the virulence
proteins before they are near eukaryotic cells. Others are
studying the eukaryotic target proteins and the process by
which they are affected.

Bacteria as Plant Pathogens

Many costly diseases of plants are associated with partic-
ular heterotrophic bacteria. Almost every kind of plant is
susceptible to one or more kinds of bacterial disease.
The symptoms of these plant diseases vary, but they are
commonly manifested as spots of various sizes on the
stems, leaves, flowers, or fruits. Other common and de-
structive diseases of plants, including blights, soft rots,
and wilts, also are associated with bacteria. Fire blight,
which destroys pears, apple trees, and related plants, is a
well-known example of bacterial disease. Most bacteria
that cause plant diseases are members of the group of
rod-shaped bacteria known as pseudomonads (see
figure 34.2).

 

While bacteria obtain carbon and energy in many
ways, most are chemoheterotrophs. Some
heterotrophs have evolved sophisticated ways to infect
their hosts.

 

Chapter 34 Bacteria 687
