 

EUKARYA

 

 

 

Animals Plants

     
  
   
  
      
  
  
   
   
    
     
    

Microsporidia . cerevisiae

Slime molds

E. coli

 

B. subtilus

 

BACTERIA

 

 

Synechocystis sp.

 
 

. Thermotoga
Flavobacteria

Green sulfur
bacteria Methano-

pyrus

  

Borrelia
@) burgdorferi paitoy

FIGURE 4.15

Euglena

Sulfolobus

Methanococcus
jannaschii

 

Diplomonads
(lamblia)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Thermococcus

Methanobacterium
Archaeoglobus
Halococcus
Halobacterium

The three domains of life. The kingdoms Archaebacteria and Eubacteria are as different from each other as from eukaryotes, so
biologists have assigned them a higher category, a “domain.” (a) A three-domain tree of life based on ribosomal RNA consists of the
Eukarya, Bacteria, and Archaea. ()) New analyses of complete genome sequences contradict the rRNA tree, and suggest other
arrangements such as this one, which splits the Archaea. Apparently genes hopped from branch to branch as early organisms either stole
genes from their food or swapped DNA with their neighbors, even distantly related ones.

The Kingdoms of Life

Confronted with the great diversity of life on earth today,
biologists have attempted to categorize similar organisms
in order to better understand them, giving rise to the sci-
ence of taxonomy. In later chapters, we will discuss tax-
onomy and classification in detail, but for now we can
generalize that all living things fall into one of three
domains which include six kingdoms (figure 4.15):

Kingdom Archaebacteria: Prokaryotes that lack a
peptidoglycan cell wall, including the methanogens and
extreme halophiles and thermophiles.

Kingdom Eubacteria:
peptidoglycan cell wall, including cyanobacteria, soil
bacteria, nitrogen-fixing bacteria, and pathogenic
(disease-causing) bacteria.

Kingdom Protista: Eukaryotic, primarily unicellu-
lar (although algae are multicellular), photosynthetic
or heterotrophic organisms, such as amoebas and
paramecia.

Prokaryotic organisms with a

72 PartI The Origin of Living Things

Kingdom Fungi: Eukaryotic, mostly multicellular (al-
though yeasts are unicellular), heterotrophic, usually
nonmotile organisms, with cell walls of chitin, such as
mushrooms.

Kingdom Plantae: Eukaryotic, multicellular, non-
motile, usually terrestrial, photosynthetic organisms,
such as trees, grasses, and mosses.

Kingdom Animalia: Eukaryotic, multicellular, motile,
heterotrophic organisms, such as sponges, spiders,
newts, penguins, and humans.

As more is learned about living things, particularly from
the newer evidence that DNA studies provide, scientists will
continue to reevaluate the relationships among the king-
doms of life.

 

For at least the first 1 billion years of life on earth, all
organisms were bacteria. About 1.5 billion years ago,
the first eukaryotes appeared. Biologists place living
organisms into six general categories called kingdoms.

 

 
