| 35.2 The kingdom Protista is by far the most diverse of any kingdom.

The Challenge of Classifying
the Protists

Protists are the most diverse of the four kingdoms in the
domain Eukaryota. The kingdom Protista contains many
unicellular, colonial, and multicellular groups. Probably the
most important statement we can make about the kingdom
Protista is that it is an artificial group; as a matter of conve-
nience, single-celled eukaryotic organisms have typically
been grouped together into this kingdom. This lumps
many very different and only distantly related forms to-
gether. The “single-kingdom” classification of the Protista
is not representative of any evolutionary relationships. The
phyla of protists are, with very few exceptions, only dis-
tantly related to one another.

New applications of a wide variety of molecular methods
are providing important insights into the relationships
among the protists. Of all the groups of organisms biolo-
gists study, protists are probably in the greatest state of flux
when it comes to classification. There is little consensus,
even among experts, as to how the different kinds of protists
should be classified. Are they a single, very diverse kingdom,
or are they better considered as several different kingdoms,
each of equal rank with animals, plants, and fungi?

Because the Protista are still predominantly considered
part of one diverse, nonunified group, that is how we will
treat them in this chapter, bearing in mind that biologists
are rapidly gaining a better understanding of the evolution-
ary relationships among members of the kingdom Protista
(figure 35.4). It seems likely that within a few years, the tra-
ditional kingdom Protista will be replaced by another more
illuminating arrangement.

 

The taxonomy of the protists is in a state of flux as new
information shapes our understanding of this kingdom.

 

FIGURE 35.4

The challenge of protistan classification. Three different
suggestions for protistan classification are presented, each adapted
from the work of an authority in the field. Their great differences
attest to the wide divergence of opinion within the field itself.

‘The classification on the top is based on molecular variation in
ribosomal subunits. The classification in the middle presents a
cladistic analysis of a broad range of characters (including
ribosomal subunits). The classification on the bottom outlines a
more revolutionary reevaluation of the protists. Comparison of
the three schemes reveals that some groups are commonly
recognized as related (like ciliates and dinoflagellates), while the
classification of others (like Giardia) is clearly in a state of flux.

696 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

   

Rhizopods, plasmodial
slime molds, fungi
(basidiomycetes)

Plants
Fungi (ascomycetes)

Red algae
Analysis Based on Ribosomal Subunits

 

 

 

 

Red algae

Photosynthetic protists
(Volvox, Spirogyra)

Most thizopods, water molds,

diatoms, brown algae,
heliozoans, slime nets

Heterotrophic symbiotic
flagellates (Trichomonas,
Trichonympha, Giardia)

Choanoflagellates and animals

Amoeboflagellates and
cellular slime molds

Dinoflagellates and ciliates
Euglenoids
Cladistic Analysis

 

 

KINGDOM PLANTAE

Plants and 5 protist

phyla, including the

green algae (Volvox,
KINGDOM Ulva, Spirogyra) and KINGDOM FUNGI
CHROMISTA the red algae Fungi and 1 phylum
10 protist phyla, of saprophytic protists
including the more (chytridiomycota)
familiar 7 “heterokont”
phyla: brown algae, KINGDOM ANIMALIA
slime nets, and diatoms (no protist phyla)

KINGDOM PROTOZOA

14 protist phyla, including
hypermastigotes (Trichonympha),
euglenoids, slime molds,
choanoflagellates, dinoflagellates,
ciliates, apicomplexans, rhizopods,
heliozoans, foraminiferans, and
radiolarians

KINGDOM ARCHEZOA

forms, including Pelomyxa,

Giardia

1
1
Primitive amitochondrial 1
\
1
'

“>> Prokaryotic Ancestor)
Six Eukaryotic Kingdoms

 

 
