Protists

 

Concept Outline

35.1 Eukaryotes probably arose by endosymbiosis.

Endosymbiosis. Mitochondria and chloroplasts are
thought to have arisen by endosymbiosis from aerobic
bacteria.

35.2 The kingdom Protista is by far the most diverse
of any kingdom.

The Challenge of Classifying the Protists. There is no
general agreement among taxonomists about how to
classify the protists.

General Biology of the Protists. Protista contains
members exhibiting a wide range of methods of
locomotion, nutrition, and reproduction.

35.3 Protists can be categorized into five groups.

Five Groups of Protists. The 15 major phyla of protists
can be conveniently discussed in seven general groups that
share certain characteristics.

Heterotrophs with No Permanent Locomotor
Apparatus. Amoebas and other sarcodines have no
permanent locomotor apparatus.

Photosynthetic Protists. The flagellates are
photosynthesizers that propel themselves through the water
with flagella. Diatoms are photosynthesizers with hard
shells of silica. Algae are photosynthetic protists, some are
multicellular.

Heterotrophs with Flagella.Flagellates propel
themselves through the water. Single cells with many cilia,
the ciliates possess highly complex and specialized
organelles.

Nonmotile Spore-Formers. The sporozoans are
nonmotile parasites that spread by forming spores.
Heterotrophs with Restricted Mobility. Heterotrophs
with restricted mobility, molds have cell walls made of
carbohydrate.

 

 

FIGURE 35.1

Volvox, a colonial protist. The protists are a large, diverse group
of primarily single-celled organisms, a group from which the
other three eukaryotic kingdoms each evolved.

F” more than half of the long history of life on earth,
all life was microscopic in size. The biggest organisms
that existed for over 2 billion years were single-celled bac-
teria fewer than 6 micrometers thick. The first evidence of
a different kind of organism is found in tiny fossils in rock
15 billion years old. These fossil cells are much larger than
bacteria (some as big as 60 micrometers in diameter) and
have internal membranes and what appear to be small,
membrane-bounded structures. Many have elaborate
shapes, and some exhibit spines or filaments. These new,
larger fossil organisms mark one of the most important
events in the evolution of life, the appearance of a new kind
of organism, the eukaryote (figure 35.1). Flexible and
adaptable, the eukaryotes rapidly evolved to produce all of
the diverse large organisms that populate the earth today,
including ourselves—indeed, all organisms other than bac-
teria are cukaryotes.

693
