How Biologists Do
Their Work

 

The Consent

Late in November, on a single night

Not even near to freezing, the ginkgo trees
That stand along the walk drop all their leaves
In one consent, and neither to rain nor to wind
But as though to time alone: the golden and
green

Leaves litter the lawn today, that yesterday
Had spread aloft their fluttering fans of light.
What signal from the stars? What senses took it
in?

What in those wooden motives so decided
To strike their leaves, to down their leaves,
Rebellion or surrender? And if this
Can happen thus, what race shall be exempt?
What use to learn the lessons taught by time,
Ifa star at any time may tell us: Now.

Howard Nemerov

FIGURE 1.4
Aginkgo tree.

 

when the days get short enough in the fall,
each leaf responds independently by falling.

Hypothesis 3: A strong wind arose the night
before Nemerov made his observation,
blowing all the leaves off the ginkgo trees.

Next, the scientist attempts to eliminate
one or more of the hypotheses by conduct-
ing an experiment. In this case, one might
cover some of the leaves so that they can-
not use light to sense day length. If hypoth-
esis 2 is true, then the covered leaves
should not fall when the others do, because
they are not receiving the same informa-
tion. Suppose, however, that despite the
covering of some of the leaves, all the
leaves still fall together. This result would
eliminate hypothesis 2 as a possibility. Ei-
ther of the other hypotheses, and many
others, remain possibilities.

This simple experiment with ginkgoes
points out the essence of scientific
progress: science does not prove that cer-
tain explanations are true; rather, it proves
that others are not. Hypotheses that are
inconsistent with experimental results are

What is bothering the poet Howard Nem-
erov is that life is influenced by forces he
cannot control or even identify. It is the job
of biologists to solve puzzles such as the one
he poses, to identify and try to understand
those things that influence life.

Nemerov asks why ginkgo trees (figure
1.A) drop all their leaves at once. To find
an answer to questions such as this, biolo-
gists and other scientists pose possible an-
swers and then try to determine which an-
swers are false. Tests of alternative
possibilities are called experiments. To

learn why the ginkgo trees drop all their
leaves simultaneously, a scientist would
first formulate several possible answers,
called hypotheses:

Hypothesis 1: Ginkgo trees possess an inter-
nal clock that times the release of leaves to
match the season. On the day Nemerov de-
scribes, this clock sends a “drop” signal
(perhaps a chemical) to all the leaves at the
same time.

Hypothesis 2: The individual leaves of ginkgo
trees are each able to sense day length, and

rejected, while hypotheses that are not
proven false by an experiment are provi-
sionally accepted. However, hypotheses
may be rejected in the future when more
information becomes available, if they are
inconsistent with the new information. Just
as finding the correct path through a maze
by trying and eliminating false paths, sci-
entists work to find the correct explana-
tions of natural phenomena by eliminating
false possibilities.

some kind of industry. Their work may involve the manu-
facturing of food additives, creating of new drugs, or test-
ing the quality of the environment.

After developing a hypothesis and performing a series of
experiments, a scientist writes a paper carefully describing
the experiment and its results. He or she then submits the
paper for publication in a scientific journal, but before it is
published, it must be reviewed and accepted by other scien-
tists who are familiar with that particular field of research.
This process of careful evaluation, called peer review, lies at
the heart of modern science, fostering careful work, precise
description, and thoughtful analysis. When an important
discovery is announced in a paper, other scientists attempt
to reproduce the result, providing a check on accuracy and
honesty. Nonreproducible results are not taken seriously
for long.

The explosive growth in scientific research during the
second half of the twentieth century is reflected in the
enormous number of scientific journals now in existence.
Although some, such as Science and Nature, are devoted to
a wide range of scientific disciplines, most are extremely
specialized: Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, Glycoconju-
gate Journal, Mutation Research, and Synapse are just a few
examples.

 

The scientific process involves the rejection of
hypotheses that are inconsistent with experimental
results or observations. Hypotheses that are consistent
with available data are conditionally accepted. The
formulation of the hypothesis often involves creative
insight.

 

Chapter 1 The Science of Biology 9
