Heterotrophs with No
Permanent Locomotor
Apparatus

The largest of the five general groups
of protists are primarily unicellular or-
ganisms with amoeboid forms. There
are three principle phyla: the forams
and the radiolarians have carbonate

shells and the rhizopods lack shells.

|.
5
£
§
E
5
a
2
2
=
2

locomotor apparatus

Rhizopoda: The Amoebas

Hundreds of species of amoebas are
found throughout the world in both
fresh and salt waters. They are also
abundant in soil. Many kinds of amoe-
bas are parasites of animals. Reproduc-
tion in amoebas occurs by fission, or
the direct division into two cells of
equal volume. Amoebas of the phylum
Rhizopoda lack cell walls, flagella,
meiosis, and any form of sexuality.
They do undergo mitosis, with a spin-
dle apparatus that resembles that of
other eukaryotes.

Amoebas move from place to place
by means of their pseudopods, from
the Greek words for “false” and “foot”
(figure 35.7). Pseudopods are flowing
projections of cytoplasm that extend
and pull the amoeba forward or engulf
food particles, a process called cyto-
plasmic streaming. An amoeba puts a
pseudopod forward and then flows into

FIGURE 35.7

 

 

Amoeba proteus. This relatively large

slight diarrhea to much more serious
conditions. In some tropical areas,
more than half of the population may
be infected. The spread of amoebic
dysentery can be limited by proper
sanitation and hygiene.

Actinopoda: The Radiolarians

The pseudopodia of amoeboid cells
give them truly amorphous bodies.
One group, however, have more dis-
tinct structures. Members of the phy-
lum Actinopoda, often called radiolari-
ans, secrete glassy exoskeletons made
of silica. These skeletons give the uni-
cellular organisms a distinct shape, ex-
hibiting either bilateral or radial sym-
metry. The shells of different species
form many elaborate and beautiful
shapes and its pseudopodia extrude
outward along spiky projections of the
skeleton (figure 35.8). Microtubules
support these cytoplasmic projections.

Foraminifera: Forams

Members of the phylum Foraminifera
are heterotrophic marine protists.
They range in diameter from about 20
micrometers to several centimeters.
Characteristic of the group are pore-
studded shells (called tests) composed
of organic materials usually reinforced
with grains of inorganic matter. These
grains may be calcium carbonate, sand,

it. Microfilaments of actin and myosin
similar to those found in muscles are
associated with these movements. The
pseudopodia can form at any point on

amoeba is commonly used in teaching and
for research in cell biology. The projections
are pseudopods; an amoeba moves by
flowing into them. The nucleus of the
amoeba is plainly visible.

or even plates from the shells of echin-
oderms or spicules (minute needles of
calcium carbonate) from sponge skele-
tons. Depending on the building mate-

the cell body so that it can move in any
direction.

Some kinds of amoebas form resis-
tant cysts. In parasitic species such as
Entamoeba histolytica, which causes
amoebic dysentery, cysts enable the amoebas to resist di-
gestion by their animal hosts. Mitotic division takes place
within the cysts, which ultimately rupture and release
four, eight, or even more amoebas within the digestive
tracts of their host animals. The primary infection takes
place in the intestine, but it often moves into the liver and
other parts of the body. The cysts are dispersed in the
feces and may be transmitted from person to person in in-
fected food or water, or by flies. It is estimated that up to
10 million people in the United States have infections of
parasitic amoebas, and some 2 million show symptoms of
the disease, ranging from abdominal discomfort with

700 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

rials they use, foraminifera—often in-
formally called “forams”—may have
shells of very different appearance.
Some of them are brilliantly colored
red, salmon, or yellow-brown.

Most foraminifera live in sand or are attached to other
organisms, but two families consist of free-floating plank-
tonic organisms. Their tests may be single-chambered but
more often are multichambered, and they sometimes have a
spiral shape resembling that of a tiny snail. Thin cytoplas-
mic projections called podia emerge through openings in
the tests (figure 35.9). Podia are used for swimming, gath-
ering materials for the tests, and feeding. Forams eat a wide
variety of small organisms.

The life cycles of foraminifera are extremely complex,
involving an alternation between haploid and diploid gen-
erations (sporic meiosis). Forams have contributed massive
