Has Life Evolved Elsewhere?

We should not overlook the possibility that life processes
might have evolved in different ways on other planets. A
functional genetic system, capable of accumulating and
replicating changes and thus of adaptation and evolution,
could theoretically evolve from molecules other than car-
bon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen in a different environ-
ment. Silicon, like carbon, needs four electrons to fill its
outer energy level, and ammonia is even more polar than
water. Perhaps under radically different temperatures and
pressures, these elements might form molecules as diverse
and flexible as those carbon has formed on earth.

The universe has 10? (100,000,000,000,000,000,000)
stars similar to our sun. We don’t know how many of
these stars have planets, but it seems increasingly likely
that many do. Since 1996, astronomers have been detect-
ing planets orbiting distant stars. At least 10% of stars are
thought to have planetary systems. If only 1 in 10,000 of
these planets is the right size and at the right distance
from its star to duplicate the conditions in which life orig-
inated on earth, the “life experiment” will have been re-
peated 10!5 times (that is, a million billion times). It does
not seem likely that we are alone.

Ancient Bacteria on Mars?

A dull gray chunk of rock collected in 1984 in Antarctica
ignited an uproar about ancient life on Mars with the report
that the rock contains evidence of possible life. Analysis of
gases trapped within small pockets of the rock indicate it is a
meteorite from Mars. It is, in fact, the oldest rock known to
science—fully 4.5 billion years old. Back then, when this
rock formed on Mars, that cold, arid planet was much
warmer, flowed with water, and had a carbon dioxide
atmosphere—conditions not too different from those that
spawned life on earth.

When examined with powerful electron microscopes,
carbonate patches within the meteorite exhibit what look
like microfossils, some 20 to 100 nanometers in length. One
hundred times smaller than any known bacteria, it is not
clear they actually are fossils, but the resemblance to bacte-
ria is striking.

Viewed as a whole, the evidence of bacterial life associ-
ated with the Mars meteorite is not compelling. Clearly,
more painstaking research remains to be done before the
discovery can claim a scientific consensus. However, while
there is no conclusive evidence of bacterial life associated
with this meteorite, it seems very possible that life has
evolved on other worlds in addition to our own.

Deep-Sea Vents

The possibility that life on earth actually originated in the
vicinity of deep-sea hydrothermal vents is gaining popular-
ity. At the bottom of the ocean, where these vents spewed

 

FIGURE 4.16

Is there life elsewhere? Currently the most likely candidate for
life elsewhere within the solar system is Europa, one of the many
moons of the large planet Jupiter.

out a rich froth of molecules, the geological turbulence and
radioactive energy battering the land was absent, and things
were comparatively calm. The thermophilic archaebacteria
found near these vents today are the most ancient group of
organisms living on earth. Perhaps the gentler environment
of the ocean depths was the actual cradle of life.

Other Planets

Has life evolved on other worlds within our solar system?
There are planets other than ancient Mars with conditions
not unlike those on earth. Europa, a large moon of Jupiter, is
a promising candidate (figure 4.16). Europa is covered with
ice, and photos taken in close orbit in the winter of 1998 re-
veal seas of liquid water beneath a thin skin of ice. Additional
satellite photos taken in 1999 suggest that a few miles under
the ice lies a liquid ocean of water larger than earth’s, warmed
by the push and pull of the gravitational attraction of Jupiter’s
many large satellite moons. The conditions on Europa now
are far less hostile to life than the conditions that existed in
the oceans of the primitive earth. In coming decades satellite
missions are scheduled to explore this ocean for life.

 

‘There are so many stars that life may have evolved
many times. Although evidence for life on Mars is not
compelling, the seas of Europa offer a promising
candidate which scientists are eager to investigate.

 

Chapter 4 The Origin and Early History of Life 73
