Five Groups of Protists

 

There are some 15 major phyla of protists. It is difficult to
encompass their great diversity with any simple scheme.
Traditionally, texts have grouped them artificially (as was
done in the nineteenth century) into photosynthesizers
(algae), heterotrophs (protozoa), and absorbers (funguslike
protists).

In this text, we will group the protists into five gen-
eral groups according to some of the major shared char-
acteristics (figure 35.6). These are characteristics that
taxonomists are using today in broad attempts to classify
the kingdom Protista. These include (1) the presence or
absence and type of cilia or flagella, (2) the presence and
kinds of pigments, (3) the type of mitosis, (4) the kinds
of cristae present in the mitochondria, (5) the molecular
genetics of the ribosomal “S” subunit, (6) the kind of in-
clusions the protist may have, (7) overall body form
(amoeboid, coccoid, and so forth), (8) whether the pro-
tist has any kind of shell or other body “armor,” and

 

categorized into five groups.

(9) modes of nutrition and movement. These represent
only some of the characters used to define phylogenetic
relationships.

The five criteria we have chosen to define groups are
not the only ones that might be chosen, and there is no
broad agreement among biologists as to which set of crite-
ria is preferable. As molecular analysis gives us a clearer
picture of the phylogenetic relationships among the pro-
tists, more evolutionarily suitable groupings will without a
doubt replace the one represented here. Table 35.1 sum-
marizes some of the general characteristics and groupings
of the 15 major phyla of protists. It is important to remem-
ber that while the phyla of protists discussed here are gen-
erally accepted taxa, the larger groupings of phyla pre-
sented are functional groupings.

 

‘The 15 major protist phyla can be conveniently
categorized into five groups according to major shared
characteristics.

 

 

Pyrthophyta
Euglenophyta
Rhizopoda Chrysophyta Sarcomastigophora Apicomplexa Oomycota
‘Actinopoda Rhodophyta Ciliophora Acrasiomycota
Foraminifera Phaeophyta Myxomycota
Chlorophyta
Protists

 

FIGURE 35.6

Five general groups of protists. This text presents the 15 major phyla of protists in five groups that share major characteristics.

698 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
