Chlorophyta: The Green
Algae

Green algae are an extremely varied
group of more than 7000 species.
The chlorophytes have an extensive
fossil record dating back 900 million
years. They are mostly aquatic, but
some are semiterrestrial in moist
places, such as on tree trunks or in
soil. Many are microscopic and uni-
cellular, but some, such as sea let-
tuce, Ulva (see figure 35.16), are
tens of centimeters across and easily
visible on rocks and pilings around
the coasts.

Green algae are of special inter-
est, both because of their unusual di-
versity and because the ancestors of
the plant kingdom were clearly mul-
ticellular green algae. Many features
of modern green algae closely re-
semble plants, especially their
chloroplasts which are biochemically
similar to those of the plants. They
contain chlorophylls @ and b, as well
as carotenoids. Green algae include
a very wide array of both unicellular
and multicellular organisms.

Among the unicellular green
algae, Chlamydomonas (figure 35.15)
is a well-known genus. Individuals
are microscopic (usually less than 25
micrometers long), green, rounded,
and have two flagella at the anterior
end. They move rapidly in water by beating their flagella in
opposite directions. Each individual has an eyespot, which
contains about 100,000 molecules of rhodopsin, the same
pigment employed in vertebrate eyes. Light received by
this eyespot is used by the alga to help direct its swimming.
Most individuals of Chlamydomonas are haploid. Chlamy-
domonas reproduces asexually (by cell division) as well as
sexually. In sexual reproduction, two haploid individuals
fuse to form a four-flagellated zygote. The zygote ulti-
mately enters a resting phase, called the zygospore, in
which the flagella disappear and a tough protective coat is
formed. Meiosis occurs at the end of this resting period and
results in the production of four haploid cells.

Chlamydomonas probably represents a primitive state for
green algae and several lines of evolutionary specialization
have been derived from organisms like it. The first is the
evolution of nonmotile, unicellular green algae. Chlamy-
domonas is capable of retracting its flagella and settling
down as an immobile unicellular organism if the ponds in
which it lives dry out. Some common algae of soil and bark,
such as Chlorella, are essentially like Chlamydomonas in this

FIGURE 35.15

706 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

Asexual
reproduction

 
   

-Gamete

Pairing of
positive and
negative
strains

2n

a
MEIOSIS (J
Zygospore (diploid)

Life cycle of Chlamydomonas (Chlorophyta). Individual cells of this microscopic,
biflagellated alga, which are haploid, divide asexually, producing identical copies of themselves.
At times, such haploid cells act as gametes—fusing, as shown in the lower right-hand side of the
diagram, to produce a zygote. The zygote develops a thick, resistant wall, becoming a
zygospore; this is the only diploid cell in the entire life cycle. Within this diploid zygospore,
meiosis takes place, ultimately resulting in the release of four haploid individuals. Because of the
segregation during meiosis, two of these individuals are called the (+) strain, the other two the
( strain. Only + and — individuals are capable of mating with each other when syngamy does
take place, although both may divide asexually to reproduce themselves.

trait, but do not have the ability to form flagella. Chlorella is
widespread in both fresh and salt water as well as soil and is
only known to reproduce asexually. Recently, Chlorella has
been widely investigated as a possible food source for hu-
mans and other animals, and pilot farms have been estab-
lished in Israel, the United States, Germany, and Japan.
Another major line of specialization from cells like
Chlamydomonas concerns the formation of motile, colonial
organisms. In these genera of green algae, the Chlamy-
domonas-like cells retain some of their individuality. The
most elaborate of these organisms is Volvox (see figure 35.1),
a hollow sphere made up of a single layer of 500 to 60,000
individual cells, each cell with two flagella. Only a small
number of the cells are reproductive. The colony has defi-
nite anterior and posterior ends, and the flagella of all of the
cells beat in such a way as to rotate the colony in a clockwise
direction as it moves forward through the water. The repro-
ductive cells of Volvox are located mainly at the posterior
end of the colony. Some may divide asexually, bulge inward,
and give rise to new colonies that initially remain within the
parent colony. Others produce gametes. In some species of
