Rhodophyta: The Red Algae

Along with green algae and brown
algae, red algae are the seaweeds we
see cast up along shores and on
beaches. Their characteristic colors re-
sult from phycoerythrin, a type of phy-
cobilin pigment. Phycobilins are re-
sponsible for the colors of the
cyanobacteria. Chlorophyll @ also oc-
curs with the phycobilins in red algae,
just as it does in cyanobacteria. These
similarities with cyanobacteria make it
likely that the rhodophyta evolved
when their heterotrophic eukaryotic
ancestor developed an endosymbiotic
relationship with a cyanobacteria
which eventually gave rise to their
chloroplasts.

The great majority of the estimated
4000 species of red algae occur in the
sea, and almost all are multicellular.

Red algae have complex bodies
made up of interwoven filaments of
cells. In the cell walls of many red
algae are sulfated polysaccharides such
as agar and carrageenan, which make
these algae important economically.
Agar is used to make gel capsules, as
material for dental impressions, and as
a base for cosmetics. It is also the basis
of the laboratory media on which bac-
teria, fungi, and other organisms are
often grown. In addition, agar is used
to prevent baked goods from drying
out, for rapid-setting jellies, and as a
temporary preservative for meat and
fish in warm regions. Carrageenan is
used mainly to stabilize emulsions
such as paints, cosmetics, and dairy
products such as ice cream. In addition
to these uses, red algae such as Por-
phyra, called “nori,” are eaten and, in
Japan, are even cultivated as a human
food crop.

The life cycles of red algae are com-
plex but usually involve an alternation
of generations (sporic meiosis). None
of the red algae have flagella or cilia at
any stage in their life cycle, and they
may have descended directly from an-
cestors that never had them, especially
as the red algae also lack centrioles. To-
gether with the fungi, which also lack
flagella and centrioles, the red algae
may be one of the most ancient groups
of eukaryotes.

 

 

FIGURE 35.14

Brown algae (Phaeophyta). The massive
“groves” of giant kelp that occur in
relatively shallow water along the coasts of
the world provide food and shelter for
many different kinds of organisms.

Phaeophyta: The Brown Algae

The phaeophyta, or brown algae, con-
sist of about 1500 species of multicel-
lular protists, almost exclusively ma-
rine. They are the most conspicuous
seaweeds in many northern regions,
dominating rocky shores almost every-
where in temperate North America. In
habitats where large brown algae
known as_kelps (order Laminariales)
occur abundantly in so-called kelp
forests (figure 35.14), they are respon-
sible for most of the food production
through photosynthesis. Many kelps
are conspicuously differentiated into
flattened blades, stalks, and grasping
basal portions that anchor them to the
rocks.

Among the larger brown algae are
genera such as Macrocystis, in which
some individuals may reach 100 me-
ters in length. The flattened blades of
this kelp float out on the surface of
the water, while the base is anchored

 

tens of meters below the surface. An-
other ecologically important member
of this phylum is sargasso weed, Sar-
gassum, which forms huge floating
masses that dominate the vast Sar-
gasso Sea, an area of the Atlantic
Ocean northeast of the Caribbean.
The stalks of the larger brown algae
often exhibit a complex internal dif-
ferentiation of conducting tissues
analogous to that of plants.

The life cycle of the brown algae is
marked by an alternation of genera-
tions between a sporophyte and a ga-
metophyte. The large individuals we
recognize, such as the kelps, are
sporophytes. The gametophytes are
often much smaller, filamentous indi-
viduals, perhaps a few centimeters
across. Sporangia, which produce
haploid, swimming spores after meio-
sis, are formed on the sporophytes.
These spores divide by mitosis, giving
rise to individual gametophytes.
There are two kinds of gametophytes
in the kelps; one produces sperm, and
the other produces eggs. If sperm and
eggs fuse, the resulting zygotes grow
into the mature kelp sporophytes,
provided that they reach a favorable
site.
