General Biology
of the Protists

Protists are united on the basis of a
single negative characteristic: they
are not fungi, plants, or animals. In
all other respects they are highly
variable with no uniting features.
Many are unicellular (figure 35.5),
but there are numerous colonial and
multicellular groups. Most are mi-
croscopic, but some are as large as
trees. They represent all symmetries,
and exhibit all types of nutrition.

The Cell Surface

Protists possess a varied array of cell
surfaces. Some protists, like amoebas,
are surrounded only by their plasma
membranes. All other protists have a
plasma membrane but some, like

 

FIGURE 35.5

A unicellular protist. The protist kingdom
is a catch-all kingdom for many different
groups of unicellular organisms, such as this
Vorticella (phylum Ciliophora), which is
heterotrophic, feeds on bacteria, and has a

Nutrition

Protists employ every form of nutri-
tional acquisition except chemoau-
totrophic, which has so far been ob-
served only in bacteria. Some protists
are photosynthetic autotrophs and are
called phototrophs. Others are het-
erotrophs that obtain energy from or-
ganic molecules synthesized by other or-
ganisms. Among heterotrophic protists,
those that ingest visible particles of food
are called phagotrophs, or holozoic
feeders. Those ingesting food in soluble
form are called osmotrophs, or sapro-
zoic feeders.

Phagotrophs ingest food particles into
intracellular vesicles called food vac-
uoles or phagosomes. Lysosomes fuse
with the food vacuoles, introducing en-
zymes that digest the food particles
within. As the digested molecules are ab-
sorbed across the vacuolar membrane,

algae and molds, are encased within
strong cell walls. Still others, like di-
atoms and forams, secrete glassy
shells of silica.

retractable stalk.

Locomotor Organelles

Movement in protists is also accomplished by diverse mech-
anisms. Protists move chiefly by cither flagellar rotation or
pseudopodial movement. Many protists wave one or more
flagella to propel themselves through the water, while oth-
ers use banks of short, flagella-like structures called cilia to
create water currents for their feeding or propulsion.
Pseudopodia are the chief means of locomotion among
amoeba, whose pseudopods are large, blunt extensions of
the cell body called lobopodia. Other related protists extend
thin, branching protrusions called filopodia. Still other pro-
tists extend long, thin pseudopodia called axopodia sup-
ported by axial rods of microtubules. Axopodia can be ex-
tended or retracted. Because the tips can adhere to adjacent
surfaces, the cell can move by a rolling motion, shortening
the axopodia in front and extending those in the rear.

Cyst Formation

Many protists with delicate surfaces are successful in quite
harsh habitats. How do they manage to survive so well?
They survive inhospitable conditions by forming cysts. A
cyst is a dormant form of a cell with a resistant outer cover-
ing in which cell metabolism is more or less completely
shut down. Not all cysts are so sturdy. Vertebrate parasitic
amoebae, for example, form cysts that are quite resistant to
gastric acidity, but will not tolerate desiccation or high
temperature.

the food vacuole becomes progressively
smaller.

Reproduction

Protists typically reproduce asexually, reproducing sexu-
ally only in times of stress. Asexual reproduction involves
mitosis, but the process is often somewhat different from
the mitosis that occurs in multicellular animals. The nu-
clear membrane, for example, often persists throughout
mitosis, with the microtubular spindle forming within it.
In some groups, asexual reproduction involves spore for-
mation, in others fission. The most common type of fis-
sion is binary, in which a cell simply splits into nearly
equal halves. When the progeny cell is considerably
smaller than its parent, and then grows to adult size, the
fission is called budding. In multiple fission, or schizo-
gony, common among some protists, fission is preceded
by several nuclear divisions, so that fission produces sev-
eral individuals almost simultaneously.

Sexual reproduction also takes place in many forms
among the protists. In ciliates and some flagellates, ga-
metic meiosis occurs just before gamete formation, as it
does in metazoans. In the sporozoans, zygotic meiosis oc-
curs directly after fertilization, and all the individuals that
are produced are haploid until the next zygote is formed. In
algac, there is intermediary meiosis, producing an alter-
nation of generations similar to that seen in plants, with
significant portions of the life cycle spent as haploid as well
as diploid.

 

Protists exhibit a wide range of forms, locomotion,
nutrition and reproduction.

 

Chapter 35 Protists 697
