Euglenophyta: The Euglenoids

Most of the approximately 1000 known species of eugle-
noids live in fresh water. The members of this phylum
clearly illustrate the impossibility of distinguishing “plants”
from “animals” among the protists. About a third of the ap-
proximately 40 genera of euglenoids have chloroplasts and
are fully autotrophic; the others lack chloroplasts, ingest
their food, and are heterotrophic. These organisms are not
significantly different from some groups of zoomastigotes
(see next section), and many biologists believe that the two
phyla should be merged into one.

Some euglenoids with chloroplasts may become het-
erotrophic if the organisms are kept in the dark; the
chloroplasts become small and nonfunctional. If they are
put back in the light, they may become green within a few
hours. Normally photosynthetic euglenoids may sometimes
feed on dissolved or particulate food.

Individual euglenoids range from 10 to 500 micrometers
long and are highly variable in form. Interlocking proteina-
ceous strips arranged in a helical pattern form a flexible
structure called the pellicle, which lies within the cell
membrane of the euglenoids. Because its pellicle is flexible,
a euglenoid is able to change its shape. Reproduction in
this phylum occurs by mitotic cell division. The nuclear en-
velope remains intact throughout the process of mitosis.
No sexual reproduction is known to occur in this group.

In Euglena (figure 35.12), the genus for which the phy-
lum is named, two flagella are attached at the base of a
flask-shaped opening called the reservoir, which is located
at the anterior end of the cell. One of the flagella is long
and has a row of very fine, short, hairlike projections along
one side. A second, shorter flagellum is located within the
reservoir but does not emerge from it. Contractile vacuoles
collect excess water from all parts of the organism and
empty it into the reservoir, which apparently helps regulate
the osmotic pressure within the organism. The stigma, an
organ that also occurs in the green algae (phylum Chloro-
phyta), is light-sensitive and aids these photosynthetic or-
ganisms to move toward light.

Cells of Euglena contain numerous small chloroplasts.
These chloroplasts, like those of the green algae and plants,
contain chlorophylls a and b, together with carotenoids. Al-
though the chloroplasts of euglenoids differ somewhat in
structure from those of green algae, they probably had a
common origin. It seems likely that euglenoid chloroplasts
ultimately evolved from a symbiotic relationship through
ingestion of green algae.

FIGURE 35.12
Euglenoids. (0) Micrograph of individuals of the genus Euglena
(Euglenophyta). (#) Diagram of Euglena. Paramylon granules are
areas where food reserves are stored.

(@)

(b)

Ee I

a

 

  
      
    
  
  

7 et

 
  

a
Flagellum —

, } \
Stigma |
Second Ps |
flagellum Ct
Reser 2 |
Basal body — |
Contractile i

vacuole

 

Pellicle

Nucleus.

Chloroplast

Paramylon
granule

Chapter 35 Protists 703
