Chrysophyta: The Diatoms and Golden Algae

The Diatoms. Diatoms, members of the phylum Chrys-
ophyta, are photosynthetic, unicellular organisms with
unique double shells made of opaline silica, which are often
strikingly and characteristically marked. The shells of di-
atoms are like small boxes with lids, one half of the shell fit-
ting inside the other. Their chloroplasts, with chlorophylls
a and ¢, as well as carotenoids, resemble those of the brown
algae and dinoflagellates. In other respects, however, there
are few similarities between these groups, and they proba-
bly do not share an immediate common ancestor. Another
member of the phylum Chrysophyta is the golden algae.
Diatoms and golden algae are grouped together because
they both produce a unique carbohydrate called chrysolam-
inarin.

There are more than 11,500 living species of diatoms,
with many more known in the fossil record. The shells of
fossil diatoms often form very thick deposits, which are
sometimes mined commercially. The resulting “diatoma-
ceous earth” is used as an abrasive or to add the sparkling
quality to the paint used on roads, among other purposes.
Living diatoms are often abundant both in the sea and in
fresh water, where they are important food producers. Di-
atoms occur in the plankton and are attached to submerged
objects in relatively shallow water. Many species are able to
move by means of a secretion that is produced from a fine
groove along each shell. The diatoms exude and perhaps
also retract this secretion as they move.

There are two major groups of diatoms, one with radial
symmetry (like a wheel) and the other with bilateral (two-
sided) symmetry (figure 35.13). Diatom shells are rigid, and
the organisms reproduce asexually by separating the two
halves of the shell, each half then regenerating another half
shell within it. Because of this mode of reproduction, there
is a tendency for the shells, and consequently the individual
diatoms, to get smaller and smaller with each asexual re-
production. When the resulting individuals have dimin-
ished to about 30% of their original size, one may slip out
of its shell, grow to full size, and regenerate a full-sized pair
of new shells.

Individual diatoms are diploid. Meiosis occurs more fre-
quently under conditions of starvation. Some marine di-
atoms produce numerous sperm and others a single egg. If
fusion occurs, the resulting zygote regenerates a full-sized
individual. In some freshwater diatoms, the gametes are
amoeboid and similar in appearance.

The Golden Algae. Also included within the Chryso-
phyta are the golden algae, named for the yellow and
brown carotenoid and xanthophyll accessory pigments in
their chloroplasts, which give them a golden color. Unicel-
lular but often colonial, these freshwater protists typically
have two flagella, both attached near the same end of the
cell. When ponds and lakes dry out in summer, golden
algae form resistant cysts. Viable cells emerge from these
cysts when wetter conditions recur in the fall.

 

FIGURE 35.13

Diatoms (Chrysophyta). Several different centric (radially symmetrical) diatoms.

704 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
