Aquatic oomycetes, or water molds, are common and
easily cultured. Some water molds cause fish diseases, pro-
ducing a kind of white fuzz on aquarium fishes. Among
their terrestrial relatives are oomycetes of great importance
as plant pathogens, including Plasmopara viticola, which
causes downy mildew of grapes, and Phytophthora infestans,
which causes the late blight of potatoes. This oomycete was
responsible for the Irish potato famine of 1845 and 1847,
during which about 400,000 people starved to death or died
of diseases complicated by starvation. Millions of Irish peo-
ple emigrated to the United States and elsewhere as a result
of this disaster.

Acrasiomycota: The Cellular Slime Molds

There are about 70 species of cellular slime molds. This
phylum has extraordinarily interesting features and was
once thought to be related to fungi, “mold” being a general
term for funguslike organisms. In fact, the cellular slime
molds are probably more closely related to amoebas (phy-
lum Rhizopoda) than to any other group, but they have
many special features that mark them as distinct. Cellular
slime molds are common in fresh water, damp soil, and on
rotting vegetation, especially fallen logs. They have be-
come one of the most important groups of organisms for
studies of differentiation because of their relatively simple
developmental systems and the ease of analyzing them (fig-
ure 35.25).

ff

 

FIGURE 35.25

Development in Dictyostelium
discoideum, a cellular slime mold. (a)

First, a spore germinates, forming amoebas.
‘These amoebas feed and reproduce until the

Moving
amoeba

()
mass is he !
lled
food runs out. (b) The amoebas aggregate sug
and move toward a fixed center. (c) Next,
they form a multicellular “slug” 2 to 3 mm
long that migrates toward light. (d) The slug
stops moving and begins to differentiate into

a spore-forming body, called a sorocarp (¢).
(fi Within heads of the sorocarps, amoebas
become encysted as spores.

forms.

Amoeba mass

The individual organisms of this group behave as sepa-
rate amoebas, moving through the soil or other substrate
and ingesting bacteria and other smaller organisms. At a
certain phase of their life cycle, the individual organisms
aggregate and form a moving mass, the “slug,” that eventu-
ally transforms itself into a spore-containing mass, the
sorocarp. In the sorocarp the amoebas become encysted as
spores. Some of the amoebas fuse sexually to form macro-
cysts, which have diploid nuclei; meiosis occurs in them
after a short period (zygotic meiosis). The sporocarp de-
velops a stalked structure with a chamber at the top which
releases the spores. Other amoebas are released directly,
eventually aggregating again to form a new slug.

The development of Dictyostelium discoideum, a cellular
slime mold, has been studied extensively because of the im-
plication its unusual life cycle has for understanding the de-
velopmental process in general. When the individual amoe-
bas of this species exhaust the supply of bacteria in a given
area and are near starvation, they aggregate and form a
compound, motile mass. The aggregation of the individual
amoebas is induced by pulses of cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (CAMP), which the cells begin to secrete
when they are starving. The cells form an aggregate organ-
ism that moves to a new area where food is more plentiful.
In the new area, the colony differentiates into a multicellu-
lar sorocarp within which spores differentiate. Each of
these spores, if it falls into a suitably moist habitat, releases
a new amoeba, which begins to feed, and the cycle is
started again.

  
     

(d)

Slug begins
to right itself.

Slug is transformed
into spore-forming
body, the sorocarp.

©)

 

Amoebas begin
to congregate.

Chapter 35 Protists 715
