Nonmotile Spore-
Formers

Apicomplexa: The Sporozoans

All sporozoans are nonmotile, spore-
forming parasites of animals. Their
spores are small, infective bodies that
are transmitted from host to host.
These organisms are distinguished by a
unique arrangement of fibrils, micro-
tubules, vacuoles, and other cell or-
ganelles at one end of the cell. There
are 3900 described species of this phy-
lum; best known among them is the
malarial parasite, Plasmodium.

Sporozoans have complex life cycles
that involve both asexual and sexual
phases. Sexual reproduction involves
an alternation of haploid and diploid
generations. Both haploid and diploid
individuals can also divide rapidly by mitosis, thus produc-
ing a large number of small infective individuals. Sexual re-
production involves the fertilization of a large female ga-
mete by a small, flagellated male gamete. The zygote that
results soon becomes an oocyst. Within the oocyst, mei-
otic divisions produce infective haploid spores called
sporozoites.

An alternation between different hosts often occurs in
the life cycles of sporozoans. Sporozoans of the genus Plas-
modium are spread from person to person by mosquitoes of
the genus Anopheles (figure 35.23); at least 65 different
species of this genus are involved. When an Anopheles mos-
quito penetrates human skin to obtain blood, it injects
saliva mixed with an anticoagulant. If the mosquito is in-
fected with Plasmodium, it will also inject the elongated
sporozoites into the bloodstream of its victim. The parasite
makes its way through the bloodstream to the liver, where
it rapidly divides asexually. After this division phase, mero-
zoites, the next stage of the life cycle, form, either reinvad-
ing other liver cells or entering the host’s bloodstream. In
the bloodstream, they invade the red blood cells, dividing
rapidly within them and causing them to become enlarged
and ultimately to rupture. This event releases toxic sub-
stances throughout the body of the host, bringing about
the well-known cycle of fever and chills that is characteris-
tic of malaria. The cycle repeats itself regularly every 48
hours, 72 hours, or longer.

Plasmodium enters a sexual phase when some mero-
zoites develop into gametocytes, cells capable of produc-
ing gametes. There are two types of gametocytes: male
and female. Gametocytes are incapable of producing ga-
metes within their human hosts and do so only when they
are extracted from an infected human by a mosquito.
Within the gut of the mosquito, the male and female ga-
metocytes form sperm and eggs, respectively. Zygotes de-

712 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

velop within the mosquito’s intestinal
walls and ultimately differentiate into
oocysts. Within the oocysts, repeated
mitotic divisions take place, produc-
ing large numbers of sporozoites.
These sporozoites migrate to the sali-
vary glands of the mosquito, and
from there they are injected by the
mosquito into the bloodstream of a
human, thus starting the life cycle of
the parasite again.

2
3
E
2
g
5
8
&
2
3
e
E
5
=

Malaria. Malaria, caused by infec-
tions by the sporozoan Plasmodium, is
one of the most serious diseases in
the world. According to the World
Health Organization, about 500 mil-
lion people are affected by it at any
one time, and approximately 2 mil-
lion of them, mostly children, die
each year. Malaria kills most children
under five years old who contract it. In areas where
malaria is prevalent, most survivors more than five or six
years old do not become seriously ill again from malaria
infections. The symptoms, familiar throughout the trop-
ics, include severe chills, fever, and sweating, an enlarged
and tender spleen, confusion, and great thirst. Ulti-
mately, a victim of malaria may die of anemia, kidney
failure, or brain damage. The disease may be brought
under control by the person’s immune system or by
drugs. As discussed in chapter 21, some individuals are
genetically resistant to malaria. Other persons develop
immunity to it.

Efforts to eradicate malaria have focused on (1) the
elimination of the mosquito vectors; (2) the development of
drugs to poison the parasites once they have entered the
human body; and (3) the development of vaccines. The
widescale applications of DDT from the 1940s to the 1960s
led to the elimination of the mosquito vectors in the
United States, Italy, Greece, and certain areas of Latin
America. For a time, the worldwide elimination of malaria
appeared possible, but this hope was soon crushed by the
development of DDT-resistant strains of malaria-carrying
mosquitoes in many regions; no fewer than 64 resistant
strains were identified in a 1980 survey. Even though the
worldwide use of DDT, long banned in the United States,
nearly doubled from its 1974 level to more than 30,000
metric tons in 1984, its effectiveness in controlling mosqui-
toes is dropping. Further, there are serious environmental
concerns about the use of this long-lasting chemical any-
where in the world. In addition to the problems with resis-
tant strains of mosquitoes, strains of Plasmodium have ap-
peared that are resistant to the drugs that have historically
been used to kill them.

As a result of these problems, the number of new cases
of malaria per year roughly doubled from the mid-1970s to
