Ciliophora: The Ciliates

As the name indicates, most members of the Ciliophora
feature large numbers of cilia. These heterotrophic, unicel-
lular protists range in size from 10 to 3000 micrometers
long. About 8000 species have been named. Despite their
unicellularity, ciliates are extremely complex organisms, in-
spiring some biologists to consider them organisms without
cell boundaries rather than single cells.

Their most characteristic feature, cilia, are usually
arranged either in longitudinal rows or in spirals around
the body of the organism (figure 35.20). Cilia are anchored
to microtubules beneath the cell membrane, and they beat
in a coordinated fashion. In some groups, the cilia have
specialized locomotory and feeding functions, becoming
fused into sheets, spikes, and rods which may then function
as mouths, paddles, teeth, or feet. The ciliates have a tough
but flexible outer covering called the pellicle that enables
the organism to squeeze through or move around many
kinds of obstacles.

All ciliates that have been studied have two very differ-
ent types of nuclei within their cells, small micronuclei
and larger macronuclei (figure 35.21). The micronuclei,
which contain apparently normal diploid chromosomes, di-
vide by meiosis and are able to undergo genetic recombina-
tion. Macronuclei are derived from certain micronuclei in a
complex series of steps. Within the macronuclei are multi-
ple copies of the genome, and the DNA is divided into
small pieces—smaller than individual chromosomes. In one
group of ciliates, these are equivalent to single genes.
Macronuclei divide by elongating and constricting and play
an essential role in routine cellular functions, such as the
production of mRNA to direct protein synthesis for growth
and regeneration.

Ciliates form vacuoles for ingesting food and regulating
their water balance. Food first enters the gullet, which in
the well-known ciliate Paramecium is lined with cilia fused
into a membrane (figure 35.21). From the gullet, the food
passes into food vacuoles, where enzymes and hydrochloric
acid aid in its digestion. After the digested material has
been completely absorbed, the vacuole empties its waste
contents through a special pore in the pellicle known as the
cytoproct. The cytoproct is essentially an exocytotic vesi-
cle that appears periodically when solid particles are ready
to be expelled. The contractile vacuoles, which function in
the regulation of water balance, periodically expand and
contract as they empty their contents to the outside of the
organism.

Ciliates usually reproduce by transverse fission of the
parent cell across its short axis, thus forming two identical
individuals (figure 35.22). In this process of cell division,
the mitosis of the micronuclei proceeds normally, and the
macronuclei divide as just described.

In Paramecium, the cells divide asexually for about 700
generations and then die if sexual reproduction has not oc-
curred. Like most ciliates, Paramecium has a sexual process
called conjugation, in which two individual cells remain

710 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

FIGURE 35.20
A ciliate
(Ciliophora).
Stentor, a funnel-
shaped ciliate,
showing spirally
arranged cilia
(120x).

       
   
 

Anterior contractile vacuole
Food vacuole

Micronucleus

Macronucleus
Gullet

Pellicle

Posterior
contractile
vacuole

FIGURE 35.21
Paramecium. The main features of this familiar ciliate are shown.

attached to each other for up to several hours (figure
35.22b,0). Only cells of two different genetically determined
mating types, odd and even, are able to conjugate. Meiosis in
the micronuclei of each individual produces several haploid
micronuclei, and the two partners exchange a pair of these
micronuclei through a cytoplasmic bridge that appears be-
tween the two partners.

In each conjugating individual, the new micronucleus
fuses with one of the micronuclei already present in that in-
dividual, resulting in the production of a new diploid mi-
cronucleus in each individual. After conjugation, the
macronucleus in each cell disintegrates, while the new
diploid micronucleus undergoes mitosis, thus giving rise to
two new identical diploid micronuclei within each individ-
ual. One of these micronuclei becomes the precursor of the
future micronuclei of that cell, while the other micronu-
cleus undergoes multiple rounds of DNA replication, be-
coming the new macronucleus. This kind of complete seg-
regation of the genetic material is a unique feature of the
