Mosquito injects
sporozoites

© Sporozoites
form within
mosquito

Oooysts

© Gametocytes
ingested by
mosquito

FIGURE 35.23

     
  
  
   
     
 

 

Sporozoites

 

merozoites
develop into
gametocytes

The life cycle of Plasmodium, the sporozoan that causes malaria. Plasmodium has a complex life cycle that alternates between

mosquitoes and mammals.

the mid-1980s, largely because of the spread of resistant
strains of the mosquito and the parasite. In many tropical
regions, malaria is blocking permanent settlement. Scien-
tists have therefore redoubled their efforts to produce an
effective vaccine. Antibodies to the parasites have been iso-
lated and produced by genetic engineering techniques, and
they are starting to produce promising results.

Vaccines against Malaria. The three different stages of
the Plasmodium life cycle each produce different antigens,
and they are sensitive to different antibodies. The gene
encoding the sporozoite antigen was cloned in 1984, but
it is not certain how effective a vaccine against sporozoites
might be. When a mosquito inserts its proboscis into a
human blood vessel, it injects about a thousand sporo-
zoites. They travel to the liver within a few minutes,
where they are no longer exposed to antibodies circulat-
ing in the blood. If even one sporozoite reaches the liver,
it will multiply rapidly there and cause malaria. The num-
ber of malaria parasites increases roughly eightfold every
24 hours after they enter the host’s body. A compound
vaccination against sporozoites, merozoites, and gameto-

cytes would probably be the most effective preventive
measure, but such a compound vaccine has proven diffi-
cult to develop.

However, research completed in 1997 brings a glim-
mer of hope. An experimental vaccine containing one of
the surface proteins of the disease-causing parasite, P. fal-
ciparum, seems to induce the immune system to produce
defenses that are able to destroy the parasite in future in-
fections. In tests, six out of seven vaccinated people did
not get malaria after being bitten by mosquitoes that car-
ried P. falciparum. Although research is still underway,
many are hopeful that this new vaccine may be able to
fight malaria, especially in Africa, where it takes a devas-
tating toll.

 

The best known of the sporozoans is the malarial
parasite Plasmodium. Like other sporozoans,
Plasmodium has a complex life cycle involving sexual
and asexual phases and alternation between different
hosts, in this case mosquitoes and humans. Malaria kills
about 2 million people each year.

 

Chapter 35 Protists 713
