a

 

FIGURE 35.26

 

A plasmodial protist. This multinucleate plasmodium moves about in search of the bacteria and other organic particles that it ingests.

Myxomycota: The Plasmodial Slime Molds

Plasmodial slime molds are a group of about 500 species.
These bizarre organisms stream along as a plasmodium, a
nonwalled, multinucleate mass of cytoplasm, that resembles
a moving mass of slime (figure 35.26). This is called the
feeding phase, and the plasmodia may be orange, yellow, or
another color. Plasmodia show a back-and-forth streaming
of cytoplasm that is very conspicuous, especially under a mi-
croscope. They are able to pass through the mesh in cloth
or simply flow around or through other obstacles. As they
move, they engulf and digest bacteria, yeasts, and other
small particles of organic matter. Plasmodia contain many
nuclei (multinucleate), but these are not separated by cell
membranes. The nuclei undergo mitosis synchronously,
with the nuclear envelope breaking down, but only at late
anaphase or telophase. Centrioles are lacking in cellular
slime molds. Although they have similar common names,
there is no evidence that the plasmodial slime molds are
closely related to the cellular slime molds; they differ in
most features of their structure and life cycles (figure 35.27).

When either food or moisture is in short supply, the
plasmodium migrates relatively rapidly to a new area. Here
it stops moving and either forms a mass in which spores dif-
ferentiate or divides into a large number of small mounds,
each of which produces a single, mature sporangium, the

716 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

structure in which spores are produced. These sporangia are
often extremely complex in form and beautiful (figure
35.28). The spores can be either diploid or haploid. In most
species of plasmodial slime molds with a diploid plasmod-
ium, meiosis occurs in the spores within 24 hours of their
formation. Three of the four nuclei in each spore disinte-
grate, leaving each spore with a single haploid nucleus.

The spores are highly resistant to unfavorable environ-
mental influences and may last for years if kept dry. When
conditions are favorable, they split open and release their
protoplast, the contents of the individual spore. The proto-
plast may be amoeboid or bear two flagella. These two
stages appear to be interchangeable, and conversions in ei-
ther direction occur readily. Later, after the fusion of hap-
loid protoplasts (gametes), a usually diploid plasmodium
may be reconstituted by repeated mitotic divisions.

 

Molds are heterotrophic protists, many of which are
capable of amoeba-like streaming. The feeding phase of
plasmodial slime molds consists of a multinucleate mass
of protoplasm; a plasmodium can flow through a cloth
mesh and around obstacles. If the plasmodium begins
to dry out or is starving, it forms often elaborate
sporangia. Meiosis occurs in the spores once they have
formed within the sporangium.

 
