Chapter 4

Summary

4.1 All living things share key characteristics.

BIOLOGY

 

www.mhhe.com/raven6/resources4.mhtml

Questions Media Resources

 

* All living things are characterized by cellular
organization, growth, reproduction, and heredity.

* Other properties commonly exhibited by living
things include movement and sensitivity to stimuli.

4.2 There are many ideas about the origin of life.

1, What characteristics of living
things are necessary
characteristics (possessed by all
living things), and which are
sufficient characteristics
(possessed only by living things)?

 

© Of the many explanations of how life might have
originated, only the theories of spontaneous and
extraterrestrial origins provide scientifically testable
explanations.

¢ Experiments recreating the atmosphere of primitive
earth, with the energy sources and temperatures
thought to be prevalent at that time, have led to the
spontaneous formation of amino acids and other
biologically significant molecules.

4.3 The first cells had little internal structure.

 

2. What molecules are thought * Origin of Life

to have been present in the

atmosphere of the early earth?

Which molecule that was

notably absent then is now a © Art Quizzes:

major component of the “Miller-Urey

atmosphere? Txpeiinens
-Miller-Urey

Experiment Results

 

¢ The first cells are thought to have arisen from
aggregations of molecules that were more stable and,
therefore, persisted longer.

¢ Ithas been suggested that RNA may have arisen
before cells did, and subsequently became packaged
within a membrane.

* Bacteria were the only life-forms on earth for about 1
billion years. At least three kinds of bacteria were
present in ancient times: methane utilizers, anaerobic
photosynthesizers, and eventually O7-forming
photosynthesizers.

3. What evidence supports the © Art Quiz:
argument that RNA evolved first Current Bubble
on the early earth? What Hypothesis

evidence supports the argument
that proteins evolved first?

4, What are coacervates, and
what characteristics do they have
in common with organisms? Are
they alive? Why or why not?

5. What were the earliest known
organisms like, and when did
they appear? What present-day
organisms do they resemble?

44 The first eukaryotic cells were larger and more complex than bacteria.

 

¢ The first eukaryotes can be seen in the fossil record
about 1.5 billion years ago. All organisms other than
bacteria are their descendants.

* Biologists group all living organisms into six
“kingdoms,” each profoundly different from the
others.

¢ The two most ancient kingdoms contain prokaryotes
(bacteria); the other four contain eukaryotes.

¢ There are approximately 10”° stars in the universe
similar to our sun. It is almost certain that life has
evolved on planets circling some of them.

6. When did the first eukaryotes
appear? By what mechanism are
they thought to have evolved
from the earlier prokaryotes?

© Key Events in Earth's
History

 

7. What sorts of organisms are
contained in each of the six
kingdoms of life recognized by
biologists?

74 PartI_ The Origin of Living Things ae BioCourse.com
