hag

 

_

FIGURE 35.16

Life cycle of Ulva. In this green alga, the
gametophyte and the sporophyte are identical in
appearance and consist of flattened sheets two
cells thick. In the haploid (7) gametophyte,
gametangia give rise to haploid gametes, which
fuse to form a diploid (27) zygote. The zygote
germinates to form the diploid sporophyte.
Sporangia within the sporophyte give rise to
haploid spores by meiosis. The haploid spores
develop into haploid gametophytes.

Sporophyte
(2n)

Volvox, there is a true division of labor among the different
types of cells, which are specialized in relation to their ulti-
mate function throughout the development of the organism.

In addition to these two lines of specialization from
Chlamydomonas-like cells, there are many other kinds of
green algae of less certain derivation. Many filamentous
genera, such as Spirogyra, with its ribbon-like chloro-
plasts, differ substantially from the remainder of the green
algae in their modes of cell division and reproduction.
Some of these genera have even been placed in separate
phyla. The study of the green algae, involving modern
methods of electron microscopy and biochemistry, is be-
ginning to reveal unexpected new relationships within this
phylum.

Ulva, or sea lettuce (figure 35.16), is a genus of marine
green algae that is extremely widespread. The glistening
individuals of this genus, often more than 10 centimeters
across, consist of undulating sheets only two cells thick.
Sea lettuce attaches by protuberances of the basal cells to
rocks or other substrates. The reproductive cycle of Ulva
involves an alternation of generations (sporic meiosis;
figure 35.16) as is typical among green algae. Unlike
most organisms that undergo sporic meiosis, however,

MEIOSIS

— Gametophyte (n)

(—_—
>

+ Gametophyte
(n)

— Gametangia

  

Sporangia

te ef

8

Gametes “J

* ? =<eoe Pi

Germinating
zygote

 

Zygote

the gametophytes (haploid phase) and sporophytes
(diploid phase) resemble one another closely.

The stoneworts, a group of about 250 living species of
green algae, many of them in the genera Chara and Nitella,
have complex structures. Whorls of short branches arise
regularly at their nodes, and the gametangia (structures
that give rise to gametes) are complex and multicellular.
Stoneworts are often abundant in fresh to brackish water
and are common as fossils.

 

Dinoflagellates are primarily unicellular,
photosynthetic, and flagellated. Euglenoids (phylum
Euglenophyta) consist of about 40 genera, about a third
of which have chloroplasts similar biochemically to
those of green algae and plants. Diatoms and golden
algae are unicellular, photosynthetic organisms that
produce a unique carbohydrate. Diatoms have double
shells made of opaline silica. Nonmotile, unicellular
algae and multicellular, flagellated colonies have been.
derived from green algae like Chlamydomonas—a
biflagellated, unicellular organism. The life cycle of
brown algae is marked by an alternation of generations
between the diploid phase, or sporophyte, and the
haploid phase, or gametophyte.

 

Chapter 35 Protists 707
