poisoned with insecticides, have like-
wise proved effective. Research is pro-
ceeding rapidly because the presence
of tsetse flies with their associated try-
panosomes blocks the use of some 11
million square kilometers of potential
grazing land in Africa.

Some zoomastigotes occur in the
guts of termites and other wood-eat-
ing insects. They possess enzymes that
allow them to digest the wood and
thus make the components of the
wood available to their hosts. The re-
lationship is similar to that between
certain bacteria and protozoa that
function in the rumens of cattle and
related mammals (see chapter 51).

Another order of zoomastigotes,
the choanoflagellates, is most likely
the group from which the sponges (phylum Porifera) and
probably all animals arose. Choanoflagellates have a single
emergent flagellum surrounded by a funnel-shaped, con-
tractile collar composed of closely placed filaments, a
unique structure that is exactly matched in the sponges.
These protists feed on bacteria strained out of the water by
the collar.

FIGURE 35.18

Hiker’s Diarrhea. Giardia lamblia is a flagellate protist
(belonging to a small order called diplomonads) found
throughout the world, including all parts of the United
States and Canada (figure 35.19). It occurs in water, includ-
ing the clear water of mountain streams and the water sup-
plies of some cities. It infects at least 40 species of wild and
domesticated animals in addition to humans. In 1984 in
Pittsburgh, 175,000 people had to boil their drinking water
for several days following the appearance of Giardia in the
city’s water system. Although most individuals exhibit no
symptoms if they drink water infested with Giardia, many
suffer nausea, cramps, bloating, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Only 35 years ago, Giardia was thought to be harmless;
today, it is estimated that at least 16 million residents of the
United States are infected by it.

Giardia lives in the upper small intestine of its host. It
occurs there in a motile form that cannot survive outside
the host’s body. It is spread in the feces of infected individ-
uals in the form of dormant, football-shaped cysts—some-
times at levels as high as 300 million individuals per gram
of feces. These cysts can survive at least two months in cool
water, such as that of mountain streams. They are relatively
resistant to the usual water-treatment agents such as chlo-
rine and iodine but are killed at temperatures greater than
about 65°C. Apparently, pollution by humans seems to be
the main way Giardia is released into stream water. There
are at least three species of Giardia and many distinct
strains; how many of them attack humans and under what
circumstances are not known with certainty.

 

Trypanosoma is the zoomastigote that causes sleeping sickness. (a) Trypanosoma among
red blood cells. The nuclei (dark-staining bodies), anterior flagella, and undulating,
changeable shape of the trypanosomes are visible in this photograph (500%). (b) The tsetse

 

FIGURE 35.19

Giardia lamblia. Giardia are flagellated unicellular parasites that
infect the human intestine. Giardia are very primitive, having only
a rudimentary cytoskeleton and lacking mitochondria and
chloroplasts. Sequencing of ribosomal RNA suggests that Giardia
and Pelomyxa, the eukaryotes most closely related to prokaryotes,
should be grouped together. The name Archezoa (Greek arkhaios,
“ancient”) has been suggested for the group, stressing its early
divergence from bacteria as long as 2 billion years ago.

In the wilderness, good sanitation is important in pre-
venting the spread of Giardia. Dogs, which readily contract
and spread the disease, should not be taken into pristine
wilderness areas. Drinking water should be filtered—the
filter must be capable of eliminating particles as small as 1
micrometer in diameter—or boiled for at least one minute.
Water from natural streams or lakes should never be con-
sumed directly, regardless of how clean it looks. In other
regions, good sanitation methods are important to prevent
not only Giardia infection but also other diseases.

Chapter 35 Protists 709
