Chapter 55

Summary
35.1 Eukaryotes probably arose by endosymbiosis.

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

* The theory of endosymbiosis, accepted by almost all
biologists, proposes that mitochondria and
chloroplasts were once aerobic eubacteria that were
engulfed by ancestral eukaryotes.

¢ There is some suggestion that centrioles may also
have an endosymbiotic origin.

1. What kind of bacteria most
likely gave rise to the

chloroplasts in the eukaryotic
cells of plants and some algae?

35.2 The kingdom Protista is by far the most diverse of any kingdom.

 

¢ The kingdom Protista consists of predominantly
unicellular phyla, together with three phyla that
include large numbers of multicellular organisms.

© The catch-all kingdom Protista includes all
eukaryotic organisms except animals, plants, and

fungi.

35.3 Protists can be categorized into five groups.

2. Why is the kingdom Protista
said to be an artificial group?
How is this different from the
other kingdoms?

* Characteristics of

@ Protists

 

* Dinoflagellates (phylum Dinoflagellata) are a major
phylum of primarily unicellular organisms that have
unique chromosomes and a very unusual form of
mitosis. They are the only eukaryotes known to lack
histones and nucleosomes.

¢ Euglenoids (phylum Euglenophyta) have chloroplasts
that share the biochemical features of those found in
green algae and plants.

* Diatoms (phylum Chrysophyta) are unicellular,
photosynthetic protists with opaline silica shells.
They include the golden algae.

* Brown algae (phylum Phacophyta) are multicellular,
marine protists, some reaching 100 meters in length.
The kelps contribute greatly to the productivity of
the sea, especially along the coasts in relatively
shallow areas.

¢ The zoomastigotes (phylum Sarcomastigophora) are
a group of heterotrophic, mostly unicellular protists
that includes the organism responsible for sleeping
sickness.

¢ There are about 8000 named species of ciliates
(phylum Ciliophora); these protists have a very
complex morphology with numerous cilia.

¢ The malarial parasite, Plasmodium, is a member of the
phylum Apicomplexa. Carried by mosquitoes, it
multiplies rapidly in the liver of humans and other
primates and brings about the cyclical fevers
characteristic of malaria by releasing toxins into the
bloodstream of its host.

718 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

3. Why is mitosis in
dinoflagellates unique? What
are zooxanthellae?

4, What determines whether a
collection of individuals is truly
multicellular?

5. What unique characteristic
differentiates the members of
Ciliophora from other protists?
What is the function of two
vacuoles exhibited by most
members of Ciliophora?

6. Why has it been so difficult to

produce a vaccine for
trypanosome-caused diseases?
7. What differentiates the
oomycetes from the kingdom
Fungi, in which they were
previously placed? What is the

feeding strategy of this phylum?

Why are these organisms
generally considered harmful?

* Protozoa

* Photosynthetic
Protists

* Fungus-like Protists

Yo
