FIGURE 36.6

World’s largest organism?
Armillaria, a pathogenic fangus shown
here afflicting three discrete regions
of coniferous forest in Montana,
grows out from a central focus as a
single circular clone. The large patch
at the bottom of the picture is almost
8 hectares in diameter. The largest
clone measured so far has been 15
hectares in diameter—pretty
impressive for a single individual!

Ecology of Fungi

Fungi, together with bacteria, are the principal decom-
posers in the biosphere. They break down organic materi-
als and return the substances locked in those molecules to
circulation in the ecosystem. Fungi are virtually the only
organisms capable of breaking down lignin, one of the
major constituents of wood. By breaking down such sub-
stances, fungi release critical building blocks, such as car-
bon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, from the bodies of dead or-
ganisms and make them available to other organisms.

In breaking down organic matter, some fungi attack liv-
ing plants and animals as a source of organic molecules,
while others attack dead ones. Fungi often act as disease-
causing organisms for both plants (figure 36.6) and animals,
and they are responsible for billions of dollars in agricul-
tural losses every year. Not only are fungi the most harmful
pests of living plants, but they also attack food products
once they have been harvested and stored. In addition,
fungi often secrete substances into the foods that they are
attacking that make these foods unpalatable, carcinogenic,
or poisonous.

The same aggressive metabolism that makes fungi eco-
logically important has been put to commercial use in
many ways. The manufacture of both bread and beer de-
pends on the biochemical activities of yeasts, single-celled
fungi that produce abundant quantities of ethanol and car-
bon dioxide. Cheese and wine achieve their delicate flavors
because of the metabolic processes of certain fungi, and
others make possible the manufacture of soy sauce and
other fermented foods. Vast industries depend on the bio-
chemical manufacture of organic substances such as citric

 

acid by fungi in culture, and yeasts are now used on a large
scale to produce protein for the enrichment of animal food.

Many antibiotics, including the first one that was used on a
wide scale, penicillin, are derived from fungi.

Some fungi are used to convert one complex organic
molecule into another, cleaning up toxic substances in the
environment. For example, at least three species of fungi
have been isolated that combine selenium, accumulated at
the San Luis National Wildlife Refuge in California’s San
Joaquin Valley, with harmless volatile chemicals—thus re-
moving excess selenium from the soil.

Two kinds of mutualistic associations between fungi and
autotrophic organisms are ecologically important. Lichens
are mutualistic symbiotic associations between fungi and
either green algae or cyanobacteria. They are prominent
nearly everywhere in the world, especially in unusually
harsh habitats such as bare rock. Mycorrhizae, specialized
mutualistic symbiotic associations between the roots of
plants and fungi, are characteristic of about 90% of all
plants. In each of them, the photosynthetic organisms fix
atmospheric carbon dioxide and thus make organic material
available to the fungi. The metabolic activities of the fungi,
in turn, enhance the overall ability of the symbiotic associa-
tion to exist in a particular habitat. In the case of mycor-
rhizae, the fungal partner expedites the plant’s absorption
of essential nutrients such as phosphorus. Both of these as-
sociations will be discussed further in this chapter.

 

Fungi are key decomposers and symbionts within
almost all terrestrial ecosystems and play many other
important ecological and commercial roles.

 

Chapter 36 Fungi 723
