36.2 Fungi are classified by their reproductive structures.

The Three Phyla of Fungi

There are three phyla but actually four groups of fungi:
phylum Zygomycota, the zygomycetes; phylum Ascomy-
cota, the ascomycetes; phylum Basidiomycota, the basid-
iomycetes, and the imperfect fungi (figure 36.7 and table
36.1). Several other groups that historically have been asso-
ciated with fungi, such as the slime molds and water molds
(phylum Oomycota; see chapter 35), now are considered to
be protists, not fungi. Oomycetes are sharply distinct from
fungi in their (1) motile spores; (2) cellulose-rich cell walls;
(3) pattern of mitosis; and (4) diploid hyphae.

The three phyla of fungi are distinguished primarily by
their sexual reproductive structures. In the zygomycetes,
the fusion of hyphae leads directly to the formation of a zy-
gote, which divides by meiosis when it germinates. In the
other two phyla, an extensive growth of dikaryotic hyphae
may lead to the formation of structures of interwoven hy-
phae within which are formed the distinctive kind of repro-
ductive cell characteristic of that particular group. Nuclear
fusion, followed by meiosis, occurs within these cells. The
imperfect fungi are cither asexual or the sexual reproduc-
tive structures have not been identified.

 

Sexual reproductive structures distinguish the three
phyla of fungi.

 

-'d?

 

 

 

Fungi
=

 

FIGURE 36.7

‘The four major groups of fungi. The imperfect fungi are not a
true phylum, but rather a collection of fungi in which sexual
structures have not been identified.

Table 36.1 Fungi

Phylum Typical Examples
Ascomycota Yeasts, truffles,
morels
Imperfect Aspergillus,
fungi Penicillium ,
Basidiomycota Mushrooms,
toadstools, rusts
Zygomycota Rhizopus
(black bread mold) %

724 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

Approximate
Number of

Key Characteristics Living Species

Develop by sexual means; ascospores are 32,000

formed inside a sac called an ascus;

asexual reproduction is also common

Sexual reproduction has not been observed; 17,000

most are thought to be ascomycetes that

have lost the ability to reproduce sexually

Develop by sexual means; basidiospores are 22,000

borne on club-shaped structures called basidia;

the terminal hyphal cell that produces spores is

called a basidium; asexual reproduction occurs

occasionally

Develop sexually and asexually; multinucleate 1050

hyphae lack septa, except for reproductive
structures; fusion of hyphae leads directly to
formation of a zygote, in which meiosis occurs
just before it germinates
