36.1
A Fungus Is Not a Plant

‘The fungi are a distinct kingdom of organisms, comprising
about 77,000 named species (figure 36.2). Mycologists,
scientists who study fungi, believe there may be many more
species in existence, as many as 1.2 million. Although fungi
have traditionally been included in the plant kingdom, they
lack chlorophyll and resemble plants only in their general
appearance and lack of mobility. Significant differences be-
tween fungi and plants include the following:

1. Fungi are heterotrophs. Perhaps most obviously,
a mushroom is not green. Virtually all plants are pho-
tosynthesizers, while no fungi have chlorophyll or
carry out photosynthesis. Instead, fungi obtain their
food by secreting digestive enzymes onto the sub-
strate, and then absorbing the organic molecules that
are released by the enzymes.

2. Fungi have filamentous bodies. Fungi are basi-
cally filamentous in their growth form (that is, their
bodies consist of long slender filaments called hy-
phae), even though these hyphae may be packed to-
gether to form complex structures like the mush-
room. Plants, in contrast, are made of several types of
cells organized into tissues and organs.

3. Fungi have unusual reproductive modes.
plants have motile sperm with flagella. No fungi do.

Some

 

(b)
720 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

Fungi are unlike any other kind of organism.

Most fungi reproduce sexually with nuclear exchange
rather than gametes.

4. Fungi have cell walls made of chitin. The cell
walls of fungi are built of polysaccharides (chains of
sugars) and chitin, the same tough material a crab
shell is made of. The cell walls of plants are made of
cellulose, also a strong building material.

5. Fungi have nuclear mitosis. Mitosis in fungi is
different from that in plants or most other eukaryotes
in one key respect: the nuclear envelope does not
break down and re-form. Instead, mitosis takes place
within the nucleus. A spindle apparatus forms there,
dragging chromosomes to opposite poles of the nu-
cleus (not the cell, as in most other eukaryotes).

You could build a much longer list, but already the
take-home lesson is clear: fungi are not like plants at all!
Their many unique features are strong evidence that fungi
are not closely related to any other group of organisms.
DNA studies confirm significant differences from other
eukaryotes.

 

Fungi absorb their food after digesting it with secreted
enzymes. This mode of nutrition, combined with a
filamentous growth form, nuclear mitosis, and other
traits, makes the members of this kingdom highly
distinctive.

 

 

FIGURE 36.2

Representatives of the three phyla of fungi. (a) A cup fungus,
Cookeina tricholoma, an ascomycete, from the rain forest of Costa
Rica. (b) Amanita muscaria, the fly agaric, a toxic basidiomycete. In
the cup fungi, the spore-producing structures line the cup; in
basidiomycetes that form mushrooms, like Amanita, they line the
gills beneath the cap of the mushroom. All visible structures of
fleshy fungi, such as the ones shown here, arise from an extensive
network of filamentous hyphae that penetrates and is interwoven
with the substrate on which they grow. (c) Pilobolus, a zygomycete
that grows on animal feces. Stalks about 10 millimeters long
contain dark spore-bearing sacs.
