Phylum Zygomycota

The zygomycetes (phylum Zygomycota) |
lack septa in their hyphae except when they f
form sporangia or gametangia. Zy-
gomycetes are by far the smallest of the
three phyla of fungi, with only about 1050
named species. Included among them are
some of the more common bread molds
(figure 36.8), as well as a variety of other
microscopic fungi found on decaying or-
ganic material. The group is named after a
characteristic feature of the life cycle of its
members, the production of temporarily
dormant structures called zygosporangia.
In the life cycle of the zygomycetes (fig-
ure 36.80), sexual reproduction occurs by
the fusion of gametangia, which contain numerous nuclei.
The gametangia are cut off from the hyphae by complete
septa. These gametangia may be formed on hyphae of dif-
ferent mating types or on a single hypha. If both + and —
mating strains are present in a colony, they may grow to-
gether and their nuclei may fuse. Once the haploid nuclei
have fused, forming diploid zygote nuclei, the area where
the fusion has taken place develops into an often massive
and elaborate zygosporangium. A zygosporangium may
contain one or more diploid nuclei and acquires a thick

2
2
8
S|
€
5
EY

Ni

 

Sporangium

(occurs
during
germination)

Pro
MEIOSIS

 

(a)

FIGURE 36.8

Rhizopus, a zygomycete that grows on
moist bread and other similar
substrates. (a) The dark, spherical,

 

spore-producing sporangia are on Germinating

hyphae about a centimeter tall. The Zygesporanglum ee
rootlike hyphae anchor the sporangia.

© Life cycle of Rhizopus, a zygomycete. Zygosporangium

This phylum is named for its
characteristic zygosporangia. (b)

 

coat. The zygosporangium helps the
species survive conditions not favorable for
growth. Meiosis occurs during the germi-
nation of the zygosporangium. Normal,
haploid hyphae grow from the haploid
cells that result from this process. Except
for the zygote nuclei, all nuclei of the zy-
gomycetes are haploid.

Asexual reproduction occurs much more
frequently than sexual reproduction in the
zygomycetes. During asexual reproduction,
hyphae grow over the surface of the bread
or other material on which the fungus
feeds and produce clumps of erect stalks,
called sporangiophores. The tips of the
sporangiophores form sporangia, which
are separated by septa. Thin-walled hap-
loid spores are produced within the sporangia. Their spores
are thus shed above the substrate, in a position where they
may be picked up by the wind and dispersed to a new food

source.

 

Zygomycetes form characteristic resting structures,
called zygosporangia, which contain one or more
zygotic nuclei. The hyphae of zygomycetes are
multinucleate, with septa only where gametangia or
sporangia are separated.

 

Sporangiophore
Sporangium iz0

   
     

FUSION OF
GAMETANGIA

   

Gametangia

Chapter 36 Fungi 725
