Fungi

 

Concept Outline

36.1 Fungi are unlike any other kind of organism.

A Fungus Is Nota Plant. Unlike any plant, all fungi are
filamentous heterotrophs with cell walls made of chitin.
‘The Body of a Fungus. Cytoplasm flows from one cell
to another within the filamentous body of a fungus.

How Fungi Reproduce. Fungi reproduce sexually when
filaments of different fungi encounter one another and fuse.
How Fungi Obtain Nutrients. Fungi secrete digestive
enzymes and then absorb the products of the digestion.
Ecology of Fungi. Fungi are among the most important
decomposers in terrestrial ecosystems.

36.2 Fungi are classified by their reproductive
structures.

‘The Three Phyla of Fungi. There are three phyla of
fungi, distinguished by their reproductive structures.
Phylum Zygomycota. In zygomycetes, the fusion of
hyphae leads directly to the formation of a zygote.
Phylum Ascomycota. In ascomycetes, hyphal fusion
leads to stable dikaryons that grow into massive webs of
hyphae that form zygotes within a characteristic saclike
structure, the ascus. Yeasts are unicellular fungi, mostly
ascomycetes, that play many important commercial and
medical roles.

Phylum Basidiomycota. _ In basidiomycetes, dikaryons
also form, but zygotes are produced within reproductive
structures called basidia.

‘The Imperfect Fungi. Fungi that have not been
observed to reproduce sexually cannot be classified into one
of the three phyla.

36.3 Fungi form two key mutualistic symbiotic
associations.

Lichens. A lichen is a mutualistic symbiotic association
between a fungus and a photosynthetic alga or
cyanobacterium.

Mycorrhizae. Mycorrhizae are mutualistic symbiotic
associations between fungi and the roots of plants.

 

FIGURE 36.1

Spores exploding from the surface of a puffball fungus. The
fungi constitute a unique kingdom of heterotrophic organisms.
Along with bacteria, they are important decomposers and disease-
causing organisms.

fall the bewildering variety of organisms that live on

earth, perhaps the most unusual, the most peculiarly
different from ourselves, are the fungi (figure 36.1). Mush-
rooms and toadstools are fungi, multicellular creatures that
grow so rapidly in size that they seem to appear overnight
on our lawns. At first glance, a mushroom looks like a
funny kind of plant growing up out of the soil. However,
when you look more closely, fungi turn out to have nothing
in common with plants except that they are multicellular
and grow in the ground. As you will see, the more you ex-
amine fungi, the more unusual they are.

719
