The Body of a Fungus

Fungi exist mainly in the form of slender filaments, barely
visible to the naked eye, which are called hyphae (singular,
hypha). These hyphae are typically made up of long chains
of cells joined end-to-end divided by cross-walls called
septa (singular, septum). The septa rarely form a complete
barrier, except when they separate the reproductive cells.
Cytoplasm characteristically flows or streams freely
throughout the hyphae, passing right through major pores
in the septa (figure 36.3). Because of this streaming, pro-
teins synthesized throughout the hyphae may be carried to
their actively growing tips. As a result, fungal hyphae may
grow very rapidly when food and water are abundant and
the temperature is optimum.

A mass of connected hyphae is called a mycelium
(plural, mycelia). This word and the term mycologist are
both derived from the Greek word for fungus, myketos. The
mycelium of a fungus (figure 36.4) constitutes a system that
may, in the aggregate, be many meters long. This
mycelium grows through and penetrates its substrate, re-
sulting in a unique relationship between the fungus and its
environment. All parts of such a fungus are metabolically
active, continually interacting with the soil, wood, or other
material in which the mycelium is growing.

In two of the three phyla of fungi, reproductive struc-
tures formed of interwoven hyphae, such as mushrooms,
puffballs, and morels, are produced at certain stages of the
life cycle. These structures expand rapidly because of rapid
elongation of the hyphae. For this reason, mushrooms can
appear suddenly on your lawn.

The cell walls of fungi are formed of polysaccharides
and chitin, not cellulose like those of plants and many
groups of protists. Chitin is the same material that makes
up the major portion of the hard shells, or exoskeletons, of
arthropods, a group of animals that includes insects and
crustaceans (see chapter 46). The commonality of chitin is
one of the traits that has led scientists to believe that fungi
and animals share a common ancestor.

Mitosis in fungi differs from that in most other organ-
isms. Because of the linked nature of the cells, the cell it-
self is not the relevant unit of reproduction; instead, the
nucleus is. The nuclear envelope does not break down and
re-form; instead, the spindle apparatus is formed within it.
Centrioles are lacking in all fungi; instead, fungi regulate
the formation of microtubules during mitosis with small,
relatively amorphous structures called spindle plaques.
This unique combination of features strongly suggests that
fungi originated from some unknown group of single-
celled eukaryotes with these characteristics.

 

Fungi exist primarily in the form of filamentous hyphae,
typically with incomplete division into individual cells

by septa. These and other unique features indicate that
fungi are not closely related to any other group of
organisms.

 

 

FIGURE 36.3

A septum (45,000). This transmission electron micrograph of a
section through a hypha of the basidiomycete Inonotus tomentosus
shows a pore through which the cytoplasm streams.

 

FIGURE 36.4
Fungal mycelium. This mycelium, composed of hyphae, is
growing through leaves on the forest floor in Maryland.

Chapter 36 Fungi 721
