Part

II

Biology of the Cell

How Do the Cells of a Growing
Plant Know in Which Direction

to Elongate?

Sometimes questions that seem simple can be devilishly dif-
ficult to answer. Imagine, for example, that you are holding
a green blade of grass in your hand. The grass blade has
been actively growing, its cells dividing and then stretching
and elongating as the blade lengthens. Did you ever wonder
how the individual cells within the blade of grass know in
what direction to grow?

To answer this deceptively simple question, we will first
need to provide answers to several others. Like Sherlock
Holmes following a trail of clues, we must approach the an-
swer we seck in stages.

Question One. First, we need to ask how a blade of grass
is able to grow at all. Plant cells are very different from ani-
mal cells in one key respect: every plant cell is encased
within a tough cell wall made of cellulose and other tough
building materials. This wall provides structural strength
and protection to the plant cell, just as armor plate does for
a battle tank. But battle tanks can’t stretch into longer
shapes! How is a plant cell able to elongate?

It works like this. A growing cell first performs a little
chemistry to make its wall slightly acidic. The acidity acti-
vates enzymes that attack the cell wall from the inside, rear-
ranging cellulose cross-links until the wall loses its rigidity.
The cell wall is now able to stretch. The cell then sucks in
water, creating pressure. Like blowing up a long balloon,
the now-stretchable cell elongates.

Question Two. In a growing plant organ, like the blade
of grass, each growing cell balloons out lengthwise. Stating
this more formally, a botanist would say the cell elongates
parallel to the axis along which the blade of grass is extend-
ing. This observation leads to the second question we must
answer: How does an individual plant cell control the di-
rection in which it elongates?

It works like this. Before the stretchable cell balloons out,
tiny microfibrils of cellulose are laid down along its inside sur-
face. On a per weight basis, these tiny fibrils have the tensile
strength of steel! Arrays of these cellulose microfibrils are

 

Seeing cortical microtubules. Cortical microtubules in
epidermal cells of a fava bean are tagged with a flourescent
protein so that their ordered array can be seen.

organized in bands perpendicular to the axis of elongation,
like steel belts. These tough bands reinforce the plant cell wall
laterally, so that when the cell sucks in water, there is only one
way for the cell to expand—tengthwise, along the axis.

Question Three. Now we’re getting somewhere. How
are the newly made cellulose microfibrils laid down so that
they are oriented correctly, perpendicular to the axis of
elongation?

It works like this. The complicated enzymic machine that
makes the cellulose microfibrils is guided by special
guiderails that run like railroad tracks along the interior sur-
face. The enzyme complex travels along these guiderails,
laying down microfibrils as it goes. The guiderails are con-
structed of chainlike protein molecules called microtubules,
assembled into overlapping arrays. Botanists call these ar-
rays of microtubules associated with the interior of the cell
surface “cortical microtubules.”

Question Four. But we have only traded one puzzle for
another. How are the cortical microtubules positioned cor-
rectly, perpendicular to the axis of elongation?

It works like this. In newly made cells, the microtubule
assemblies are already present, but are not organized. They
simply lie about in random disarray. As the cell prepares to
elongate by lessening the rigidity of its cell wall, the micro-
tubule assemblies become organized into the orderly trans-
verse arrays we call cortical microtubules.

Question Five. Finally, we arrive at the question we had
initially set out to answer. How are microtubule assemblies
aligned properly? What sort of signal directs them to ori-
ent perpendicular to the axis of elongation? THAT is the
question we need to answer.

75

Real People Doing Real Science mm
