How Fungi Reproduce

Fungi are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduc-
tion. When a fungus reproduces sexually it forms a
diploid zygote, as do animals and plants. Unlike animals
and plants, all fungal nuclei except for the zygote are hap-
loid, and there are many haploid nuclei in the common
cytoplasm of a fungal mycelium. When fungi reproduce
sexually, hyphae of two genetically different mating types
come together and fuse. In two of the three phyla of
fungi, the genetically different nuclei that are associated
in a common cytoplasm after fusion do not combine im-
mediately. Instead, the two types of nuclei coexist for
most of the life of the fungus. A fungal hypha containing
nuclei derived from two genetically distinct individuals is
called a heterokaryotic hypha. If all of the nuclei are ge-
netically similar to one another, the hypha is said to be
homokaryotic. If there are two distinct nuclei within
each compartment of the hyphae, they are dikaryotic. If
each compartment has only a single nucleus, it is
monokaryotic. Dikaryotic hyphae have some of the ge-
netic properties of diploids, because both genomes are
transcribed. These distinctions are important in under-
standing the life cycles of the individual groups.

Cytoplasm in fungal hyphae normally flows through
perforated septa or moves freely in their absence. Repro-
ductive structures are an important exception to this gen-
eral pattern. When reproductive structures form, they are
cut off by complete septa that lack perforations or have
perforations that soon become blocked. Three kinds of re-
productive structures occur in fungi: (1) sporangia, which
are involved in the formation of spores; (2) gametangia,
structures within which gametes form; and (3) conidio-
phores, structures that produce conidia, multinucleate
asexual spores.

Spores are a common means of reproduction among
fungi. They may form as a result of either asexual or sexual
processes and are always nonmotile, being dispersed by
wind. When spores land in a suitable place, they germinate,
giving rise to a new fungal hypha. Because the spores are
very small, they can remain suspended in the air for long
periods of time. Because of this, fungal spores may be
blown great distances from their place of origin, a factor in
the extremely wide distributions of many kinds of fungi.
Unfortunately, many of the fungi that cause diseases in
plants and animals are spread rapidly and widely by such
means. The spores of other fungi are routinely dispersed by
insects and other small animals.

 

Fungi reproduce sexually after two hyphae of opposite
mating type fuse. Asexual reproduction by spores is a
second common means of reproduction.

 

FIGURE 36.5

A carnivorous fungus. The oyster mushroom, Pleurotus ostreatus,
not only decomposes wood but also immobilizes nematodes,
which the fungus uses as a source of nitrogen.

How Fungi Obtain Nutrients

All fungi obtain their food by secreting digestive enzymes
into their surroundings and then absorbing back into the
fungus the organic molecules produced by this external di-
gestion. The significance of the fungal body plan reflects
this approach, the extensive network of hyphae providing
an enormous surface area for absorption. Many fungi are
able to break down the cellulose in wood, cleaving the link-
ages between glucose subunits and then absorbing the glu-
cose molecules as food. That is why fungi so often grow on
dead trees.

It might surprise you to know that some fungi are
predatory (figure 36.5). For example, the mycelium of the
edible oyster fungus, Pleurotus ostreatus, excretes a sub-
stance that anesthetizes tiny roundworms known as nema-
todes (see chapter 44) that feed on the fungus. When the
worms become sluggish and inactive, the fungal hyphae
envelop and penetrate their bodies and absorb their nutri-
tious contents. The fungus usually grows within living
trees or on old stumps, obtaining the bulk of its glucose
through the enzymatic digestion of cellulose from the
wood, so that the nematodes it consumes apparently serve
mainly as a source of nitrogen—a substance almost always
in short supply in biological systems. Other fungi are even
more active predators than Pleurotus, snaring, trapping, or
firing projectiles into nematodes, rotifers, and other small
animals on which they prey.

 

Fungi secrete digestive enzymes onto organic matter
and then absorb the products of the digestion.

 

722 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms
