 

The Imperfect Fungi ti
Most of the so-called imperfect fungi, a y
group also called deuteromycetes, are those

in which the sexual reproductive stages

have not been observed. Most of these ap- >
pear to be related to ascomycetes although | 2
some have clear affinities to the other |E 3
phyla. The group of fungi from whicha B = |)
particular nonsexual strain has been derived | 7

 

 

 

usually can be determined by the features
of its hyphae and asexual reproduction. It
cannot, however, be classified by the stan-
dards of that group because the classifica-
tion systems are based on the features re-
lated to sexual reproduction. One
consequence of this system is that as sexual
reproduction is discovered in an imperfect fungus, it may
have two names assigned to different stages of its life cycle.

There are some 17,000 described species of imperfect
fungi (figure 36.12). Even though sexual reproduction is
absent among imperfect fungi, a certain amount of ge-
netic recombination occurs. This becomes possible when
hyphae of different genetic types fuse, as sometimes hap-
pens spontancously. Within the heterokaryotic hyphae
that arise from such fusion, a special kind of genetic re-
combination called parasexuality may occur. In parasex-
uality, genetically distinct nuclei within a common hypha
exchange portions of chromosomes. Recombination of
this sort also occurs in other groups of fungi and seems to

be responsible for some of the new pathogenic strains of
wheat rust.

FIGURE 36.12

 

 

Economic Importance

Among the economically important genera
of the imperfect fungi are Penicillium and
Aspergillus. Some species of Penicillium are
sources of the well-known antibiotic peni-
cillin, and other species of the genus give
the characteristic flavors and aromas to
cheeses such as Roquefort and Camembert.
Species of Aspergillus are used to ferment
soy sauce and soy paste, processes in which
certain bacteria and yeasts also play impor-
tant roles. Citric acid is produced commer-
cially with members of this genus under
highly acidic conditions. Some species of
both Penicillium and Aspergillus form asco-
carps, but the genera are still classified pri-
marily as imperfect fungi because the asco-
carps are found rarely in only a few species. Most of the
fungi that cause skin diseases in humans, including athlete’s
foot and ringworm, are also imperfect fungi.

A number of imperfect fungi occur widely on food.
Fusarium species growing on spoiled food produce highly
toxic substances such as trichothecenes. Aflatoxins, among
the most carcinogenic compounds known, are produced by
some Aspergillus flavus strains growing on corn, peanuts,
etc. Most developed countries have legal limits on the con-
centration of aflatoxin permitted in different foods.

‘Ascomycetes
Basidiomycetes

 

Imperfect fungi are fungi in which no sexual
reproduction has been observed. For this reason, they
cannot be classified by the standards applied to the
three phyla of fungi. The great majority of the
imperfect fungi are clearly ascomycetes.

 

 

‘The imperfect fungi. (a) Verticillium alboatrum (1350), an important pathogen of alfalfa,
has whorled conidiophores. The single-celled conidia of this member of the imperfect
fungi are borne at the ends of the conidiophores. (0) In Tolypocladium inflatum, the conidia
arise along the branches. This fungus is one of the sources of cyclosporin, a drug that
suppresses immune reactions and thus assists in making human organ grafts possible; the
drug was put on the market in 1979. () This scanning electron micrograph of Aspergillus
shows conidia, the spheres at the end of the hyphae.

Chapter 36 Fungi 729
