Chapter 56

Summary
36.1 Fungi are unlike any other kind of organism.

=
V4

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

¢ The fungi are a distinct kingdom of eukaryotic
organisms characterized by a filamentous growth
form, lack of chlorophyll and motile cells, chitin-rich
cell walls, and external digestion of food by the
secretion of enzymes.

¢ Fungal filaments, called hyphae, collectively make up
the fungus body, which is ‘alled the mycelium.

¢ In many fungi, the two kinds of nuclei that will
eventually undergo syngamy occur together in
hyphae for a long period before they fuse. Meiosis
occurs immediately after the formation of the zygote
in all fungi; the zygote, therefore, is the only diploid
nucleus of the entire life cycle in these organisms.

1, What is a hypha? What is
the advantage to having
incomplete septa?

2. What is the composition of
the fungal cell wall? Why is this
composition an advantage to the
fungi?

3. Which fungal nuclei are
diploid? Which are haploid? To
what do the following terms
refer: heterokaryotic, homokaryotic,
dikaryotic, and monokaryotic?

36.2 Fungi are classified by their reproductive structures.

* Characteristics of
Fungi

@

 

© There are three phyla of fungi: Zygomycota, the
zygomycetes; Ascomycota, the ascomycetes; and
Basidiomycota, the basidiomycetes.

* Zygomycetes form septa only when gametangia or
sporangia are cut off at the ends of their hyphae;
otherwise, their hyphae are multinucleate. Most
hyphae of ascomycetes and basidiomycetes have
perforated septa through which the cytoplasm, but
not necessarily the nuclei, flows freely.

* Cells within the heterokaryotic hyphae of
ascomycetes are multinucleate; those within the
heterokaryotic hyphae of the basidiomycetes are
dikaryotic. Zygotes in ascomycetes form within sac-
like structures known as asci, and those in
basidiomycetes form within structures known as

basidia.

¢ Asexual reproduction in zygomycetes takes place by
means of spores from multinucleate sporangia; in
ascomycetes, it takes place by means of conidia.
Asexual reproduction in basidiomycetes is rare.

4, What are the three
reproductive structures that

occur in fungi? How do they
differ?

5. Fungi are nonmotile. How
are they dispersed to new areas?

6. What are the ascomycete
asexual spores called? Do the
nonreproductive hyphae of this
division have septa?

7. To what phyla do the yeasts
belong? How do they differ from
other fungi? Is it more likely that
this characteristic is primitive or
degenerate?

8. What are the imperfect
fungi? Which phylum seems to
be best represented in this
group? By what means can
individuals in this group be
classified?

36.3 Fungi form two key mutualistic symbiotic associations.

@ * Diversity of Fungi

* Student Research:
Mushroom Spore
Germination

Tn

 

¢ Lichens are mutualistic symbiotic systems involving
fungi (almost always ascomycetes), which derive their
nutrients from green algae, cyanobacteria, or both.

¢ Mycorrhizae are mutualistic symbiotic associations
between fungi and plants. Endomycorrhizae, more
common, involve zygomycetes, while ectomycor-
rhizal fungi are mainly basidiomycetes.

732 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

9. What are lichens? Which
fungal phylum is best
represented in the lichens?

10. What are mycorrhizae? How
do endomycorrhizae and
ectomycorrhizae differ?
