| 37.1 Plants have multicellular haploid and diploid stages in their life cycles.

The Evolutionary Origins of Plants

Biologists have long suspected that plants are the evolu-
tionary descendants of green algae. Now we are sure. The
evolutionary history of plants was laid bare at the 1999 In-
ternational Botanical Congress held in St. Louis, Mis-
souri, by a team of 200 biologists from 12 countries that
had been working together for five years with U.S. federal
funding. Their project, Deep Green (more formally
known as The Green Plant Phylogeny Research Coordi-
nation Group), coordinated the efforts of laboratories
using molecular, morphological, and anatomical traits to
create a new “Tree of Life.” Deep Green confirmed the
long-standing claim that green algae were ancestral to
plants. More surprising was the finding that just a single
species of green algae gave rise to the entire terrestrial
plant lineage from moss through the flowering plants (an-
giosperms). Exactly what this ancestral alga was is still a
mystery, but close relatives are believed to exist in fresh-
water lakes today. DNA sequence data is consistent with
the claim that a single “Eve” gave rise to the entire king-
dom Plantae 450 million years ago. At each subsequent
step in evolution, the evidence suggests that only a single
family of plants made the transition. The fungi appear to
have branched later than the plants and are more closely
related to us.

There are 12 plant phyla, all of which afford some pro-
tection to their embryos. All plants also have a haploid and
a diploid stage that is multicellular. The trend over time
has been toward increasing embryo protection and a
smaller haploid stage in the life cycle. The plants are di-
vided into two groups based on the presence or absence of
vascular tissues which facilitate the transport of water and
nutrients in plants. Three phyla (mosses, liverworts, and
hornworts) lack vascular tissue and are referred to as the
nonvascular plants. Members of 9 of the 12 plant phyla
are collectively called vascular plants, and include, among
others, the ferns, conifers, and flowering plants. Vascular
plants have water-conducting xylem and food-conducting
phloem strands of tissues in their stems, roots, and leaves.
Vascular plants can be further grouped based on how much
protection embryos have. The seedless vascular plants
(ferns) provide less protection than the seeds of the gym-
nosperms (conifers) and angiosperms (flowering plants)
(figure 37.2). About 150 million years ago the angiosperms
arose with further innovations—flowers to attract pollina-
tors and fruit surrounding the seed to protect the embryo
and aid in seed dispersal. Many of these lineages have per-
sisted. If you could travel back 65 million years to the di-
nosaur era, you would encounter oak, walnut, and
sycamore trees!

736 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

 

&*n

 

 

Plants

FIGURE 37.2

‘The four major groups of plants. In this chapter we will discuss
four major groups of plants. The green algae, discussed in chapter
35, are the protists from which plants are thought to have evolved.

Adaptations to Land

Plants and fungi are the only major groups of organisms
that are primarily terrestrial. Most plants are protected
from desiccation—the tendency of organisms to lose water
to the air—by a waxy cuticle that is secreted onto their ex-
posed surfaces. The cuticle is relatively impermeable and
provides an effective barrier to water loss.

This solution creates another problem by limiting gas
exchange essential for respiration and photosynthesis.
Water and gas diffusion into and out of a plant occurs
through tiny mouth-shaped openings called stomata (sin-
gular, stoma).

The evolution of leaves resulted in increased photo-
synthetic surface area. The shift to a dominant diploid
generation, accompanied by the structural support of vas-
cular tissue, allowed plants to take advantage of the verti-
cal dimension of the terrestrial environment, resulting in
trees.

 

Plants evolved from freshwater green algae and
eventually developed cuticles, stomata, conducting
systems, and reproductive strategies that adapt them
well for life on land.

 
