 

  

 

   
  

 

 

 

 

— 2F 27 APM treated
&
2 5 Not centrifuged , Not centrifuged
8 iF < r Centrifuged
3 Centrifuged
a
Bz 6b 6
8
2
5
2 Sr 3r
5
2
° po 0 po
0 30 60 0 30 60 90
(a) Axis of elongation relative to centrifugal force (degrees) (b) Axis of elongation relative to centrifugal force (degrees)

 

 

Effects of centrifugation on cell elongation. (a) Protoplasts (plant cells without cell walls) that were centrifuged showed preferential
elongation in a direction approximately perpendicular to the direction of the force. (}) Protoplasts exposed to APM, a microtubule dis-
rupting chemical, exhibited random cell elongation with or without centrifugation.

The Experiment

This question has been addressed experimentally in a sim-
ple and direct way in the laboratory of Richard Cyr at
Pennsylvania State University. Rigid plant cells conduct
mechanical force well from one cell to another, and Carol
Wymer (then a graduate student in the Cyr lab) suspected
some sort of mechanical force is the signal guiding cortical
microtubule alignment

Wymer set out to test this hypothesis using centrifuga-
tion. If cortical microtubules are obtaining their positional
information from an applied force, then their alignment
should be affected by centrifugal force, and should be im-
possible if the integrity of the cell wall (which is supposedly
transmitting the mechanical force) is perturbed with chem-
icals that prevent cell wall formation.

Wymer, along with others in the Cyr lab, started out with
cells that were not elongated. She isolated protoplasts (cells
without walls) from the tobacco plant, Nicotiana tabacum, by
exposing the plant cells to enzymes that break down the cell
wall, creating a spherical plant cell. If allowed to grow in cul-
ture, these protoplasts will eventually re-form their cell walls.

In order to examine the effects of directional force on the
elongation patterns of plant cells, Wymer and co-workers
exposed the tobacco protoplasts to a directional force gener-
ated by a centrifuge. Prior experiments had determined
that centrifugation at the low speeds used in these experi-
ments does not disrupt the integrity or shape of the proto-
plasts. The protoplasts were immobilized for centrifugation
by embedding them in an agar medium supported in a
mold. The embedded protoplasts were spun in a centrifuge
at 450 rpm for 15 minutes. Following centrifugation, the
embedded cells were cultured for 72 hours, allowing for cell
elongation to occur.

Following centrifugation, fluorescently tagged micro-
tubule antibody was applied to the protoplasts, which were
then examined with immunofluorescence microscopy for
microtubule orientation.

 

To confirm the involvement of microtubules as sensors
of directional force in cell elongation, some protoplasts
were incubated prior to centrifugation with a chemical her-
bicide, APM, which disrupts microtubules.

The Results

The biophysical force of centrifugation had significant ef-
fects on the pattern of elongation in the protoplasts follow-
ing the 72-hour culturing period. The microtubules were
randomly arranged in protoplasts that were not centrifuged
but were more ordered in protoplasts that had been cen-
trifuged. The microtubules in these cells were oriented
parallel to the direction of the force, in a direction approxi-
mately perpendicular to the axis of elongation (graph a
above). These results support the hypothesis that plant cell
growth responds to an external biophysical force.

It is true that plant cells are not usually exposed to the
type of mechanical force generated by centrifugation but
this manipulation demonstrates how a physical force can af-
fect cell growth, assumably by influencing the orientation of
cortical microtubules. These could be small, transient bio-
physical forces acting at the subcellular level.

In preparations exposed to the microtubule disrupting
chemical amiprophos-methyl (APM), directed elongation
was blocked (graph b above). This suggests that reorienta-
tion of microtubules is indeed necessary to direct the elon-
gation axis of the plant

Taken together, these experiments support the hypothesis
that the microtubule reorientation that directs cell elongation
may be oriented by a mechanical force. Just what the natural
force might be is an open question, providing an opportunity
for lots of interesting future experiments that are being pur-
sued in the Cyr lab.

To explore this experiment further,
go to the Virtual Lab at
www.mhhe.com/raven6/vlab2.mhtml
