36.3 Fungi form two key mutualistic symbiotic associations.

Lichens

Lichens (figure 36.13) are symbiotic
associations between a fungus and a
photosynthetic partner. They pro-
vide an outstanding example of mu-
tualism, the kind of symbiotic asso-
ciation that benefits both partners.
Ascomycetes (including some imper-
fect fungi) are the fungal partners in
all but about 20 of the approxi-
mately 15,000 species of lichens esti-
mated to exist; the exceptions,
mostly tropical, are basidiomycetes.
Most of the visible body of a lichen
consists of its fungus, but within the
tissues of that fungus are found
cyanobacteria, green algae, or some-
times both (figure 36.14). Special-
ized fungal hyphae penetrate or envelop the photosyn-
thetic cells within them and transfer nutrients directly to
the fungal partner. Biochemical “signals” sent out by the
fungus apparently direct its cyanobacterial or green algal
component to produce metabolic substances that it does
not produce when growing independently of the fungus.
The photosynthetic member of the association is nor-
mally held between thick layers of interwoven fungal hy-
phae and is not directly exposed to the light, but enough
light penetrates the translucent layers of fungal hyphae to
make photosynthesis possible. The fungi in lichens are
unable to grow normally without their photosynthetic
partners and the fungi protect their partners from strong
light and desiccation.

The durable construction of the fungus, combined with
the photosynthetic properties of its partner, has enabled
lichens to invade the harshest habitats at the tops of moun-
tains, in the farthest northern and southern latitudes, and
on dry, bare rock faces in the desert. In harsh, exposed
areas, lichens are often the first colonists, breaking down
the rocks and setting the stage for the invasion of other
organisms.

Lichens are often strikingly colored because of the pres-
ence of pigments that probably play a role in protecting
the photosynthetic partner from the destructive action of
the sun’s rays. These same pigments may be extracted
from the lichens and used as natural dyes. The traditional
method of manufacturing Scotland’s famous Harris tweed
used fungal dyes.

Lichens are extremely sensitive to pollutants in the at-
mosphere, and thus they can be used as bioindicators of air
quality. Their sensitivity results from their ability to ab-
sorb substances dissolved in rain and dew. Lichens are
generally absent in and around cities because of automo-

FIGURE 36.13

730 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

 

Lichens are found in a variety of habitats. (a) A fruticose lichen, Cladina evansii, growing
on the ground in Florida. (#) A foliose (“leafy”) lichen, Parmotrema gardneri, growing on the
bark of a tree in a mountain forest in Panama.

 

FIGURE 36.14

Stained section of a lichen (250%). This section shows fungal
hyphae (purple) more densely packed into a protective layer on the
top and, especially, the bottom layer of the lichen. The blue cells
near the upper surface of the lichen are those ofa green alga.
These cells supply carbohydrate to the fungus.

bile traffic and industrial activity, even though suitable
substrates exist.

 

Lichens are symbiotic associations between a fungus—
an ascomycete in all but a very few instances—and a
photosynthetic partner, which may be a green alga or a
cyanobacterium or both.

 
