Mycorrhizae

The roots of about 90% of all kinds of vascular plants nor-
mally are involved in mutualistic symbiotic relationships
with certain kinds of fungi. It has been estimated that these
fungi probably amount to 15% of the total weight of the
world’s plant roots. Associations of this kind are termed
mycorrhizae (from the Greek words for “fungus” and
“roots”). The fangi in mycorrhizae associations function as
extensions of the root system. The fungal hyphae dramati-
cally increase the amount of soil contact and total surface
area for absorption. When mycorrhizae are present, they
aid in the direct transfer of phosphorus, zinc, copper, and
other nutrients from the soil into the roots. The plant, on
the other hand, supplies organic carbon to the fungus, so
the system is an example of mutualism.

There are two principal types of mycorrhizae (figure
36.15): endomycorrhizae, in which the fungal hyphae
penetrate the outer cells of the plant root, forming coils,
swellings, and minute branches, and also extend out into
the surrounding soil; and ectomycorrhizae, in which the
hyphae surround but do not penetrate the cell walls of the
roots. In both kinds of mycorrhizae, the mycelium extends
far out into the soil.

Endomycorrhizae

Endomycorrhizae are by far the more common of these
two types. The fungal component in them is a zy-
gomycete. Only about 100 species of zygomycetes are
known to be involved in such relationships throughout the
world. These few species of zygomycetes are associated
with more than 200,000 species of plants. Endomycor-
rhizal fungi are being studied intensively because they are
potentially capable of increasing crop yields with lower
phosphate and energy inputs.

The earliest fossil plants often show endomycorrhizal
roots. Such associations may have played an important role
in allowing plants to colonize land. The soils available at
such times would have been sterile and completely lacking
in organic matter. Plants that form mycorrhizal associa-
tions are particularly successful in infertile soils; consider-
ing the fossil evidence, the suggestion that mycorrhizal as-
sociations found in the earliest plants helped them succeed
on such soils seems reasonable. In addition, the most prim-
itive vascular plants surviving today continue to depend
strongly on mycorrhizae.

Ectomycorrhizae

Ectomycorrhizae (figure 36.150) involve far fewer kinds of
plants than do endomycorrhizae, perhaps a few thousand.
They are characteristic of certain groups of trees and
shrubs, particularly those of temperate regions, including
pines, firs, oaks, beeches, and willows. The fungal compo-
nents in most ectomycorrhizae are basidiomycetes, but

Ectomycorrhizae

 

 

()

FIGURE 36.15

Endomycorthizae and ectomycorrhizae. (a) In
endomycorrhizae, fungal hyphae penetrate and branch out in the
root cells of plants. In ectomycorrhizae, fungal hyphae do not
penetrate root cells but grow around and extend between the cells.
(® Ectomycorrhizae on roots of pines. From left to right are
yellow-brown mycorrhizae formed by Pisolithus, white
mycorrhizae formed by Rhizopagon, and pine roots not associated
with a fungus.

some are ascomycetes. Several different kinds of ectomyc-
orrhizal fungi may form mycorrhizal associations with one
plant. Different combinations have different effects on the
physiological characteristics of the plant and its ability to
survive under different environmental conditions. At least
5000 species of fungi are involved in ectomycorrhizal rela-
tionships, and many of them are restricted to a single
species of plant.

 

Mycorrhizae are symbiotic associations between plants
and fungi.

 

Chapter 36 Fungi 731
