Phylum Basidiomycota

The third phylum of fungi, the basid-
iomycetes (phylum Basidiomycota), has
about 22,000 named species. These are
among the most familiar fungi. Among the
basidiomycetes are not only the mush-
rooms, toadstools, puffballs, jelly fungi, and
shelf fungi, but also many important plant
pathogens including rusts and smuts (figure
36.11). Many mushrooms are used as food,
but others are deadly poisonous.

Basidiomycetes are named for their char-
acteristic sexual reproductive structure, the
basidium (plural, basidia). A basidium is
club-shaped. Karyogamy occurs within the
basidium, giving rise to the zygote, the only
diploid cell of the life cycle (figure 36.114). As in all fungi,
meiosis occurs immediately after the formation of the zy-
gote. In the basidiomycetes, the four haploid products of
meiosis are incorporated into basidiospores. In most
members of this phylum, the basidiospores are borne at the
end of the basidia on slender projections called sterigmata
(singular, sterigma). Thus the structure of a basidium dif-
fers from that of an ascus, although functionally the two are
identical. Recall that the ascospores of the ascomycetes are
borne internally in asci.

 
    
     
   
     

FIGURE 36.11

Basidiomycetes. (a) Death cap
mushroom, Amanita phalloides. When
eaten, these mushrooms are usually
fatal. (0) Life cycle of a basidiomycete.
The basidium is the reproductive
structure where syngamy occurs.

Fusion of
and
hyphae

(b)

728 Part IX Viruses and Simple Organisms

 

Secondary mycelium
(dikaryotic)

The life cycle of a basidiomycete contin-
ues with the production of homokaryotic
hyphae after spore germination. These hy-
phae lack septa at first. Eventually, septa
form between the nuclei of the monokary-
otic hyphae. A basidiomycete mycelium
made up of monokaryotic hyphae is called
a primary mycelium. Different mating
types of monokaryotic hyphae may fuse,
forming a dikaryotic or secondary
mycelium. Such a mycelium is heterokary-
otic, with two nuclei, representing the two
different mating types, between each pair
of septa. The maintenance of two genomes
in the heterokaryon allows for more ge-
netic plasticity than in a diploid cell with
one nucleus. One genome may compen-
sate for mutations in the other. The basidiocarps, or
mushrooms, are formed entirely of secondary (dikaryotic)
mycelium. Gills on the undersurface of the cap of a mush-

i
3
e
3
3
a

room form vast numbers of minute spores. It has been esti-
mated that a mushroom with a cap that is 7.5 centimeters
across produces as many as 40 million spores per hour!

 

Most basidiomycete hyphae are dikaryotic. Ultimately,
the hyphae fuse to form basidiocarps, with basidia lining
the gills on the underside. Meiosis immediately follows
syngamy in these basidia.

 

Gills lined
with basidia

  

OF—" jl
Basidiospores J é
wn OF
Primary mycelium
(monokaryotic)

Formation of
basidiospores
