 

357

Evolutionary History
of Plants

 

Concept Outline

37.1 Plants have multicellular haploid and diploid
stages in their life cycles.

The Evolutionary Origins of Plants. Plants evolved
from freshwater green algae and eventually developed
cuticles, stomata, conducting systems, and reproductive
strategies that adapt them well for life on land.

Plant Life Cycles. Plants have haplodiplontic life cycles.
Diploid sporophytes produce haploid spores which develop
into haploid gametophytes that produce haploid gametes.

37.2 Nonvascular plants are relatively unspecialized,
but successful in many terrestrial environments.

Mosses, Liverworts, and Hornworts. The most
conspicuous part of a nonvascular plant is the green
photosynthetic gametophyte, which supports the smaller
sporophyte nutritionally.

37.3 Seedless vascular plants have well-developed
conducting tissues in their sporophytes.

Features of Vascular Plants. _ In vascular plants,
specialized tissue called xylem conducts water and dissolved
minerals within the plant, and tissue called phloem conducts
sucrose and plant growth regulators within the plant.
Seedless Vascular Plants. Seedless vascular plants have a
much more conspicuous sporophyte than nonvascular
plants do, and many have well-developed conducting
systems in stem, roots, and leaves.

37.4 Seeds protect and aid in the dispersal of plant
embryos.

Seed Plants. In seed plants, the sporophyte is dominant.
Male and female gametophytes develop within the
sporophyte and depend on it for food. Seeds allow embryos
to germinate when conditions are favorable.
Gymnosperms. In gymnosperms, the female
gametophyte (ovule) is not completely enclosed by
sporophyte tissue at the time of pollination by male
gametophytes (pollen).

Angiosperms. In angiosperms, the ovule is completely
enclosed by sporophyte tissue at the time of pollination.
Angiosperms, by far the most successful plant group,
produce flowers.

 

FIGURE 37.1

An arctic tundra. This is one of the harshest environments on
earth, yet a diversity of plants have made this home. These
ecosystems are fragile and particularly susceptible to global
change.

lant evolution is the story of the conquest of land by

green algal ancestors. For about 500 million years,
algae were confined to a watery domain, limited by the
need for water to reproduce, provide structural support,
prevent water loss, and provide some protection from the
sun’s ultraviolet irradiation. Numerous evolutionary solu-
tions to these challenges have resulted in over 300,000
species of plants dominating all terrestrial communities
today, from forests to alpine tundra, from agricultural
fields to deserts (figure 37.1). Most plants are photosyn-
thetic, converting light energy into chemical-bond energy
and providing oxygen for all aerobic organisms. We rely
on plants for food, clothing, wood for shelter and fuel,
chemicals, and many medicines. This chapter explores the
evolutionary history and strategies that have allowed
plants to inhabit most terrestrial environments over mil-
lions of years.

735
