nuclei that represent the two different original mating
types occur. These hyphae are thus both dikaryotic and
heterokaryotic.

Asci are formed at the tips of the dikaryotic hyphae and
are separated by the formation of septa. There are two
haploid nuclei within each ascus, one of each mating type
represented in the dikaryotic hypha. Fusion of these two
nuclei occurs within each ascus, forming a zygote. Each
zygote divides immediately by meiosis, forming four hap-
loid daughter nuclei. These usually divide again by mito-
sis, producing eight haploid nuclei that become walled as-
cospores. In many ascomycetes, the ascus becomes highly
turgid at maturity and ultimately bursts, often at a pre-
formed area. When this occurs, the ascospores may be
thrown as far as 30 centimeters, an amazing distance con-
sidering that most ascospores are only about 10 microme-
ters long. This would be equivalent to throwing a baseball
(diameter 7.5 centimeters) 1.25 kilometers—about 10
times the length of a home run!

Yeasts

Yeasts, which are unicellular, are one of the most interest-
ing and economically important groups of microscopic
fungi, usually ascomycetes. Most of their reproduction is
asexual and takes place by cell fission or budding, when a
smaller cell forms from a larger one (figure 36.10).

Sometimes two yeast cells will fuse, forming one cell
containing two nuclei. This cell may then function as an
ascus, with syngamy followed immediately by meiosis.
The resulting ascospores function directly as new yeast
cells.

Because they are single-celled, yeasts were once con-
sidered primitive fungi. However, it appears that they
are actually reduced in structure and were originally de-
rived from multicellular ancestors. The word yeast actu-
ally signifies only that these fungi are single-celled.
Some yeasts have been derived from each of the three
phyla of fungi, although ascomycetes are best repre-
sented. Even yeasts that were derived from ascomycetes
are not necessarily directly related to one another, but
instead seem to have been derived from different groups
of ascomycetes.

 

Putting Yeasts to Work. The ability of yeasts to fer-
ment carbohydrates, breaking down glucose to produce
ethanol and carbon dioxide, is fundamental in the produc-
tion of bread, beer, and wine. Many different strains of
yeast have been domesticated and selected for these
processes. Wild yeasts—ones that occur naturally in the
areas where wine is made—were important in wine mak-
ing historically, but domesticated yeasts are normally used
now. The most important yeast in all these processes is
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This yeast has been used by hu-
mans throughout recorded history. Other yeasts are im-
portant pathogens and cause diseases such as thrush and

 

 

FIGURE 36.10

Scanning electron micrograph of a yeast, showing the
characteristic cell division method of budding (19,000x).
The cells tend to hang together in chains, a feature that calls to
mind the derivation of single-celled yeasts from multicellular
ancestors.

cryptococcosis; one of them, Candida, causes common
oral or vaginal infections.

Over the past few decades, yeasts have become increas-
ingly important in genetic research. They were the first
eukaryotes to be manipulated extensively by the tech-
niques of genetic engineering, and they still play the lead-
ing role as models for research in eukaryotic cells. In
1983, investigators synthesized a functional artificial chro-
mosome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by assembling the ap-
propriate DNA molecule chemically; this has not yet been
possible in any other eukaryote. In 1996, the genome se-
quence of S. cerevisiae, the first eukaryote to be sequenced
entirely, was completed. With their rapid generation time
and a rapidly increasing pool of genetic and biochemical
information, the yeasts in general and S. cerevisiae in par-
ticular are becoming the eukaryotic cells of choice for
many types of experiments in molecular and cellular biol-
ogy. Yeasts have become, in this respect, comparable to
Escherichia coli among the bacteria, and they are continu-
ing to provide significant insights into the functioning of
eukaryotic systems.

 

Ascomycetes form their zygotes within a characteristic
saclike structure, the ascus. Meiosis follows, resulting
in the production of ascospores. Yeasts are unicellular
fungi, mainly ascomycetes, that have evolved from
hypha-forming ancestors; not all yeasts are directly
related to one another. Long useful for baking,
brewing, and wine making, yeasts are now becoming
very important in genetic research.

 

Chapter 36 Fungi 727
