Table 37.1 The Nine Phyla of Extant Vascular Plants

Approximate
Number of
Phylum Examples Key Characteristics Living Species
Anthophyta Flowering plants Heterosporous seed plants. Sperm not motile; conducted 250,000
(angiosperms) to egg by a pollen tube. Seeds enclosed within a fruit.
Leaves greatly varied in size and form. Herbs, vines,
shrubs, trees. About 14,000 genera.
Pterophy x imari
yphyta Ferns GE Primarily homosporous (a few heterosporous) vascular 11,000
— plants. Sperm motile. External water necessary for
mw fertilization. Leaves are megaphylls that uncoil as they
a mature. Sporophytes and virtually all gametophytes
\® photosynthetic. About 365 genera.
Tpconinel ehnbyreeees inl Homosporous or heterosporous vascular plants. Sperm 1,150
Wy Y/ motile. External water necessary for fertilization. Leaves
VY 4 are microphylls. About 12-13 genera.
Coniferophyta Conifers Heterosporous seed plants. Sperm not motile; conducted 601
(including to egg by a pollen tube. Leaves mostly needlelike or
pines, scalelike. Trees, shrubs. About 50 genera.
spruces,
firs, yews,
redwoods,
and others)
Cycadophyta ——-Cycads \ Heterosporous vascular seed plants. Sperm flagellated and 206
motile but confined within a pollen tube that grows to the
4 vicinity of the egg. Palmlike plants with pinnate leaves.
Secondary growth slow compared with that of the conifers.
Ten genera.
Gnetophyta Gnetophytes Heterosporous vascular seed plants. Sperm not motile; 65
conducted to egg by a pollen tube. The only gymnosperms
with vessels. Trees, shrubs, vines. Three very diverse genera
(Ephedra, Gnetum, Welwitschia).
Arthrophyta Horsetails Homosporous vascular plants. Sperm motile. External 15
water necessary for fertilization. Stems ribbed, jointed,
either photosynthetic or nonphotosynthetic. Leaves
scalelike, in whorls, nonphotosynthetic at maturity.
- One genus.
. . wy, Wt .
Psilophyta Whisk ferns A eels, Homosporous vascular plants. Sperm motile. External 6
yy See eee onion miner
between root and shoot. No leaves; one of the two genera
has scalelike enations and the other leaflike appendages.
i
Ginkgophyta Ginkgo { \ Heterosporous vascular seed plants. Sperm flagellated and il

motile but conducted to the vicinity of the egg bya pollen
tube. Deciduous tree with fan-shaped leaves that have
evenly forking veins. Seeds resemble a small plum with
fleshy, ill-scented outer covering.

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants 741
