Cell Structure

 

Concept Outline

5.1 All organisms are composed of cells.

Cells. A cell is a membrane-bounded unit that contains
DNA and cytoplasm. All organisms are cells or aggregates of
cells, descendants of the first cells.

Cells Are Small. The greater relative surface area of small
cells enables more rapid communication between the cell
interior and the environment.

5.2 Eukaryotic cells are far more complex than
bacterial cells.

Bacteria Are Simple Cells. Bacterial cells are small and
lack membrane-bounded organelles.

Eukaryotic Cells Have Complex Interiors. Eukaryotic
cells are compartmentalized by membranes.

5.3 Take a tour of a eukaryotic cell.

The Nucleus: Information Center for the Cell. The
nucleus of a eukaryotic cell isolates the cell’s DNA.

The Endoplasmic Reticulum: Compartmentalizing the
Cell. An extensive system of membranes subdivides the cell
interior.

The Golgi Apparatus: Delivery System of the Cell. A
system of membrane channels collects, modifies, packages,
and distributes molecules within the cell.

Vesicles: Enzyme Storehouses. Sacs that contain enzymes
digest or modify particles in the cell, while other vesicles
transport substances in and out of cells.

Ribosomes: Sites of Protein Synthesis. An RNA-protein
complex directs the production of proteins.

Organelles That Contain DNA. Some organelles with
very different functions contain their own DNA.

The Cytoskeleton: Interior Framework of the Cell. A
network of protein fibers supports the shape of the cell and
anchors organelles.

Cell Movement. Eukaryotic cell movement utilizes
cytoskeletal elements.

Special Things about Plant Cells. Plant cells have a large
central vacuole and strong, multilayered cell walls.

5.4 Symbiosis played a key role in the origin of some
eukaryotic organelles.

Endosymbiosis. Mitochondria and chloroplasts may have
arisen from prokaryotes engulfed by other prokaryotes.

 

FIGURE. 5.1

The single-celled organism Dileptus. The hairlike projections
that cover its surface are cilia, which it undulates to propel itself
through the water (1000x).

Il organisms are composed of cells. The gossamer

swing of a butterfly is a thin sheet of cells, and so is the
glistening outer layer of your eyes. The hamburger or
tomato you eat is composed of cells, and its contents soon
become part of your cells. Some organisms consist of a sin-
gle cell too small to see with the unaided eye (figure 5.1),
while others, like us, are composed of many cells. Cells are
so much a part of life as we know it that we cannot imagine
an organism that is not cellular in nature. In this chapter
we will take a close look at the internal structure of cells. In
the following chapters, we will focus on cells in action—on
how they communicate with their environment, grow, and
reproduce.

77
