  

Features of Vascular Plants

The first vascular plants for which we have a relatively
complete record belonged to the phylum Rhyniophyta;
they flourished some 410 million years ago but are now ex-
tinct. We are not certain what the very earliest of these vas-
cular plants looked like, but fossils of Cooksonia provide
some insight into their characteristics (figure 37.8). Cookso-
nia, the first known vascular land plant, appeared in the
late Silurian period about 420 million years ago. It was suc-
cessful partly because it encountered little competition as it
spread out over vast tracts of land. The plants were only a
few centimeters tall and had no roots or leaves. They con-
sisted of little more than a branching axis, the branches
forking evenly and expanding slightly toward the tips. They
were homosporous (producing only one type of spore).
Sporangia formed at branch tips. Other ancient vascular
plants that followed evolved more complex arrangements
of sporangia. Leaves began to appear as protuberances
from stems.

Cooksonia and the other early plants that followed it be-
came successful colonizers of the land through the develop-
ment of efficient water- and food-conducting systems
known as vascular tissues. The word vascular comes from
the Latin vasculum, meaning a “vessel or duct.” These tis-
sues consist of strands of specialized cylindrical or elon-
gated cells that form a network throughout a plant, extend-
ing from near the tips of the roots, through the stems, and
into true leaves. One type of vascular tissue, the xylem, con-
ducts water and dissolved minerals upward from the roots;
another type of tissue, phloem, conducts sucrose and hor-
monal signals throughout the plant. It is important to note
that vascular tissue developed in the sporophyte, but (with
few exceptions) not the gametophyte. (See the discussion of
vascular tissue structure in chapter 38.) The presence of a
cuticle and stomata are also characteristic of vascular
plants.

The nine phyla of vascular plants (table 37.1) dominate
terrestrial habitats everywhere, except for the highest
mountains and the tundra. The haplodiplontic life cycle
persists, but the gametophyte has been reduced during evo-
lution of vascular plants. A similar reduction in multicellu-
lar gametangia has occurred.

Accompanying this reduction in size and complexity of
the gametophytes has been the appearance of the seed.
Seeds are highly resistant structures well suited to protect
a plant embryo from drought and to some extent from
predators. In addition, most seeds contain a supply of
food for the young plant. Seeds occur only in het-
erosporous plants (plants that produce two types of
spores). Heterospory is believed to have arisen multiple

740 = Part X Plant Form and Function

cular plants have well-developed conducting tissues in their

Sporangia

 

FIGURE 37.8

Cooksonia, the first known vascular land plant. Its upright,
branched stems, which were no more than a few centimeters tall,
terminated in sporangia, as seen here. It probably lived in moist
environments such as mudflats, had a resistant cuticle, and
produced spores typical of vascular plants. This fossil represents a
plant that lived some 410 million years ago. Cooksonia belongs to
phylum Rhyniophyta, consisting entirely of extinct plants.

times in the plants. Fruits in the flowering plants add a
layer of protection to seeds and attract animals that assist
in seed dispersal, expanding the potential range of the
species. Flowers, which evolved among the angiosperms,
attract pollinators. Flowers allow plants to overcome lim-
itations of their rooted, immobile nature and secure the
benefits of wide outcrossing in promoting genetic

diversity.

 

Most vascular plants have well-developed conducting
tissues, specialized stems, leaves, roots, cuticles, and
stomata. Many have seeds which protect embryos until
conditions are suitable for further development.

 
