| 37.4— Seeds protect and aid in the dispersal of plant embryos.

Seed Plants

Seed plants first appeared about 425 million years ago.
Their ancestors appear to have been spore-bearing plants
known as progymnosperms. Progymnosperms shared sev-
eral features with modern gymnosperms, including sec-
ondary xylem and phloem (which allows for an increase in
girth later in development). Some progymnosperms had
leaves. Their reproduction was very simple, and it is not
certain which particular group of progymnosperms gave
rise to seed plants.

From an evolutionary and ecological perspective, the
seed represents an important advance. The embryo is pro-
tected by an extra layer of sporophyte tissue creating the
ovule. During development this tissue hardens to produce
the seed coat. In addition to protection from drought, dis-
persal is enhanced. Perhaps even more significantly, a dor-
mant phase is introduced into the life cycle that allows the
embryo to survive until environmental conditions are fa-

Seed plants produce two kinds of gametophytes—male
and female, each of which consists of just a few cells. Pollen
grains, multicellular male gametophytes, are conveyed to
the egg in the female gametophyte by wind or a pollinator.
The sperm move toward the egg through a growing pollen
tube. This eliminates the need for water. In contrast to the
seedless plants, the whole male gametophyte rather than
just the sperm moves to the female gametophyte. A female
gametophyte develops within an ovule. In flowering plants
(angiosperms), the ovules are completely enclosed within
diploid sporophyte tissue (ovaries which develop into the
fruit). In gymnosperms (mostly cone-bearing seed plants),
the ovules are not completely enclosed by sporophyte tissue
at the time of pollination.

 

Acommon ancestor with seeds gave rise to the
gymnosperms and the angiosperms. Seeds can allow for
a pause in the life cycle until environmental conditions
are more optimal.

vorable for further growth.

A Vocabulary of

Plant Terms

 

androecium The stamens of a flower.

anther The pollen-producing portion of a
stamen. This is a sporophyte structure
where male gametophytes are produced by
meiosis.

antheridium The male sperm-producing
structure found in the gametophytes of
seedless plants and certain fungi.

archegonium The multicellular egg-
producing structure in the gametophytes of
seedless plants and gymnosperms.

carpel A leaflike organ in angiosperms
that encloses one or more ovules; a unit of a
gynoecium.

double fertilization The process, unique
to angiosperms, in which one sperm fuses
with the egg, forming a zygote, and the
other sperm fuses with the two polar nuclei,
forming the primary endosperm nucleus.
endosperm The usually triploid (although
it can have a much higher ploidy level) food
supply of some angiosperm seeds.

 

filament The stalklike structure that sup-
ports the anther of a stamen.

gametophyte The multicellular, haploid
phase of a plant life cycle in which gametes
are produced by mitosis.

gynoecium The carpel(s) of a flower.

heterosporous Refers to a plant that pro-
duces two types of spores: microspores and
megaspores.

homosporous Refers to a plant that pro-
duces only one type of spore.

integument The outer layer(s) of an
ovule; integuments become the seed coat of
aseed.

micropyle The opening in the ovule in-
tegument through which the pollen tube
grows.

nucellus The tissue of an ovule in which
an embryo sac develops.

ovary The basal, swollen portion of a
carpel (gynoecium); it contains the ovules
and develops into the fruit.

ovule A seed plant structure within an ovary;
it contains a female gametophyte surrounded
by the nucellus and one or two integuments.
At maturity, an ovule becomes a seed.

pollen grain A binucleate or trinucleate
seed plant structure produced from a mi-

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants

crospore in a microsporangium.
pollination The transfer of a pollen grain
from an anther to a stigma in angiosperms,
or to the vicinity of the ovule in gym-
nosperms.

primary endosperm nucleus The
wiploid nucleus resulting from the fusion of
a single sperm with the two polar nuclei.

seed A reproductive structure that devel-
ops from an ovule in seed plants. It consists
of an embryo and a food supply surrounded
by a seed coat.

seed coat The protective layer of a seed; it
develops from the integument or integu-
ments.

spore A haploid reproductive cell, pro-
duced when a diploid spore mother cell un-
dergoes meiosis; it gives rise by mitosis to a
gametophyte.

sporophyte The multicellular, diploid
phase of a plant life cycle; it is the genera-
tion that ultimately produces spores.
stamen A unit of an androecium; it con-

sists of a pollen-bearing anther and usually a
stalklike filament.

stigma The uppermost pollen-receptive
portion of a gynoecium.

745
