 

Plant Life Cycles

All plants undergo mitosis after both gamete
fusion and meiosis. The result is a multicellu-
lar haploid and a multicellular diploid individ-
ual, unlike us where gamete fusion directly fol-
lows meiosis. We have a diplontic life cycle
(only the diploid stage is multicellular), but the
plant life cycle is haplodiplontic (with multi-
cellular haploid and diploid stages). The basic
haplodiplontic cycle is summarized in figure
37.3. Brown, red, and green algae are also hap-

Haploid

 

Meiosis

Ry oN Spores

   
 

Gametophyte
(n)

Spore
B Sperm

Egg

 

 

 

 

Gamete fusion

 

lodiplontic (see chapter 35). While we produce
gametes via meiosis, plants actually produce
gametes by mitosis in a multicellular, haploid
individual. The diploid generation, or sporo-
phyte, alternates with the haploid generation,
or gametophyte. Sporophyte means “spore
plant,” and gametophyte means “gamete
plant.” These terms indicate the kinds of re-
productive cells the respective generations
produce.

The diploid sporophyte undergoes meiosis

 

 
    
     

 

 

 

(an) Zygote

Spore mother
cell

Embryo

     
   
  

Sporophyte
(en)

  
 

 

 

 

to produce haploid spores (mot gametes). | Diploid
Meiosis takes place in structures called spo-

rangia, where diploid spore mother cells | FIGURE 37.3
(sporocytes) undergo meiosis, each producing A generalized pl:

four haploid spores. Spores divide by mitosis,
producing a multicellular, haploid gameto-
phyte. Spores are the first cells of the gameto-
phyte generation.

In turn, the haploid gametophyte produces haploid ga-
metes by mitosis. When the gametes fuse, the zygote
they form is diploid and is the first cell of the next sporo-
phyte generation. The zygote grows into a diploid sporo-
phyte that produces sporangia in which meiosis ulti-
mately occurs.

While all plants are haplodiplontic, the haploid genera-
tion consumes a much larger chunk of the life cycle in
mosses than in gymnosperms and angiosperms. In mosses,
liverworts, and ferns, the gametophyte is photosynthetic
and free-living; in other plants it is either nutritionally de-
pendent on the sporophyte, or saprobic (deriving its en-
ergy directly from nonliving organic matter). When you
look at moss, what you see is largely gametophyte tissue;
their sporophytes are usually smaller, brownish or yellow-
ish structures attached to or enclosed within tissues of the
gametophyte. In most vascular plants the gametophytes are
much smaller than the sporophytes. In seed plants, the ga-
metophytes are nutritionally dependent on the sporophytes
and are enclosed within their tissues. When you look at a
gymnosperm or angiosperm, what you see, with rare excep-
tions, is a sporophyte.

The difference between dominant gametophytes and
sporophytes is key to understanding why there are no
moss trees. What we identify as a moss plant is a gameto-

ant life cycle. Anything yellow is haploid and anything blue is

diploid. Note that both haploid and diploid individuals can be multicellular. Also,
spores are produced by meiosis while gametes are produced by mitosis.

phyte and it produces gametes at its tip. The egg is sta-
tionery and sperm lands near the egg in a droplet of
water. If the moss were the height of a sequoia, not only
would it need vascular tissue for conduction and support,
the sperm would have to swim up the tree! In contrast,
the fern gametophyte develops on the forest floor where
gametes can meet. Fern trees abound in Australia and the
haploid spores fall to the ground and develop into game-
tophytes.

Having completed our overview of plant life cycles, we
will consider the major plant groups. As we do, we will
see a progressive reduction of the gametophyte from
group to group, a loss of multicellular gametangia
(structures in which gametes are produced), and increas-
ing specialization for life on the land, culminating with
the remarkable structural adaptations of the flowering
plants, the dominant plants today. Similar trends must
have characterized the progression to seed plants over the
hundreds of millions of years since a freshwater alga
made the move onto land.

 

Plants have haplodiplontic life cycles. Diploid
sporophytes produce haploid spores which develop into
haploid gametophytes that produce haploid gametes.

 

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants 737
