Seedless Vascular Plants

The earliest vascular plants lacked
seeds. Members of four phyla of living
vascular plants lack seeds, as do at least
three other phyla known only from fos-
sils. As we explore the adaptations of the
vascular plants, we focus on both repro-
ductive strategies and the advantages of
increasingly complex transport systems.
We will begin with the most familiar
phylum of seedless vascular plants, the
ferns.

eS
9

Seedless vascular plants

Ferns (Pterophyta)

Ferns are the most abundant group of
seedless vascular plants, with about
12,000 living species. The fossil record
indicates that they originated during the
Devonian period about 350 million years
ago and became abundant and varied in form during the
next 50 million years. Their apparent ancestors had no
broad leaves and were established on land as much as 375
million years ago.

Today, ferns flourish in a wide range of habitats
throughout the world; about 75% of the species, however,
occur in the tropics. The conspicuous sporophytes may be
less than a centimeter in diameter—as seen in small aquatic
ferns such as Azo/la—or more than 24 meters tall and with
leaves up to 5 meters or more long in the tree ferns (figure
37.9). The sporophytes and the smaller gametophytes,
which rarely reach 6 millimeters in diameter, are both pho-
tosynthetic. The fern life cycle differs from that of a moss
primarily in the much greater development, independence,
and dominance of the fern’s sporophyte. The fern’s sporo-
phyte is much more complex than that of the moss’s; the
fern sporophyte has vascular tissue and well-differentiated
roots, stems, and leaves. The gametophyte, however, lacks
vascular tissue.

Fern sporophytes typically have a horizontal under-
ground stem called a rhizome, with roots emerging from
the sides. The leaves, referred to as fronds, usually de-
velop at the tip of the rhizome as tightly rolled-up coils
(“fiddleheads”) that unroll and expand. Many fronds are
highly dissected and feathery, making the ferns that pro-
duce them prized as ornamentals. Some ferns, such as
Marsilea, have fronds that resemble a four-leaf clover,
but Marsilea fronds still begin as coiled fiddleheads.
Other ferns produce a mixture of photosynthetic fronds
and nonphotosynthetic reproductive fronds that tend to
be brownish in color.

Most ferns are homosporous, producing distinctive, spo-
rangia, usually in clusters called sori, typically on the backs
of the fronds. Sori are often protected during their devel-
opment by a transparent, umbrella-like covering. At first

742 Part X Plant Form and Function

    

glance, one might mistake the sori for an
infection on the plant. Diploid spore
mother cells in each sporangium un-
dergo meiosis, producing haploid spores.
At maturity, the spores are catapulted
from the sporangium by a snapping ac-
tion, and those that land in suitable
damp locations may germinate, produc-
ing gametophytes which are often heart-
shaped, are only one cell thick (except in
the center) and have rhizoids that anchor
them to their substrate. These rhizoids
are not true roots as they lack vascular
tissue, but as with many of the nonvascu-
lar plants they do aid in transporting
water and nutrients from the soil. Flask-
shaped archegonia and globular an-
theridia are produced on either the same
or different gametophyte.

 

FIGURE 37.9

A tree fern (phylum Pterophyta) in the forests of Malaysia.
The ferns are by far the largest group of seedless vascular plants.
‘Trees in other phyla are now extinct.
