Whisk Ferns (Psilophyta)

The three other phyla of seedless vascular plants, the Psilo-
phyta, (whisk ferns), Lycophyta (club mosses), and Arthro-
phyta (horsetails), have many features in common with
ferns. For example, they all form antheridia and archego-
nia. Free water is required for the process of fertilization,
during which the sperm, which have flagella, swim to and
unite with the eggs. In contrast, most seed plants have non-
flagellated sperm; none form antheridia, although a few
form archegonia.

The origins of the two genera of whisk ferns, which
occur in the tropics and subtropics, are not clear, but
they are considered to be living remnants of the very ear-
liest vascular plants. Certainly they are the simplest of all
extant vascular plants, consisting merely of evenly forking
green stems without roots or leaves. The two or three
species of the genus Psilotum do, however, have tiny,
green, spirally arranged, flaps of tissue lacking veins and
stomata. Another genus, Tmespiteris, has leaflike
appendages.

The gametophytes of whisk ferns were unknown for
many years until their discovery in the soil beneath the
sporophytes. They are essentially colorless and are less than
2 millimeters in diameter, but they can be up to 18 mil-
limeters long. They form saprobic or parasitic associations
with fungi, which furnish their nutrients. Some develop el-
ements of vascular tissue and have the distinction of being
the only gametophytes known to do so.

Club Mosses (Lycophyta)

The club mosses are worldwide in distribution but are
most abundant in the tropics and moist temperate re-
gions. Several genera of club mosses, some of them tree-
like, became extinct about 270 million years ago. Mem-
bers of the four genera and nearly 1000 living species of
club mosses superficially resemble true mosses, but once
their internal structure and reproductive processes be-
came known it was clear that these vascular plants are
quite unrelated to mosses. Modern club mosses are either
homosporous or heterosporous. The sporophytes have
leafy stems that are seldom more than 30 centimeters
long.

Horsetails (Arthrophyta)

The 15 living species of horsetails, also called scouring
rushes, are all heterosporous and herbaceous. They con-
stitute a single genus, Equisetum. Fossil forms of Equise-
tum extend back 300 million years to an era when some of
their relatives were treelike. Today, they are widely scat-
tered around the world, mostly in damp places. Some that
grow among the coastal redwoods of California may reach
a height of 3 meters, but most are less than a meter tall

(figure 37.11).

744 Part X_ Plant Form and Function

 

FIGURE 37.11

A horsetail, Equisetum telmateia, a representative of the only
living genus of the phylum Arthrophyta. This species forms
two kinds of erect stems; one is green and photosynthetic, and the
other, which terminates in a spore-producing “cone,” is mostly
light brown.

Horsetail sporophytes consist of ribbed, jointed, photo-
synthetic stems that arise from branching underground rhi-
zomes with roots at their nodes. A whorl of nonphotosyn-
thetic, scalelike leaves emerges at each node. The stems,
which are hollow in the center, have silica deposits in the
epidermal cells of the ribs, and the interior parts of the
stems have two sets of vertical, somewhat tubular canals.
The larger outer canals, which alternate with the ribs, con-
tain air, while the smaller inner canals opposite the ribs
contain water.

 

Ferns and other seedless vascular plants have a much
larger and more conspicuous sporophyte, with vascular
tissue. Many have well-differentiated roots, stem, and
leaves. The shift to a dominant sporophyte lead to the
evolution of trees.

 
