Gymnosperms

There are several groups of living gym-
nosperms (conifers, cycads, gneto-
phytes, and Ginkgo), none of which are
directly related to one another, but all
of which lack the flowers and fruits of
angiosperms. In all of them the ovule,
which becomes a seed, rests exposed on
a scale (modified leaf) and is not com-
pletely enclosed by sporophyte tissues at
the time of pollination. The name gym-
nosperm combines the Greek root gym-
nos, or “naked,” with sperma, or “seed.”
In other words, gymnosperms are
naked-seeded plants. However, al-
though the ovules are naked at the time
of pollination, the seeds of gym-
nosperms are sometimes enclosed by
other sporophyte tissues by the time
they are mature.

Details of reproduction vary somewhat in gym-
nosperms, and their forms vary greatly. For example, cy-
cads and Ginkgo have motile sperm, even though the
sperm are borne within a pollen tube, while many others
have sperm with no flagella. The female cones range from
tiny woody structures weighing less than 25 grams with a
diameter of a few millimeters, to massive structures
weighing more than 45 kilograms growing to lengths
more than a meter.

Conifers (Coniferophyta)

The most familiar gymnosperms are conifers (phylum
Coniferophyta), which include pines (figure 37.12),
spruces, firs, cedars, hemlocks, yews, larches, cypresses, and
others. The coastal redwood (Sequoia sempervirens), a
conifer native to northwestern California and southwestern
Oregon, is the tallest living vascular plant; it may attain
nearly 100 meters (300 feet) in height. Another conifer, the
bristlecone pine (Pinus Jongaeva) of the White Mountains of
California is the oldest living tree; one is 4900 years of age.
Conifers are found in the colder temperate and sometimes
drier regions of the world, especially in the northern hemi-
sphere. They are sources of timber, paper, resin, turpen-
tine, taxol (used to treat cancer) and other economically
important products.

Pines. More than 100 species of pines exist today, all
native to the northern hemisphere, although the range of
one species does extend a little south of the equator. Pines
and spruces are members of the vast coniferous forests
that lie between the arctic tundra and the temperate de-
ciduous forests and prairies to their south. During the
past century, pines have been extensively planted in the
southern hemisphere.

746 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

 

Pines have tough, needlelike leaves
produced mostly in clusters of two to
five. The leaves, which have a thick cuti-
cle and recessed stomata, represent an
evolutionary adaptation for retarding
water loss. This is important because
many of the trees grow in areas where
the topsoil is frozen for part of the year,
making it difficult for the roots to obtain
water. The leaves and other parts of the
sporophyte have canals into which sur-
rounding cells secrete resin. The resin,
apparently secreted in response to
wounding, deters insect and fungal at-
tacks. The resin of certain pines is har-
vested commercially for its volatile liquid
portion, called turpentine, and for the
solid rosin, which is used on stringed in-
struments. The wood of pines consists
primarily of xylem tissue that lacks some
of the more rigid cell types found in
other trees. Thus it is considered a “soft” rather than a
“hard” wood. The thick bark of pines represents another
adaptation for surviving fires and subzero temperatures.
Some cones actually depend on fire to open, releasing seed
to reforest burnt areas.

Gymnosperms

 

FIGURE 37.12

Conifers. Slash pines, Pinus palustris, in Florida, are
representative of the Coniferophyta, the largest phylum of.
gymnosperms.
