cular plants are relatively unspecialized, but successful in many
environments.

Mosses, Liverworts, and

Hornworts §

There are about 24,700 bryophytes—
mosses, liverworts, and hornworts—
that are simply but highly adapted to a
diversity of terrestrial environments
(even deserts!). Scientists now agree
that bryophytes consist of three quite
distinct phyla of relatively unspecial-
ized plants. Their gametophytes are
photosynthetic. Sporophytes are at-
tached to the gametophytes and de-
pend on them nutritionally to varying
degrees. Bryophytes, like ferns and cer-
tain other vascular plants, require
water (for example, rainwater) to re-
produce sexually. It is not surprising
that they are especially common in
moist places, both in the tropics and tem-
perate regions.

Most bryophytes are small; few exceed 7
centimeters in height. The gametophytes
are more conspicuous than the sporo-
phytes. Some of the sporophytes are com-
pletely enclosed within gametophyte tissue;
others are not and usually turn brownish or
straw-colored at maturity.

Mosses (Bryophyta)

The gametophytes of mosses typically
consist of small leaflike structures
arranged spirally or alternately around a
stemlike axis (figure 37.4); the axis is an-
chored to its substrate by means of rhi-
zoids. Each rhizoid consists of several
cells that absorb water, but nothing like
the volume of water absorbed by a vascu-
lar plant root. Moss “leaves” have little in
common with true leaves, except for the
superficial appearance of the green, flat-
tened blade and slightly thickened midrib
that runs lengthwise down the middle.
They are only one cell thick (except at the

midrib), lack vascular strands and stomata, and all the

cells are haploid.

Water may rise up a strand of specialized cells in the
center of a moss gametophyte axis, but most water used by
the plant travels up the outside of the plant. Some mosses

738 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

te:

2
2
8
a
8
3
8
gs
z
5
iz

 

FIGURE 37.4

A hair-cup moss, Polytrichum
(phylum Bryophyta). The
“leaves” belong to the
gametophyte. Each of the
yellowish-brown stalks, with the
capsule, or sporangium, at its
summit, is a sporophyte.

 

also have specialized food-conducting
cells surrounding those that conduct
water.

Multicellular gametangia are formed
at the tips of the leafy gametophytes
(figure 37.5). Female gametangia
(archegonia) may develop cither on the
same gametophyte as the male ga-
metangia (antheridia) or on separate
plants. A single egg is produced in the
swollen lower part of an archegonium
while numerous sperm are produced in
an antheridium. When sperm are re-
leased from an antheridium, they swim
with the aid of flagella through a film of
dew or rainwater to the archegonia.
One sperm (which is haploid) unites
with an egg (also haploid), forming a
diploid zygote. The zygote divides by
mitosis and develops into the sporo-
phyte, a slender, basal stalk with a swollen
capsule, the sporangium, at its tip. As the
sporophyte develops, its base becomes em-
bedded in gametophyte tissue, its nutri-
tional source. The sporangium is often
cylindrical or club-shaped. Spore mother
cells within the sporangium undergo meio-
sis, each becoming four haploid spores. At
maturity, the top of the sporangium pops
off, and the spores are released. A spore
that lands in a suitable damp location may
germinate and grow into a threadlike struc-
ture that branches to form rhizoids and
“buds” that grow upright. Each bud devel-
ops into a new gametophyte plant consist-
ing of a leafy axis.

In the Arctic and the Antarctic, mosses
are the most abundant plants, boasting not
only the largest number of individuals in
these harsh regions, but also the largest
number of species. Many mosses are able to
withstand prolonged periods of drought, al-
though they are not common in deserts.
Most are remarkably sensitive to air pollu-
tion and are rarely found in abundance in

or near cities or other areas with high levels of air pollu-

tion. Some mosses, such as the peat mosses (Sphagnum),

when dry.

can absorb up to 25 times their weight in water and are
valuable commercially as a soil conditioner, or as a fuel
