As mentioned earlier, all seed plants
are heterosporous, so the spores give
rise to two types of gametophytes (fig-
ure 37.13). The male gametophytes of
pines develop from pollen grains, which
are produced in male cones that develop
in clusters of 30 to 70, typically at the
tips of the lower branches; there may be
hundreds of such clusters on any single
tree. The male cones generally are 1 to
4 centimeters long and consist of small,
papery scales arranged in a spiral or in
whorls. A pair of microsporangia form
as sacs within each scale. Numerous mi-
crospore mother cells in the microspo-
rangia undergo meiosis, each becoming
four microspores. The microspores de-
velop into four-celled pollen grains with
a pair of air sacs that give them added
buoyancy when released into the air. A
single cluster of male pine cones may
produce more than 1 million pollen
grains.

Female cones typically are produced
on the upper branches of the same tree
that produces male cones. Female
cones are larger than male cones, and
their scales become woody. Two
ovules develop toward the base of each
scale. Each ovule contains a megaspo-
rangium called the nucellus. The nu-
cellus itself is completely surrounded
by a thick layer of cells called the in-
tegument that has a small opening (the
micropyle) toward one end. One of
the layers of the integument later be-
comes the seed coat. A single mega-
spore mother cell within each mega-
sporangium undergoes meiosis,
becoming a row of four megaspores. Three of the mega-
spores break down, but the remaining one, over the better
part of a year, slowly develops into a female gametophyte.
The female gametophyte at maturity may consist of thou-
sands of cells, with two to six archegonia formed at the
micropylar end. Each archegonium contains an egg so
large it can be seen without a microscope.

Female cones usually take two or more seasons to ma-
ture. At first they may be reddish or purplish in color,
but they soon turn green, and during the first spring, the
scales spread apart. While the scales are open, pollen
grains carried by the wind drift down between them,
some catching in sticky fluid oozing out of the mi-
cropyle. As the sticky fluid evaporates, the pollen grains
are slowly drawn down through the micropyle to the top
of the nucellus, and the scales close shortly thereafter.

The archegonia and the rest of the female gametophyte

4

FIGURE 37.13

~~
a,

itosis
Pollination

 

 
    
 
 
  

Mature seed
cone (2nd year)

FERTILIZATION
(15 months after

Ou
W Patien

pollination)
Mitosis a
Embryo
Microspores
t Longisection of
Microspore Soon
mother cell 2n ee
seed
Pollen-bearing
cone

 
  
 

Seedling

Are

Ovulate (seed-bearing)
cone

Sporophyte

Life cycle of a typical pine. The male and female gametophytes have been dramatically
reduced in size. Wind generally disperses sperm that is within the male gametophyte
(pollen). Pollen tube growth delivers the sperm to the egg on the female cone. Additional
protection for the embryo is provided by the ovule which develops into the seed coat.

are not mature until about a year later. While the female
gametophyte is developing, a pollen tube emerges from a
pollen grain at the bottom of the micropyle and slowly
digests its way through the nucellus to the archegonia.
While the pollen tube is growing, one of the pollen
grain’s four cells, the generative cell, divides by mitosis,
with one of the resulting two cells dividing once more.
These last two cells function as sperm. The germinated
pollen grain with its two sperm is the mature male
gametophyte.

About 15 months after pollination, the pollen tube
reaches an archegonium, and discharges its contents into it.
One sperm unites with the egg, forming a zygote. The
other sperm and cells of the pollen grain degenerate. The
zygote develops into an embryo within a seed. After disper-
sal and germination of the seed, the young sporophyte of
the next generation grows into a tree.

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants 747
