Meristems

The plant body that develops after germination depends on
the activities of meristematic tissues. Meristematic tissues
are lumps of small cells with dense cytoplasm and propor-
tionately large nuclei that act like stem cells in animals.
That is, one cell divides to give rise to two cells. One re-
mains meristematic, while the other is free to differentiate
and contribute to the plant body. In this way, the popula-
tion of meristem cells is continually renewed. Molecular
genetic evidence supports the hypothesis that stem cells
and meristem cells may also share some common molecular
mechanisms.

Elongation of both root and shoot takes place as a result
of repeated cell divisions and subsequent elongation of the
cells produced by the apical meristems. In some vascular
plants, including shrubs and most trees, lateral meristems
produce an increase in girth.

Apical Meristems

Apical meristems are located at the tips of stems (figure
38.2) and at the tips of roots (figure 38.3), just behind the
root cap. The plant tissues that result from primary
growth are called primary tissues. During periods of
growth, the cells of apical meristems divide and continu-
ally add more cells to the tips of a seedling’s body. Thus,
the seedling lengthens. Primary growth in plants is
brought about by the apical meristems. The elongation of
the root and stem forms what is known as the primary
plant body, which is made up of primary tissues. The pri-
mary plant body comprises the young, soft shoots and
roots of a tree or shrub, or the entire plant body in some
herbaceous plants.

Both root and shoot apical meristems are composed of
delicate cells that need protection. The root apical meri-
stem is protected from the time it emerges by the root cap.
Root cap cells are produced by the root meristem and are
sloughed off and replaced as the root moves through the
soil. A variety of adaptive mechanisms protect shoot apical
meristem during germination (figure 38.4). The epicotyl
or hypocotyl (“stemlike” tissue above or below the cotyle-
dons) may bend as the seedling emerges to minimize the
force on the shoot tip. In the monocots (a late evolving
group of angiosperms) there is often a coleoptile (sheath of
tissue) that forms a protective tube around the emerging
shoot. Later in development, the leaf primordia cover the
shoot apical meristem which is particularly susceptible to
desiccation.

The apical meristem gives rise to three types of embry-
onic tissue systems called primary meristems. Cell divi-
sion continues in these partly differentiated tissues as they
develop into the primary tissues of the plant body. The

754 = PartX Plant Form and Function

 
 
 
 
  

EE Young leat
primordium

Apical meristem

Older leaf
primordium

Lateral bud
primordium

Young leaf
primordium

Apical
meristem
Older leaf
primordium
Lateral bud
primordium
Vascular
tissue

 

FIGURE 38.2

An apical shoot meristem. This longitudinal section through a
shoot apex in Coleus shows the tip of a stem. Between the young
leaf primordia is the apical meristem.

Phloem

   

 

 

 

h Xylem
Cortex — Root hair
PTT
!
Endodermis
Pri ho
Protoderm rimary prigem
Ground meristem —— Primary xylem
a
nd ‘i
f
Apical meristem
Root cap
FIGURE 38.3

An apical root meristem. This diagram of meristems in the root
shows their relation to the root tip.
