Stigma
style

FIGURE 37.16 eal

Diagram of an angiosperm flower.

(a) The main structures of the flower are

labeled. (6) Details of an ovule. The ovary ovary

as it matures will become a fruit; as the

ovule’s outer layers (integuments) mature,
they will become a seed coat.

Ovule

(a)

Primitive flowers can have several to many separate carpels,
but in most flowers, two to several carpels are fused to-
gether. Such fusion can be seen in an orange sliced in half;
cach segment represents one carpel. A carpel has three
major regions (figure 37.16). The ovary is the swollen base,
which contains from one to hundreds of ovules; the ovary
later develops into a fruit. The tip of the pistil is called a
stigma. Most stigmas are sticky or feathery, causing pollen
grains that land on them to adhere. Typically there is a neck
or stalk called a style connecting the stigma and the ovary;
in some flowers, the style may be very short or even miss-
ing. Many flowers have nectar-secreting glands called nec-
taries, often located toward the base of the ovary. Nectar is a
fluid containing sugars, amino acids, and other molecules
used to attract insects, birds, and other animals to flowers.

The Angiosperm Life Cycle

While a flower bud is developing, a single megaspore
mother cell in the ovule undergoes meiosis, producing four
megaspores (figure 37.17). In most flowering plants, three
of the megaspores soon disappear while the nucleus of the
remaining one divides mitotically, and the cell slowly ex-
pands until it becomes many times its original size. While
this expansion is occurring, each of the daughter nuclei di-
vide twice, resulting in eight haploid nuclei arranged in two
groups of four. At the same time, two layers of the ovule,
the integuments, differentiate and become the seed coat of
a seed. The integuments, as they develop, leave a small gap
or pore at one end—the micropyle (see figure 37.16). One
nucleus from each group of four migrates toward the cen-
ter, where they function as polar nuclei. Polar nuclei may
fuse together, forming a single diploid nucleus, or they may
form a single cell with two haploid nuclei. Cell walls also
form around the remaining nuclei. In the group closest to
the micropyle, one cell functions as the egg; the other two
nuclei are called synergids. At the other end, the three
cells are now called antipodals; they have no apparent
function and eventually break down and disappear. The
large sac with eight nuclei in seven cells is called an em-
bryo sac; it constitutes the female gametophyte. Although
it is completely dependent on the sporophyte for nutrition,
it is a multicellular, haploid individual.

750 Part X Plant Form and Function

   
  

Megaspore

Anth
mer | stamen
it mother cell

~, Filamen

 
  
  

Nucellus

Integuments

Receptacle

Stalk of ovul
“— Pedicel ) icalus)

(funiculus)

While the female gametophyte is developing, a similar
but less complex process takes place in the anthers. Most
anthers have patches of tissue (usually four) that eventu-
ally become chambers lined with nutritive cells. The tis-
sue in each patch is composed of many diploid mi-
crospore mother cells that undergo meiosis more or less
simultaneously, each producing four microspores. The
four microspores at first remain together as a quartet or
tetrad, and the nucleus of each microspore divides once;
in most species the microspores of each quartet then sep-
arate. At the same time, a two-layered wall develops
around each microspore. As the anther matures, the wall
between adjacent pairs of chambers breaks down, leaving
two larger sacs. At this point, the binucleate microspores
have become pollen grains. The outer pollen grain wall
layer often becomes beautifully sculptured, and it con-
tains chemicals that may react with others in a stigma to
signal whether or not development of the male gameto-
phyte should proceed to completion. The pollen grain
has areas called apertures, through which a pollen tube
may later emerge.

Pollination is simply the mechanical transfer of pollen
from its source (an anther) to a receptive area (the stigma of
a flowering plant). Most pollination takes place between
flowers of different plants and is brought about by insects,
wind, water, gravity, bats, and other animals. In as many as
a quarter of all angiosperms, however, a pollen grain may
be deposited directly on the stigma of its own flower, and
self-pollination occurs. Pollination may or may not be fol-
lowed by fertilization, depending on the genetic compatibil-
ity of the pollen grain and the flower on whose stigma it
has landed. (In some species, complex, genetically con-
trolled mechanisms prevent self-fertilization to enhance ge-
netic diversity in the progeny.) If the stigma is receptive,
the pollen grain’s dense cytoplasm absorbs substances from
the stigma and bulges through an aperture. The bulge de-
velops into a pollen tube that responds to chemicals released
by the embryo sac. It follows a diffusion gradient of the
chemicals and grows down through the style and into the
micropyle. The pollen tube usually takes several hours to
two days to reach the micropyle, but in a few instances, it
may take up to a year. One of the pollen grain’s two nuclei,
the generative nucleus, lags behind. This nucleus divides, ei-
