Microspore

mother cells (2) MEIOSIS

Anther (2n)

Microspores (n)

Megaspore
mother cell (2n)

   
   
  

 
       

Megaspore (n) ).
MEIOSIS.
Mitosis o Egg Style

    
  

Generative cell.

Tube nucleus ~~

f Sperm
“Tube
nucleus

  
   
 

Pollen grains °
(microgametophytes) (n)

“Pollen tube

sporophyte 8-nucleate
with flowers 2n 7 embryo sac
(en) (megagametophyte )(r)
Formation of
pollination tube (n)
DOUBLE FERTILIZATION
Seed coat
Embryo (2n
Germination eo" Polar
Young nuclei
sporophyte
(2n) =
Seed (2n)
Endosperm (31) Sperm
FIGURE 37.17

Life cycle of a typical angiosperm. As in pines, water is no longer required for fertilization. In most species of angiosperms, animals
carry pollen to the carpel. ‘The outer wall of the carpel forms the fruit that entices animals to disperse seed.

ther in the pollen grain or in the pollen tube, producing
two sperm nuclei. Unlike sperm in mosses, ferns, and some
gymnosperms, the sperm of flowering plants have no fla-
gella. At this point, the pollen grain with its tube and sperm
has become a mature male gametophyte.

As the pollen tube enters the embryo sac, it destroys a
synergid in the process and then discharges its contents.
Both sperm are functional, and an event called double
fertilization, unique to angiosperms, follows. One sperm
unites with the egg and forms a zygote, which develops
into an embryo sporophyte plant. The other sperm and
the two polar nuclei unite, forming a triploid primary en-
dosperm nucleus. The primary endosperm nucleus begins
dividing rapidly and repeatedly, becoming triploid en-
dosperm tissue that may soon consist of thousands of
cells. Endosperm tissue can become an extensive part of
the seed in grasses such as corn (see figure 41.7). But in
most flowering plants, it provides nutrients for the embryo
that develops from the zygote; in many species, such as

peas and beans, it disappears completely by the time the
seed is mature. Following double fertilization, the integu-
ments harden and become the seed coat of a seed. The
haploid cells remaining in the embryo sac (antipodals, syn-
ergid, tube nucleus) degenerate. There is some evidence
for a type of double fertilization in gymnosperms believed
to be closely related to the angiosperms. Further studies of
this and of fertilization in Amborella, the most basal, extant
angiosperm, may provide clues to the evolution of this
double fertilization event.

 

Angiosperms are characterized by ovules that at
pollination are enclosed within an ovary at the base of a
carpel—a structure unique to the phylum; a fruit
develops from the ovary. Evolutionary innovations
including flowers to attract pollinators, fruits to protect
and aid in embryo dispersal, and double fertilization
providing additional nutrients for the embryo all have
contributed to the widespread success of this phylum.

 

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants 751
