The Plant Body

 

Concept Outline

38.1 Meristems elaborate the plant body plan after
germination.

Meristems. Growth occurs in the continually dividing
cells that function like stem cells in animals.

Organization of the Plant Body. The plant body is a
series of iterative units stacked above and below the ground.
Primary and Secondary Growth. Different meristems
allow plants to grow in both height and circumference.

38.2 Plants have three basic tissues, each composed of
several cell types.

Dermal Tissue. This tissue forms the “skin” of the plant
body, protecting it and preventing water loss.

Ground Tissue. Much of a young plant is ground tissue,
which supports the plant body and stores food and water.
Vascular Tissue. Special piping tissues conduct water
and sugars through the plant body.

38.3 Root cells differentiate as they become distanced
from the dividing root apical meristem.

Root Structure. Roots have a durable cap, behind which
primary growth occurs.
Modified Roots. Roots can have specialized functions.

38.4 Stems are the backbone of the shoot,
transporting nutrients and supporting the aerial
plant organs.

Stem Structure. The stem supports the leaves and is
anchored by the roots. Vascular tissues are organized within
the stem in different ways.

Modified Stems. Specialized stems are adapted for
storage and vegetative (asexual) propagation.

38.5 Leaves are adapted to support basic plant
functions.

Leaf External Structure. Leaves have flattened blades
and slender stalks.

Leaf Internal Structure. Leaves contain cells that carry
out photosynthesis, gas exchange, and evaporation.
Modified Leaves. In some plants, leaf development has
been modified to provide for a unique need.

 

FIGURE 38.1

All vascular plants share certain characteristics. Vascular plants
such as this tree require an elaborate system of support and fluid
transport to grow this large. Smaller plants have similar (though
simpler) structures. Much of this support system is actually
underground in the form of extensive branching root systems.

Ithough the similarities between a cactus, an orchid
lant, and a tree might not be obvious at first sight,
most plants have a basic unity of structure (figure 38.1).
This unity is reflected in how the plants are constructed; in
the way they grow, manufacture, and transport their food;
and in how their development is regulated. This chapter
addresses the question of how a vascular plant is “built.”
We will focus on the diversity of cell, tissue, and organ
types that compose the adult body. The roots and shoots
which give the adult plant its distinct above and below
ground architecture are the final product of a basic body
plan first established during embryogenesis, a process we
will explore in detail in chapter 40.

753
