Organization of the Plant Body

Coordination of primary and secondary meristematic
growth produces the body of the adult sporophyte plant.
Plant bodies do not have a fixed size. Parts such as leaves,
roots, branches, and flowers all vary in size and number
from plant to plant—even within a species. The develop-
ment of the form and structure of plant parts may be rela-
tively rigidly controlled, but some aspects of leaf, stem, and
root development are quite flexible. As a plant grows, the
number, location, size, and even structure of leaves and
roots are often influenced by the environment.

A vascular plant consists of a root system and a shoot
system (figure 38.6). The root system anchors the plant
and penetrates the soil, from which it absorbs water and
ions crucial to the plant’s nutrition. The shoot system
consists of the stems and their leaves. The stem serves as
a framework for positioning the leaves, the principal sites
of photosynthesis. The arrangement, size, and other fea-
tures of the leaves are of critical importance in the plant’s
production of food. Flowers, other reproductive organs,
and, ultimately, fruits and seeds are also formed on the
shoot (see chapters 40 and 42). The reiterative unit of the
vegetative shoot consists of the internode, node, leaf, and
axillary buds. Axillary buds are apical meristems derived
from the primary apical meristem that allow the plant to
branch or replace the main shoot if it is munched by an
herbivore. A vegetative axillary bud has the capacity to re-
iterate the development of the primary shoot. When the
plant has transited to the reproductive phase of develop-
ment (see chapter 41), these axillaries may produce flow-
ers or floral shoots.

Three basic types of tissues exist in plants: ground tis-
sue, dermal, and vascular tissue. Each of the three basic tis-
sues has its own distinctive, functionally related cell
types. Some of these cell types will be discussed later in
this chapter. In plants limited to primary growth, the
dermal system is composed of the epidermis. This tissue
is one cell thick in most plants, and forms the outer pro-
tective covering of the plant. In young exposed parts of
the plant, the epidermis is covered with a fatty cutin
layer constituting the cuticle; in plants such as the desert
succulents, a layer of wax may be added outside the cuti-
cle. In plants with secondary growth, the bark forms the
outer protective layer and is considered a part of the der-
mal tissue system.

Ground tissue consists primarily of thin-walled
parenchyma cells that are initially (but briefly) more or
less spherical. However, the cells, which have living proto-
plasts, push up against each other shortly after they are
produced and assume other shapes, often ending up with
11 to 17 sides. Parenchyma cells may live for many years;
they function in storage, photosynthesis, and secretion.

Vascular tissue includes two kinds of conducting tis-
sues: (1) xylem, which conducts water and dissolved miner-

756 Part X_ Plant Form and Function

Apical meristem — Terminal bud

   
     

Primary Blade
growth zone Vein Feat
Petiole
Secondary Axillary bud
growth zone

(vascular cambium)
Intemode
tins,

Shoot

 

FIGURE 38.6

Diagram of a plant body. Branching in both the root and shoot
system increases the number of apical meristems. A significant
increase in stem/root circumference and the formation of bark can
only occur if there is secondary growth initiated by vascular and
cork cambium (secondary meristems). The lime green areas are
zones of active elongation; secondary growth occurs in the
lavender areas.

als; and (2) phloem, which conducts carbohydrates—
mainly sucrose—used by plants for food. The phloem also
transports hormones, amino acids, and other substances
that are necessary for plant growth. Xylem and phloem dif-
fer in structure as well as in function.

 

Root and shoot meristems give rise to a plant body
with an extensive underground, branching root
system and aboveground shoot system with reiterative
units of advantageously placed leaves joined at the
node of the plant, internode, and axillary buds.

 
