 

(@) (b)

FIGURE 38.4

Developing seedling. Apical meristems are protected early in
development. (a) In this soybean, a dicot, a bent epicotyl (stem
above the cotyledons), rather than the shoot tip, pushes through
the soil before straightening. (#) In corn, a monocot, a sleeve of
tissue called the coleoptile sheaths the shoot tip until it has made
it to daylight.

three primary meristems are the protoderm, which forms
the epidermis; the procambium, which produces primary
vascular tissues (primary xylem and primary phloem); and
the ground meristem, which differentiates further into
ground tissue, which is composed of parenchyma cells. In
some plants, such as horsetails and corn, intercalary
meristems arise in stem internodes, adding to the inter-
node lengths. If you walk through a corn field (when the
corn is about knee high) on a quiet summer night, you may
hear a soft popping sound. This is caused by the rapid
growth of intercalary meristems. The amount of stem elon-
gation that occurs in a very short time is quite surprising.

Lateral Meristems

Many herbaceous plants exhibit only primary growth, but
others also exhibit secondary growth. Most trees, shrubs,
and some herbs have active lateral meristems, which are
cylinders of meristematic tissue within the stems and roots
(figure 38.5). Although secondary growth increases girth in
many nonwoody plants, its effects are most dramatic in
woody plants which have two lateral meristems. Within the
bark of a woody stem is the cork cambium, a lateral meris-
tem that produces the cork cells of the outer bark. Just be-
neath the bark is the vascular cambium, a lateral meristem
that produces secondary vascular tissue. The vascular cam-
bium forms between the xylem and phloem in vascular
bundles, adding secondary vascular tissue on opposite sides
of the vascular cambium. Secondary xylem is the main com-
ponent of wood. Secondary phloem is very close to the outer
surface of a woody stem. Removing the bark of a tree dam-
ages the phloem and may eventually kill the tree. Tissues
formed from lateral meristems, which comprise most of the

j Apical meristem

.) ~-4

Ground
meristem

  
  
  

Procambium
7
|
|
/
oo
af
Vascular
cambium
|_ Lateral
Cork meristems
cambium
Cork
cambium | Lateral

Vascular | meristems
cambium

| ___ Ground meristem

 

  

|
Root | |
\ ' | Procambium
hh — soa meristem
of Fost cap
FIGURE 38.5

Apical and lateral meristems. Apical meristems produce primary
growth, the elongation of the root and stem. In some plants, the
lateral meristems produce an increase in the girth of a plant. This
type of growth is secondary because the meristems were not
directly produced by apical meristems.

trunk, branches, and older roots of trees and shrubs, are
known as secondary tissues and are collectively called the
secondary plant body.

 

Meristems are actively dividing, embryonic tissues
responsible for both primary and secondary growth.

 

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 755
