 

Cycads (Cycadophyta)

Cycads are slow-growing gymnosperms of tropical and
subtropical regions. The sporophytes of most of the 100
known species resemble palm trees (figure 37.14a) with
trunks that can attain heights of 15 meters or more. Unlike
palm trees—which are flowering plants—cycads produce
cones and have a life cycle similar to that of pines. The fe-
male cones, which develop upright among the leaf bases,
are huge in some species and can weigh up to 45 kilograms.
The sperm of cycads, although conveyed to an archego-
nium by a pollen tube, have thousands of spirally arranged
flagella. Several species are facing extinction in the wild and
soon may exist only in botanical gardens.

Gnetophytes (Gnetophyta)

There are three genera and about 70 living species of
Gnetophyta. Gnetophytes are the closest living relatives of
angiosperms and probably share a common ancestor with
that group. They are the only gymnosperms with vessels (a
particularly efficient conducting cell type) in their xylem—
a common feature in angiosperms. The members of the
three genera differ greatly from one another in form. One
of the most bizarre of all plants is Welwitschia, which oc-
curs in the Namib and Mossamedes deserts of southwest-
ern Africa (figure 37.140). The stem is shaped like a large,
shallow cup that tapers into a taproot below the surface. It
has two strap-shaped, leathery leaves that grow continu-
ously from their base, splitting as they flap in the wind.
The reproductive structures of Welwitschia are conelike,
appear toward the bases of the leaves around the rims of
the stems, and are produced on separate male and female
plants.

More than half of the gnetophyte species are in the
genus Ephedra, which is common in arid regions of the
western United States and Mexico. The plants are shrubby,
with stems that superficially resemble those of horsetails as
they are jointed and have tiny, scalelike leaves at each node.
Male and female reproductive structures may be produced

748 = PartX Plant Form and Function

 

FIGURE 37.14
Three phyla of
gymnosperms.

(@) An African cycad,
Encephalartos
transvenosus.

@) Welwitschia
mirabilis, one of the
three genera of
gnetophytes.

(© Maidenhair tree,
Ginkgo biloba, the only
living representative of
the phylum
Ginkgophyta.

on the same or different plants. The drug ephedrine,
widely used in the treatment of respiratory problems, was
in the past extracted from Chinese species of Ephedra, but it
has now been largely replaced with synthetic preparations.
Mormon tea is brewed from Ephedra stems in the south-
western United States.

The best known species of Gnetum is a tropical tree, but
most species are vinelike. All species have broad leaves sim-
ilar to those of angiosperms. One Gnetum species is culti-
vated in Java for its tender shoots, which are cooked as a
vegetable.

Ginkgo (Ginkgophyta)

The fossil record indicates that members of the Ginkgo
family were once widely distributed, particularly in the
northern hemisphere; today only one living species, the
maidenhair tree (Ginkgo biloba), remains. The tree, which
sheds its leaves in the fall, was first encountered by Euro-
peans in cultivation in Japan and China; it apparently no
longer exists in the wild (figure 37.14c). The common
name comes from the resemblance of its fan-shaped leaves
to the leaflets of maidenhair ferns. Like the sperm of cy-
cads, those of Ginkgo have flagella. The Ginkgo is
diecious, that is, the male and female reproductive struc-
tures of Ginkgo are produced on separate trees. The fleshy
outer coverings of the seeds of female Ginkgo plants exude
the foul smell of rancid butter caused by butyric and
isobutyric acids. In the Orient, however, the seeds are
considered a delicacy. In Western countries, because of
the seed odor, male plants vegetatively propagated from
shoots are preferred for cultivation. Because it is resistant
to air pollution, Ginkgo is commonly planted along city
streets.

 

Gymnosperms are mostly cone-bearing seed plants. In
gymnosperms, the ovules are not completely enclosed
by sporophyte tissue at pollination.

 
