Angiosperms

The 250,000 known species of flower-
ing plants are called angiosperms be-
cause their ovules, unlike those of
gymnosperms, are enclosed within
diploid tissues at the time of pollina-
tion. The name angiosperm derives
from the Greek words angeion, “ves-
sel,” and sperma, “seed.” The “vessel”
in this instance refers to the carpel,
which is a modified leaf that encapsu-
lates seeds. The carpel develops into
the fruit, a unique angiosperm feature.
While some gymnosperms, including
yew, have fleshlike tissue around their
seeds, it is of a different origin and not
a true fruit.

The origins of the angiosperms
puzzled even Darwin (his “abominable
mystery”). Recently, consensus has
been reached on the most basal, living angiosperm—
Amborella trichopoda (figure 37.15). This has ended the de-
bate between the supporters of magnolias and those of
water lilies as the closest relatives of the original an-
giosperm. Amborella, with small, cream-colored flowers, is
even more primitive than either the magnolias or water
lilies. This small shrub found only on the island of New
Caledonia in the South Pacific is the last remaining species
of the earliest extant lineage of the angiosperms. About 135
million years ago a close relative of Amborella developed
floral parts and branched off from the gymnosperms.
While Amborella is not the original angiosperm, it is suffi-
ciently close that much will be learned from studying its re-
productive biology that will help us understand the early
radiation of the angiosperms.

Flowering plants (phylum Anthophyta) exhibit an almost
infinite variety of shapes, sizes, and textures. They vary, for
example, from the huge Tasmanian Eucalyptus trees, which
have nearly as much mass as the giant redwoods, to the
tiniest duckweeds, which are less than 1 millimeter long. In
addition to the typical flattened green leaves with which
everyone is familiar, flowering plant leaves may be succu-
lent, floating, submerged, cup-shaped, spinelike, scalelike,
feathery, papery, hairy, or insect-trapping, and of almost
any color. Some are so tiny one needs a microscope to ex-
amine them, while others, such as those of the Seychelles
Island palm, can be up to 6 meters long. Their flowers vary
from the simple blossoms of buttercups to the extraordi-
narily complex flowers of some orchids, which may lure
their pollinators with drugs, forcibly attach bags of pollen
to their bodies, or dunk them in fluid they secrete. The
flowers may weigh less than 1 gram and remain functional
for only a few minutes, or they can weigh up to 9 kilograms
and be functional for months. Plants of several families are
parasitic or partially parasitic (for example, dodder, or

‘Angiosperms

 

FIGURE 37.15

A flowering plant. Amiborella trichopoda.
This plant is believed to be the closest
living relative to the original angiosperm.

mistletoe) on other plants, or mycotrophic (deriving their nu-
trients from fungi that form a mutualism with plant roots).
Others, such as many orchids, are epiphytic (attached to
other plants, with no roots in the ground, and not in any
way parasitic).

The Structure of Flowers

Flowers are considered to be modified stems bearing modi-
fied leaves. Regardless of their size and shape, they all share
certain features (sce figure 37.16). Each flower originates as
a primordium that develops into a bud at the end of a stalk
called a pedicel. The pedicel expands slightly at the tip
into a base, the receptacle, to which the remaining flower
parts are attached. The other flower parts typically are at-
tached in circles called whorls. The outermost whorl is
composed of sepals. In most flowers there are three to five
sepals, which are green and somewhat leaflike; they often
function in protecting the immature flower and in some
species may drop off as the flower opens. The next whorl
consists of petals that are often colored and attract pollina-
tors such as insects and birds. The petals, which commonly
number three to five, may be separate, fused together, or
missing altogether in wind-pollinated flowers.

The third whorl consists of stamens, collectively called
the androecium, a term derived from the Greek words an-
dros, “male,” and oikos, “house.” Each stamen consists of a
pollen-bearing anther and a stalk called a filament, which
may be missing in some flowers. The gynoecium, consist-
ing of one or more carpels, is at the center of the flower.
The term gynoecium derives from the Greek words gynos,
which means “female,” and oikos, or “house.” The first
carpel is believed to have been formed from a leaflike struc-
ture with ovules along its margins. The edges of the blade
then rolled inward and fused together, forming a carpel.

Chapter 37 Evolutionary History of Plants 749
