[NSUINWAIGEghisins are composed of cells.

 

Cells

What is a typical cell like, and what would we find inside it?
The general plan of cellular organization varies in the cells
of different organisms, but despite these modifications, all
cells resemble each other in certain fundamental ways. Be-
fore we begin our detailed examination of cell structure,
let’s first summarize three major features all cells have in
common: a plasma membrane, a nucleoid or nucleus, and

cytoplasm.

    

2X10! mm

 

 

 

The Plasma Membrane Surrounds the Cell

The plasma membrane encloses a cell and separates its
contents from its surroundings. The plasma membrane is a
phospholipid bilayer about 5 to 10 nanometers (5 to 10 bil-
lionths of a meter) thick with proteins embedded in it.
Viewed in cross-section with the electron microscope, such
membranes appear as two dark lines separated by a lighter
area. This distinctive appearance arises from the tail-to-tail
packing of the phospholipid molecules that make up the
membrane (see figure 3.18). The proteins of a membrane
may have large hydrophobic domains, which associate with
and become embedded in the phospholipid bilayer.

The proteins of the plasma membrane are in large
part responsible for a cell’s ability to interact with its en-
vironment. Transport proteins help molecules and ions
move across the plasma membrane, either from the envi-
ronment to the interior of the cell or vice versa. Receptor
proteins induce changes within the cell when they come
in contact with specific molecules in the environment,
such as hormones. Markers identify the cell as a particu-
lar type. This is especially important in multicellular

 

 

  

FIGURE 5.2

The size of cells and their contents. This diagram shows the size of human skin cells, organelles, and molecules. In general, the diameter
of a human skin cell is 20 micrometers ({um) or 2 x 10-2 mm, of a mitochondrion is 2 um or 2 x 107 mm, of a ribosome is 20 nanometers
(nm) or 2 x 10-5 mm, of a protein molecule is 2 nm or 2 x 10-° mm, and of an atom is 0.2 nm or 2 x 10-7 mm.

78 ~~ Part II Biology of the Cell
