The Zone of Cell Division

The apical meristem is shaped like an inverted, concave dome
of cells and is located in the center of the root tip in the area
protected by the root cap. Most of the activity in this zone of
cell division takes place toward the edges of the dome, where
the cells divide every 12 to 36 hours, often rhythmically,
reaching a peak of division once or twice a day. Most of the
cells are essentially cuboidal with small vacuoles and propor-
tionately large, centrally located nuclei. These rapidly divid-
ing cells are daughter cells of the apical meristem. The guies-
cent center is a group of cells in the center of the root apical
meristem. They divide very infrequently. This makes sense if
you think about a solid ball expanding. The outer surface
would have to increase far more rapidly than the very center.
The apical meristem daughter cells soon subdivide into
the three primary tissue systems previously discussed: proto-
derm, procambium, and ground meristem. Genes have been
identified in the relatively simple root of Arabidopsis that
regulate the patterning of these tissue systems. The pat-
terning of these cells begins in this zone, but it is not until
the cells reach the zone of maturation that the anatomical
and morphological expression of this patterning is fully re-
vealed. WEREWOLF, for example, is required for the pat-

(a)
FIGURE 38.16

  

terning of the two root epidermal cell types, those with and
without root hairs (figure 38.16a). The SCARECROW gene
is important in ground cell differentiation (figure 38.160).
It is necessary for an asymmetric cell division that gives rise
to two cylinders of cells from one. The outer cell layer be-
comes ground tissue and serves a storage function. The
inner cell layer forms the endodermis which regulates the
intercellular flow of water and solutes into the vascular core
of the root. Cells in this region develop according to their
position. If that position changes because of a mistake in
cell division or the ablation of another cell, the cell devel-
ops according to its new position.

The Zone of Elongation

In the zone of elongation, the cells produced by the primary
meristems become several times longer than wide, and
their width also increases slightly. The small vacuoles pre-
sent merge and grow until they occupy 90% or more of the

 

volume of each cell. No further increase in cell size occurs
above the zone of elongation, and the mature parts of the

root, except for an increase in girth, remain stationary for
the life of the plant.

Tissue-specific gene expression. (2) Epidermal-specific gene expression. The promoter of the WEREWOLF gene of Arabidopsis was
attached to a green fluorescent protein and used to make a transgenic plant. The green fluorescence shows the epidermal cells where the
gene is expressed. The red was used to visually indicate cell boundaries. (b) Ground tissue-specific gene expression. The SCARECROW
gene is needed for an asymmetric cell division allowing for the formation of side-by-side ground tissue and endodermal cells. These two
layers are blue in wild-type, but in the mutant, only one cell layer is blue because the asymmetric cell division does not occur.

764 = PartX Plant Form and Function
