 
   
 
   

a

1 meristem.

Root Structure

The three tissue systems are found in the three kinds of
vegetative organs in plants: roots, stems, and leaves.
Roots have a simpler pattern of organization and develop-
ment than stems, and we will consider them first. Four
zones or regions are commonly recognized in developing
roots. The zones are called the root cap, the zone of cell
division, the zone of elongation, and the zone of matu-
ration (figure 38.15). In three of the zones, the boundaries
are not clearly defined. When apical initials divide, daugh-
ter cells that end up on the tip end of the root become root
cap cells. Cells that divide in the opposite direction pass
through the three other zones before they finish differenti-
ating. As you consider the different zones, visualize the tip
of the root moving away from the soil surface by growth.
This will counter the static image of a root that diagrams
and photos convey.

Epidermis

Ground tissue

Vascular tissue

Ground meristem
Procambium
Protoderm
Quiescent center

Apical meristem

Lateral root cap

Columella root cap

KEY

 

Dermal tissue

 

 

Ground tissue

 

 

Vascular tissue

 

 

 

FIGURE 38.15

Root structure. A root tip in corn, Zea mays. This longitudinal section of a root shows

 

 

ells differentiate as they become distanced from the dividing root

The Root Cap

The root cap has no equivalent in stems. It is composed of
two types of cells, the inner columella (they look like
columns) cells and the outer, lateral root cap cells that are
continuously replenished by the root apical meristem. In
some plants with larger roots it is quite obvious. Its most
obvious function is to protect the delicate tissues behind it
as growth extends the root through mostly abrasive soil
particles. Golgi bodies in the outer root cap cells secrete
and release a slimy substance that passes through the cell
walls to the outside. The cells, which have an average life of
less than a week, are constantly being replaced from the in-
side, forming a mucilaginous lubricant that eases the root
through the soil. The slimy mass also provides a medium
for the growth of beneficial nitrogen-fixing bacteria in the
roots of some plants such as legumes.
A new root cap is produced when an existing one is ar-
tificially or accidentally removed from a root. The root
cap also functions in the perception of
gravity. The columella cells are highly
5 specialized with the endoplasmic retic-
ulum in the periphery and the nucleus
located at either the middle or the top
of the cell. There are no large vacuoles.
a Columella cells contain amyloplasts
(plastids with starch grains) that collect
on the sides of cells facing the pull of
gravity. When a potted plant is placed
on its side, the amyloplasts drift or
tumble down to the side nearest the
source of gravity, and the root bends in
that direction. Lasers have been used to
ablate (kill) individual columella cells in
Arabidopsis. It turns out that only two of
the columella cells are essential for
gravity sensing! The precise nature of
the gravitational response is not
known, but some evidence indicates
that calcium ions in the amyloplasts in-
fluence the distribution of growth hor-
mones (auxin in this case) in the cells.
There may be multiple signaling mech-
anisms because bending has been ob-
served in the absence of auxin. A cur-
rent hypothesis is that an electrical
signal moves from the columella cell to
cells in the distal region of the elonga-
tion zone (the region closest to the
zone of cell division).

|__ Zone of
maturation

Zone of
| — elongation

 

Zone of
| cell division

Root in
cross-section

the root cap, apical meristem, procambium, protoderm, epidermis, and ground meristem.

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 763
