| 38.2 Plants have three basic tissues, each composed of several cell types.

Dermal Tissue

Epidermal cells, which originate from
the protoderm, cover all parts of the
primary plant body. This is probably
the earliest tissue system to appear in
embryogenesis. The exposed outer
walls have a cuticle that varies in thick-
ness, depending on the species and en-
vironmental conditions. A number of
types of specialized cells occur in the
epidermis, including guard cells, tri-
chomes, and root hairs.

Guard cells are paired sausage- or
dumbbell-shaped cells flanking a
stoma (plural, stomata), a mouth-
shaped epidermal opening. Guard cells,
unlike other epidermal cells, contain
chloroplasts. Stomata occur in the epi-
dermis of leaves (figure 38.8), and
sometimes on other parts of the plant,
such as stems or fruits. The passage of
oxygen and carbon dioxide, as well as
diffusion of water in vapor form, takes
place almost exclusively through the
stomata. There are between 1000 to
more than | million stomata per square
centimeter of leaf surface. In many
plants, stomata are more numerous on
the lower epidermis than on the upper
epidermis of the leaf. Some plants have stomata only on the
lower epidermis, and a few, such as water lilies, have them
only on the upper epidermis.

Guard cell formation is the result of an asymmetrical cell
division just like we saw in the first cell division in an algal
and angiosperm zygote. The patterning of these asymmetri-
cal divisions resulting in stomatal distribution has intrigued
developmental biologists. Research on mutants that get
“confused” about where to position stomata are providing
information on the timing of stomatal initiation and the
kind of intercellular communication that triggers guard cell
formation. For example, the too many mouths mutation may
be caused by a failure of developing stomata to suppress
stomatal formation in neighboring cells (figure 38.9).

The stomata open and shut in response to external fac-
tors such as light, temperature, and availability of water.
During periods of active photosynthesis, the stomata are
open, allowing the free passage of carbon dioxide into and
oxygen out of the leaf. We will consider the mechanism
that governs such movements in chapter 39.

Trichomes are hairlike outgrowths of the epidermis (fig-
ure 38.10). They occur frequently on stems, leaves, and
reproductive organs. A “fuzzy” or “woolly” leaf is covered
with trichomes that can be seen clearly with a microscope

@
FIGURE 38.8

758 PartX Plant Form and Function

 

 

71 um
(b)

Epidermis of a dicot and monocot leaf (250x). Stomata are evenly distributed over the
epidermis of monocots and dicots, but the patterning is quite different. (a) A pea (dicot) leaf
with a random arrangement of stomata. ()) A corn leaf with stomata evenly spaced in rows.
These photos also show the variety of cell shapes in plants. Some plant cells are boxlike, as
seen in corn (b), while others are irregularly shaped, as seen in peas (a).

 

FIGURE 38.9

The too many mouths stomatal mutant. This Arabidopsis plant
lacks an essential signal for spacing guard cells.
