Primary and Secondary Growth

Primary and secondary growth play important roles in es-
tablishing the basic body plan of the organism. Here we
will look at how these meristems give rise to highly differ-
entiated tissues that support the growing plant body. In the
earliest vascular plants, the vascular tissues produced by
primary meristems played the same conducting roles as
they do in contemporary vascular plants. There was no dif-
ferentiation of the plant body into stems, leaves, and roots.
The presence of these three kinds of organs is a property of
most modern plants. It reflects increasing specialization in
relation to the demands of a terrestrial existence.

With the evolution of secondary growth, vascular plants
could develop thick trunks and become treelike (figure
38.7). This evolutionary advance in the sporophyte genera-
tion made possible the development of forests and the
domination of the land by plants. As discussed in chapter
37, reproductive constraints would have made secondary
growth and increased height nonadaptive if it had occurred
in the gametophyte generation. Judging from the fossil
record, secondary growth evolved independently in several
groups of vascular plants by the middle of the Devonian
period 380 million years ago.

There were two types of conducting systems in the earli-
est plants—systems that have become characteristic of vas-
cular plants as a group. Sieve-tube members conduct carbo-
hydrates away from areas where they are manufactured or
stored. Vessel members and tracheids are thick-walled cells
that transport water and dissolved minerals up from the
roots. Both kinds of cells are elongated and occur in linked
strands making tubes. Sieve-tube members are characteris-
tic of phloem tissue; vessel members and tracheids are
characteristic of xylem tissue. In primary tissues, which re-
sult from primary growth, these two types of tissue are typ-
ically associated with cach other in the same vascular
strands. In secondary growth, the phloem is found on the
periphery, while a very thick xylem core develops more
centrally. You will see that roots and shoots of many vascu-
lar plants have different patterns of vascular tissue and sec-
ondary growth. Keep in mind that water and nutrients
travel between the most distant tip of a redwood root and
the tip of the shoot. For the system to work, these tissues
connect, which they do in the transition zone between the
root and the shoot. In the next section, we will consider the
three tissue systems that are present in all plant organs,
whether the plant has secondary growth or not.

 

Plants grow from the division of meristematic tissue.
Primary growth results from cell division at the apical
meristem at the tip of the plant, making the shoot
longer. Secondary growth results from cell division at
the lateral meristem in a cylinder encasing the shoot,
and increases the shoot’s girth.

 

Epidermis

— ~ Primary
A << phloem

: _— Primary
\ FF wien

Primary Lateral

; Primary
xylem _ meristems

Secondary phloem

xylem Secondary

SiS =

 

Qo se

re ——— j
(b)
Primary Secondary Primary Secondary
xylem xylem phloem phloem

 

Annual
. growth
layers
ik

))

}

   

  

()

FIGURE 38.7

Secondary growth. (a) Before secondary growth begins, primary
tissues continue to elongate as the apical meristems produce
primary growth. (J) As secondary growth begins, the lateral
meristems produce secondary tissues, and the stem’s girth
increases. (c) In this three-year-old stem, the secondary tissues
continue to widen, and the trunk has become thick and woody.
Note that the lateral meristems form cylinders that run axially in
roots and shoots that have them.

Chapter 38 The Plant Body 757
