under low magnification. Trichomes play an important
role in keeping the leaf surface cool and in reducing the
rate of evaporation. Trichomes vary greatly in form in
different kinds of plants; some consist of a single cell,
while others may consist of several cells. Some are glan-
dular, often secreting sticky or toxic substances to deter
herbivory.

Trichome development has been investigated exten-
sively in Arabidopsis. Four genes are needed to specify the
site of trichome formation and initiate it (figure 38.11).
Next, eight genes are necessary for extension growth. Loss
of function of any one of these genes results in a trichome
with a distorted root hair. This is an example of taking a
very simple system and trying to genetically dissect all the
component parts. Understanding the formation of more
complex plant parts is a major challenge.

Root hairs, which are tubular extensions of individual
epidermal cells, occur in a zone just behind the tips of
young, growing roots (sce figure 38.3). Because a root hair
is simply an extension and not a separate cell, there is no
crosswall isolating it from the epidermal cell. Root hairs
keep the root in intimate contact with the surrounding soil
particles and greatly increase the root’s surface area and
the efficiency of absorption. As the root grows, the extent
of the root hair zone remains roughly constant as root
hairs at the older end slough off while new ones are pro-
duced at the other end. Most of the absorption of water
and minerals occurs through root hairs, especially in
herbaceous plants. Root hairs should not be confused with
lateral roots which are multicellular and have their origins
deep within the root.

In the case of secondary growth, the cork cambium
(discussed in the section on stems in this chapter) pro-
duces the bark of a tree trunk or root. This replaces the
epidermis which gets stretched and broken with the ra-
dial expansion of the axis. Epidermal cells generally lack
the plasticity of other cells, but in some cases, they can
fuse to the epidermal cells of another organ or organelle
and dedifferentiate.

Some epidermal cells are specialized for protection,
others for absorption. Spacing of these specialized cells
within the epidermis maximizes their function and is an
intriguing developmental puzzle.

FIGURE 38.11

Trichome mutations. Mutants have revealed genes involved in a signal

transduction pathway that regulates the spacing and development of
trichomes. These include (a) DISTORTED1 (DIST) and (#) DIS2
mutants in which trichomes are swollen and twisted.

 

FIGURE 38.10

Trichomes. A covering of trichomes, teardrop-shaped blue
structures above, creates a layer of more humid air near the leaf
surface, enabling the plant to conserve available water supplies.

us
() 57 um

Chapter 38 The Plant Body 759

 
