  

Epidermis

@
FIGURE 38.19

Cross-section of the zone of maturation of a young dicot root. (a) Buttercup
(Ranunculus), a dicot (40x). (b) The enlargement shows the various tissues present (600).

The water-conducting cells of the primary xylem are dif-
ferentiated as a solid core in the center of young dicot
roots. In a cross-section of a dicot root, the central core of
primary xylem often is somewhat star-shaped, with one or
two to several radiating arms that point toward the pericy-
cle (figure 38.19). In monocot (and a few dicot) roots, the
primary xylem is in discrete vascular bundles arranged in
a ring, which surrounds parenchyma cells, called pith, at
the very center of the root. Primary phloem, composed of
cells involved in food conduction, is differentiated in dis-
crete groups of cells between the arms of the xylem in both
dicot and monocot roots.

In dicots and other plants with secondary growth, part
of the pericycle and the parenchyma cells between the
phloem patches and the xylem arms become the root vascu-
lar cambium, which starts producing secondary xylem to

 

   

Endodermis

    
    

Passage cell
Primary xylem
Pericycle
Primary phloem

(b)

the inside and secondary phloem to the outside (figure
38.20). Eventually, the secondary tissues acquire the form
of concentric cylinders. The primary phloem, cortex, and
epidermis become crushed and are sloughed off as more
secondary tissues are added. In the pericycle of woody
plants, the cork cambium produces bark which will be dis-
cussed in the section on stems (see figure 38.26). In the
case of secondary growth in dicot roots, everything outside
the stele is lost and replaced with bark.

 

Root apical meristems produce a root cap at the tip and
root tissue on the opposite side. Cells mature as the
root cap and meristem grows away from them.
Transport systems, external barriers, and a branching
root system develop from the primary root as it
matures.

 

 

 

 

 

Shoot apical
meristem
Zygote Embryo,

Root apical
FIGURE 38.20 meristem
Stages in the
differentiation of | ndifferentiated| Stage 1 Stage 2
plant tissues.

 

 

766 = =PartX Plant Form and Function
