 

(@)

FIGURE 38.14

Sieve-tube
member

Nucleus

Companion
cell

Sieve plate

 

(b)

A sieve-tube member. (2) Looking down into sieve plates in squash phloem reveals the perforations sucrose and hormones move through.
(@ Sieve-tube member cells are stacked with the sieve plates forming the connection. The narrow cell with the nucleus at the left of the
sieve-tube member is a companion cell. This cell nourishes the sieve-tube members, which have plasma membranes, but no nuclei.

Phloem

Phloem, which is located toward the outer part of roots
and stems, is the principal food-conducting tissue in vascu-
lar plants. If a plant is girdled (by removing a substantial
strip of bark down to the vascular cambium), the plant
eventually dies from starvation of the roots.

Food conduction in phloem is carried out through two
kinds of elongated cells: sieve cells and sieve-tube mem-
bers (figure 38.14). Scedless vascular plants and gym-
nosperms have only sieve cells; most angiosperms have
sieve-tube members. Both types of cells have clusters of
pores known as sieve areas. Sieve areas are more abun-
dant on the overlapping ends of the cells and connect the
protoplasts of adjoining sieve cells and sieve-tube mem-
bers. Both of these types of cells are living, but most sieve
cells and all sieve-tube members lack a nucleus at maturity.
This type of cell differentiation has parallels to the differ-
entiation of human red blood cells which also lack a nu-
cleus at maturity.

In sieve-tube members, some sieve areas have larger
pores and are called sieve plates. Sieve-tube members
occur end to end, forming longitudinal series called sieve
tubes. Sieve cells are less specialized than sieve-tube mem-

762 = = PartX Plant Form and Function

bers, and the pores in all of their sieve areas are roughly of
the same diameter. In an evolutionary sense, sieve-tube
members are more advanced, more specialized, and, pre-
sumably, more efficient.

Each sieve-tube member is associated with an adjacent
specialized parenchyma cell known as a companion cell.
Companion cells apparently carry out some of the meta-
bolic functions that are needed to maintain the associated
sieve-tube member. In angiosperms, a common initial cell
divides asymmetrically to produce a sieve-tube member
cell and its companion cell. Companion cells have all of
the components of normal parenchyma cells, including nu-
clei, and their numerous plasmodesmata (cytoplasmic
connections between adjacent cells) connect their cyto-
plasm with that of the associated sieve-tube members.
Fibers and parenchyma cells are often abundant in
phloem.

 

Xylem conducts water and dissolved minerals from the
roots to the shoots and the leaves. Phloem carries
organic materials from one part of the plant to another.

 
