Vascular Tissue

Xylem

Xylem, the principal water-conducting tissues of plants,
usually contains a combination of vessels, which are contin-
uous tubes formed from dead, hollow, cylindrical cells (ves-
sel members) arranged end to end, and tracheids, which
are dead cells that taper at the ends and overlap one another
(figure 38.13). In some plants, such as gymnosperms, tra~
cheids are the only water-conducting cells present; water
passes in an unbroken stream through the xylem from the
roots up through the shoot and into the leaves. When the
water reaches the leaves, much of it passes into a film of
water on the outside of the parenchyma cells, and then it
diffuses in the form of water vapor into the intercellular
spaces and out of the leaves into the surrounding air, mainly
through the stomata. This diffusion of water vapor from a
plant is known as transpiration. In addition to conducting
water, dissolved minerals, and inorganic ions such as ni-
trates and phosphates throughout the plant, xylem supplies
support for the plant body.

Primary xylem is derived from the procambium, which
comes from the apical meristem. Secondary xylem is formed
by the vascular cambium, a lateral meristem that develops
later. Wood consists of accumulated secondary xylem.

Vessel members are found almost exclusively in an-
giosperms. In primitive angiosperms, vessel members tend
to resemble fibers and are relatively long. In more ad-
vanced angiosperms, vessel members tend to be shorter and
wider, resembling microscopic, squat coffee cans with both
ends removed. Both vessel members and tracheids have
thick, lignified secondary walls and no living protoplasts at
maturity. Lignin is produced by the cell and secreted to
strengthen the cellulose cell walls before the protoplast

FIGURE 38.13
Comparison between vessel '
members and tracheids. (a) In 4
tracheids, the water passes from
cell to cell by means of pits, (#)
while in vessel members, it
moves by way of perforation
plates or between bars of wall
material. In gymnosperm wood,
tracheids both conduct water
and provide support; in most
kinds of angiosperms, vessels
are present in addition to |
tracheids, or present

exclusively. These two types of |
cells conduct the water, and |
fibers provide additional |
support. () Scanning @

micrograph of the wood of red

maple, Acer rubrum (350%).

 

Pits

Tracheid

ress

Pores
Vessel
member

dies, leaving only the cell wall. When the continuous
stream of water in a plant flows through tracheids, it passes
through pits, which are small, mostly rounded-to-elliptical
areas where no secondary wall material has been deposited.
The pits of adjacent cells occur opposite one another. In
contrast, vessel members, which are joined end to end, may
be almost completely open or may have bars or strips of
wall material across the open ends.

Vessels appear to conduct water more efficiently than do
the overlapping strands of tracheids. We know this partly
because vessel members have evolved from tracheids inde-
pendently in several groups of plants, suggesting that they
are favored by natural selection. It is also probable that
some types of fibers have evolved from tracheids, becoming
specialized for strengthening rather than conducting. Some
ancient flowering plants have only tracheids, but virtually
all modern angiosperms have vessels. Plants, with a muta-
tion that prevents the differentiation of xylem, but does not
affect tracheids, wilt soon after germination and are unable
to transport water efficiently.

In addition to conducting cells, xylem typically includes
fibers and parenchyma cells (ground tissue cells). The
parenchyma cells, which are usually produced in horizontal
rows called rays by special ray initials of the vascular cam-
bium, function in lateral conduction and food storage. An
initial is another term for a meristematic cell. It divides to
produce another initial and a cell that differentiates into a
ray cell. In cross-sections of woody stems and roots, the
rays can be seen radiating out from the center of the xylem
like the spokes of a wheel. Fibers are abundant in some
kinds of wood, such as oak (Quercus), and the wood is cor-
respondingly dense and heavy. The arrangements of these
and other kinds of cells in the xylem make it possible to
identify most plant genera and many species from their
wood alone. These fibers are a major component in mod-
ern paper. Earlier paper was made from fibers in phloem.

7 t Tracheids
“

 

Vessel

|

 

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 761
