organisms, whose cells must be able to recognize each
other as they form tissues.

We'll examine the structure and function of cell mem-
branes more thoroughly in chapter 6.

The Central Portion of the Cell Contains
the Genetic Material

Every cell contains DNA, the hereditary molecule. In
prokaryotes (bacteria), most of the genetic material lies in
a single circular molecule of DNA. It typically resides near
the center of the cell in an area called the nucleoid, but
this area is not segregated from the rest of the cell’s interior
by membranes. By contrast, the DNA of eukaryotes is
contained in the nucleus, which is surrounded by two
membranes. In both types of organisms, the DNA contains
the genes that code for the proteins synthesized by the cell.

The Cytoplasm Comprises the Rest of the Cell’s
Interior

A semifluid matrix called the cytoplasm fills the interior of
the cell, exclusive of the nucleus (nucleoid in prokaryotes)
lying within it. The cytoplasm contains the chemical wealth
of the cell: the sugars, amino acids, and proteins the cell uses
to carry out its everyday activities. In eukaryotic cells, the
cytoplasm also contains specialized membrane-bounded
compartments called organelles.

The Cell Theory

A general characteristic of cells is their microscopic size.
While there are a few exceptions—the marine alga Acetabu-
Jaria can be up to 5 centimeters long—a typical eukaryotic
cell is 10 to 100 micrometers (10 to 100 millionths of a
meter) in diameter (figure 5.2); most bacterial cells are only
1 to 10 micrometers in diameter.

Because cells are so small, no one observed them until
microscopes were invented in the mid-seventeenth century.
Robert Hooke first described cells in 1665, when he used a
microscope he had built to examine a thin slice of cork, a
nonliving tissue found in the bark of certain trees. Hooke
observed a honeycomb of tiny, empty (because the cells
were dead) compartments. He called the compartments in
the cork ce//ulae (Latin, “small rooms”), and the term has
come down to us as cells. The first living cells were observed
a few years later by the Dutch naturalist Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek, who called the tiny organisms that he ob-
served “animalcules,” meaning little animals. For another
century and a half, however, biologists failed to recognize
the importance of cells. In 1838, botanist Matthias Schlei-
den made a careful study of plant tissues and developed the
first statement of the cell theory. He stated that all plants
“are aggregates of fully individualized, independent, sepa-
rate beings, namely the cells themselves.” In 1839,
Theodor Schwann reported that all animal tissues also con-
sist of individual cells.

The cell theory, in its modern form, includes the fol-
lowing three principles:

1. All organisms are composed of one or more cells, and
the life processes of metabolism and heredity occur
within these cells.

2. Cells are the smallest living things, the basic units of
organization of all organisms.

3. Cells arise only by division of a previously existing
cell. Although life likely evolved spontaneously in the
environment of the early earth, biologists have con-
cluded that no additional cells are originating sponta-
neously at present. Rather, life on earth represents a
continuous line of descent from those early cells.

 

A cell is a membrane-bounded unit that contains the
DNA hereditary machinery and cytoplasm. All
organisms are cells or aggregates of cells.

 

 

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 79
