Ground Tissue
Parenchyma

Parenchyma cells, which have large vacuoles, thin walls,
and an average of 14 sides at maturity, are the most com-
mon type of plant cell. They are the most abundant cells of
primary tissues and may also occur, to a much lesser extent,
in secondary tissues (figure 38.12a). Most parenchyma cells
have only primary walls, which are walls laid down while
the cells are still maturing. Parenchyma are less specialized
than other plant cells, although there are many variations
that do have special functions such as nectar and resin se-
cretion, or storage of latex, proteins, and metabolic wastes.

Parenchyma cells, which have functional nuclei and are
capable of dividing, commonly also store food and water,
and usually remain alive after they mature; in some plants
(for example, cacti), they may live to be over 100 years old.
The majority of cells in fruits such as apples are
parenchyma. Some parenchyma contain chloroplasts, espe-
cially in leaves and in the outer parts of herbaceous stems.
Such photosynthetic parenchyma tissue is called
chlorenchyma.

Collenchyma

Collenchyma cells, like parenchyma cells, have living pro-
toplasts and may live for many years. The cells, which are
usually a little longer than wide, have walls that vary in
thickness (figure 38.125). Collenchyma cells, which are rel-
atively flexible, provide support for plant organs, allowing
them to bend without breaking. They often form strands or
continuous cylinders beneath the epidermis of stems or leaf
petioles (stalks) and along the veins in leaves. Strands of

collenchyma provide much of the support for stems in
which secondary growth has not taken place. The parts of
celery that we eat (petioles, or leaf stalks), have “strings”
that consist mainly of collenchyma and vascular bundles
(conducting tissues).

Sclerenchyma

Sclerenchyma cells have tough, thick walls; they usually
lack living protoplasts when they are mature. Their sec-
ondary cell walls are often impregnated with lignin, a
highly branched polymer that makes cell walls more rigid.
Cell walls containing lignin are said to be lignified. Lignin
is common in the walls of plant cells that have a supporting
or mechanical function. Some kinds of cells have lignin de-
posited in primary as well as secondary cell walls.

There are two types of sclerenchyma: fibers and sclereids.
Fibers are long, slender cells that are usually grouped to-
gether in strands. Linen, for example, is woven from
strands of sclerenchyma fibers that occur in the phloem of
flax. Sclereids are variable in shape but often branched.
They may occur singly or in groups; they are not elon-
gated, but may have various forms, including that of a star.
The gritty texture of a pear is caused by groups of sclereids
that occur throughout the soft flesh of the fruit (figure
38.120). Both of these tough, thick-walled cell types serve

to strengthen the tissues in which they occur.

 

Parenchyma cells are the most common type of plant
cells and have various functions. Collenchyma cells
provide much of the support in young stems and leaves.
Sclerenchyma cells strengthen plant tissues and may be
nonliving at maturity.

 

 

FIGURE 38.12

The three types of ground tissue. (@) Parenchyma cells. Only primary cell walls are seen in this cross-section of parenchyma cells from
grass. (b) Collenchyma cells. Thickened side walls are seen in this cross-section of collenchyma cells from a young branch of elderberry
(Sambucus). In other kinds of collenchyma cells, the thickened areas may occur at the corners of the cells or in other kinds of strips. (¢)
Sclereids. Clusters of sclereids (“stone cells”), stained red in this preparation, in the pulp of a pear. The surrounding thin-walled cells,
stained light blue, are parenchyma. These sclereid clusters give pears their gritty texture.

760 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function
