= Epidermis
Cortex

Endodermis

Pericycle

Primary phloem

 

FIGURE 38.17

Primary xylem

Pith

Cross-section of the zone of maturation of a young monocot root. Greenbrier (Smilax), a monocot (100%).

The Zone of Maturation

The cells that have elongated in the zone of elongation be-
come differentiated into specific cell types in the zone of
maturation. The cells of the root surface cylinder mature
into epidermal cells, which have a very thin cuticle. Many of
the epidermal cells each develop a root hair; the protuber-
ance is not separated by a crosswall from the main part of
the cell and the nucleus may move into it. Root hairs,
which can number over 35,000 per square centimeter of
root surface and many billions per plant, greatly increase
the surface area and therefore the absorptive capacity of the
root. The root hairs usually are alive and functional for
only a few days before they are sloughed off at the older
part of the zone of maturation, while new ones are being
produced toward the zone of elongation. Symbiotic bacte-
ria that fix atmospheric nitrogen into a form usable by
legumes enter the plant via root hairs and “instruct” the
plant to create a nodule around it.

Parenchyma cells are produced by the ground meri-
stem immediately to the interior of the epidermis. This
tissue, called the cortex, may be many cells wide and
functions in food storage. The inner boundary of the cor-
tex differentiates into a single-layered cylinder of endo-
dermis (figure 38.17), whose primary walls are impreg-
nated with suberin, a fatty substance that is impervious to
water. The suberin is produced in bands, called Caspar-
ian strips that surround each adjacent endodermal cell
wall perpendicular to the root’s surface (figure 38.18).
This blocks transport between cells. The two surfaces that

Casparian strip

   

Sectioned
endodermal cells

FIGURE 38.18
Casparian strip. The Casparian strip is a water-proofing band
that protects cells inside the endodermis from flooding.

are parallel to the root surface are the only way into the
core of the root and the cell membranes control what
passes through.

All the tissues interior to the endodermis are collectively
referred to as the stele. Immediately adjacent and interior
to the endodermis is a cylinder of parenchyma cells known
as the pericycle. Pericycle cells can divide, even after they
mature. They can give rise to Jateral (branch) roots or, in di-
cots, to part of the vascular cambium.

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 765
