Modified Roots

Most plants produce cither a
taproot system in which there
is a single large root with
smaller branch roots, or a fi-
brous root system in which
there are many smaller roots of
similar diameter. Some plants,
however, have intriguing root
modifications with specific
functions in addition to those of
anchorage and absorption.

Aerial roots. Some plants,
such as epiphytic orchids (or-
chids that are attached to
tree branches and grow un-
connected to the ground
without being parasitic in any
way) have roots that extend
out into the air. Some aerial
roots have an epidermis that
is several cells thick, an adap-
tation to reduce water loss.
These aerial roots may also
be green and photosynthetic,
as in the vanilla orchid. Some
monocots, such as corn, pro-
duce thick roots from the
lower parts of the stem; these
prop roots grow down to the
ground and brace the plants
against wind. Climbing plants such as ivy also produce
roots from their stems; these anchor the stems to tree
trunks or a brick wall. Any root that arises along a stem
or in some place other than the root of the plant is called
an adventitious root. Adventitious root formation in ivy
depends on the developmental stage of the shoot. When
the shoot transitions to the adult phase of development,
it is no longer capable of initiating these roots.
Pneumatophores. Some plants that grow in swamps
and other wet places may produce spongy outgrowths
called pneumatophores from their underwater roots (fig-
ure 38.214). The pneumatophores commonly extend
several centimeters above water, facilitating the oxygen
supply to the roots beneath.

Contractile roots. The roots from the bulbs of lilies
and of several other plants such as dandelions contract
by spiraling to pull the plant a little deeper into the soil
each year until they reach an area of relatively stable
temperatures. The roots may contract to a third of their
original length as they spiral like a corkscrew due to cel-
lular thickening and constricting.

Parasitic roots. The stems of certain plants that lack
chlorophyll, such as dodder (Cuscuta), produce peglike

 

 

FIGURE 38.21

Three types of modified roots. (a)
Pneumatophores (foreground) are
spongy outgrowths from the roots
below. () A water storage root
weighing over 25 kilograms (60
pounds). (¢) Buttress roots of a
tropical fig tree.

roots called haustoria that penetrate the host plants
around which they are twined. The haustoria establish
contact with the conducting tissues of the host and ef-
fectively parasitize their host.

Food storage roots. The xylem of branch roots of
sweet potatoes and similar plants produce at intervals
many extra parenchyma cells that store large quantities
of carbohydrates. Carrots, beets, parsnips, radishes, and
turnips have combinations of stem and root that also
function in food storage. Cross sections of these roots
reveal multiple rings of secondary growth.

Water storage roots. Some members of the pumpkin
family (Cucurbitaceae), especially those that grow in arid
regions, may produce water-storage roots weighing 50
or more kilograms (figure 38.210).

Buttress roots. Certain species of fig and other tropical
trees produce huge buttress roots toward the base of the

trunk, which provide considerable stability (igure 38.210.

 

Some plants have modified roots that carry out
photosynthesis, gather oxygen, parasitize other plants,
store food or water, or support the stem.

 

Chapter 38 The Plant Body 767
