(b)

FIGURE 38.31

 

Leaf blades come in a variety of forms from oval to
deeply lobed to having separate leaflets. In simple leaves
(figure 38.314), such as those of lilacs or birch trees, the
blades are undivided, but simple leaves may have teeth, in-
dentations, or lobes of various sizes, as in the leaves of
maples and oaks. In compound leaves, such as those of
ashes, box elders, and walnuts, the blade is divided into
leaflets. The relationship between the development of
compound and simple leaves is an open question. Two ex-
planations are being debated: (1) a compound leaf is a
highly lobed simple leaf, or (2) a compound leaf utilizes a
shoot development program. There are single mutations
that convert compound leaves to simple leaves which are
being used to address this debate. If the leaflets are
arranged in pairs along a common axis (the axis is called a
rachis—the equivalent of the main central vein, or midrib, in
simple leaves), the leaf is pinnately compound (figure
38.31). If, however, the leaflets radiate out from a com-
mon point at the blade end of the petiole, the leaf is
palmately compound (figure 38.3 1c). Palmately com-
pound leaves occur in buckeyes (Aesculus spp.) and Virginia
creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefolia). The leaf blades them-
selves may have similar arrangements of their veins, and are
said to be pinnately or palmately veined.

Leaves, regardless of whether they are simple or com-
pound, may be alternately arranged (alternate leaves usu-
ally spiral around a shoot) or they may be in opposite
pairs. Less often, three or more leaves may be in a whorl, a
circle of leaves at the same level at a node (figure 38.32).

 

 

(°)

Simple versus compound leaves. (a) A simple leaf, its margin deeply lobed, from the tulip
tree (Liriodendron tulipifera). (b) A pinnately compound leaf, from a mountain ash (Sorbus sp.)
A compound leaf is associated with a single lateral bud, located where the petiole is attached
to the stem. (¢) Palmately compound leaves of a Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinguefolia).

Alternate (spiral):

ly

Opposite:
Periwinkle

 

Whorled:
Sweet woodruff

FIGURE 38.32
Types of leaf arrangements. The three common types of leaf
arrangements are alternate, opposite, and whorled.

 

Leaves are the principal sites of photosynthesis. Their
blades may be arranged in a variety of ways. In simple
leaves the blades are undivided, while in compound
leaves the leaf is composed of two or more leaflets.

 

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 773
