38.5) Leaves are adapted to support basic plant functions.

Leaf External Structure

Leaves, which are initiated as primordia by the apical meri-
stems (see figure 38.2), are vital to life as we know it. They
are the principal sites of photosynthesis on land. Leaves ex-
pand primarily by cell enlargement and some cell division.
Like our arms and legs, they are determinate structures
which means growth stops at maturity. Because leaves are
crucial to a plant, features such as their arrangement, form,
size, and internal structure are highly significant and can
differ greatly. Different patterns have adaptive value in dif-
ferent environments.

Leaves are really an extension of the shoot apical meri-
stem and stem development. Leaves first emerge as primor-
dia as discussed in the section on stems. At that point, they
are not committed to be leaves. Experiments where very
young leaf primordia in fern and in coleus are isolated and
grown in culture demonstrate this. If the primordia are
young enough, they will form an entire shoot rather than a
leaf. So, positioning the primordia and beginning the initial
cell divisions occurs before those cells are committed to the
leaf developmental pathway.

Leaves fall into two different morphological groups
which may reflect differences in evolutionary origin. A mi-
crophyll is a leaf with one vein that does not leave a gap
when it branches from the vascular cylinder of the stem;
microphylls are mostly small and are associated primarily
with the phylum Lycophyta (see chapter 37). Most plants
have leaves called megaphylls, which have several to many
veins; a megaphyll’s conducting tissue leaves a gap in the
stem’s vascular cylinder as it branches from it.

Most dicot leaves have a flattened blade, and a slender
stalk, the petiole. The flattening of the leaf blade reflects a
shift from radial symmetry to dorsal-ventral (top-bottom)
symmetry. We’re just beginning to understand how this
shift occurs by analyzing mutants like phantastica which
prevents this transition (figure 38.29). In addition, a pair of
stipules may be present at the base of the petiole. The stip-
ules, which may be leaflike or modified as spines (as in the
black locust—Robinia pseudo-acacia) or glands (as in cherry
trees—Prunus cerasifera), vary considerably in size from mi-
croscopic to almost half the size of the leaf blade. Develop-
ment of stipules appears to be independent of development
of the rest of the leaf.

Grasses and other monocot leaves usually lack a petiole
and tend to sheathe the stem toward the base. Veins (a
term used for the vascular bundles in leaves), consisting of
both xylem and phloem, are distributed throughout the leaf
blades. The main veins are parallel in most monocot leaves;
the veins of dicots, on the other hand, form an often intri-
cate network (figure 38.30).

772 Part X_ Plant Form and Function

 

FIGURE 38.29

The phantastica mutant in snapdragon. Snapdragon leaves are
usually flattened with a top and bottom side (plant on /eft). In the
phantastica mutant (plant on right), the leaf never flattens but
persists as a radially symmetrical bulge.

 

(@ (b)

FIGURE 38.30

Dicot and monocot leaves. The leaves of dicots, such as this (a)
African violet relative from Sri Lanka, have netted, or reticulate,
veins; () those of monocots, like this cabbage palmetto, have
parallel veins. The dicot leaf has been cleared with chemicals and
stained with a red dye to make the veins show up more clearly.
