Modified Leaves

As plants colonized a wide variety of environments, from
deserts to lakes to tropical rain forests, modifications of
plant organs that would adapt the plants to their specific
habitats arose. Leaves, in particular, have evolved some re-
markable adaptations. A brief discussion of a few of these
modifications follows.

Floral leaves (bracts). Poinsettias and dogwoods have
relatively inconspicuous, small, greenish-yellow flowers.
However, both plants produce large modified leaves,
called bracts (mostly colored red in poinsettias and
white or pink in dogwoods). These bracts surround the
true flowers and perform the same function as showy
petals (figure 38.35). It should be noted, however, that
bracts can also be quite small and not as conspicuous as
those of the examples mentioned.

Spines. The leaves of many cacti, barberries, and
other plants are modified as spines (see figure 38.28f).
In the case of cacti, the reduction of leaf surface reduces
water loss and also may deter predators. Spines should
not be confused with thorns, such as those on honey lo-
cust (Gleditsia triacanthos), which are modified stems, or
with the prickles on raspberries and rose bushes, which
are simply outgrowths from the epidermis or the cortex
just beneath it.

Reproductive leaves. Several plants, notably Kalan-
choé, produce tiny but complete plantlets along their
margins. Each plantlet, when separated from the leaf, is
capable of growing independently into a full-sized plant.
The walking fern (Asplenium rhizophyllum) produces new
plantlets at the tips of its fronds. While leaf tissue iso-
lated from many species will regenerate a whole plant,
this in vivo regeneration is unique among just a few
species.

Window leaves. Several genera of plants growing in
arid regions produce succulent, cone-shaped leaves with
transparent tips. The leaves often become mostly buried
in sand blown by the wind, but the transparent tips,
which have a thick epidermis and cuticle, admit light to
the hollow interiors. This allows photosynthesis to take
place beneath the surface of the ground.

Shade leaves. Leaves produced where they receive
significant amounts of shade tend to be larger in surface
area, but thinner and with less mesophyll than leaves on
the same tree receiving more direct light. This plasticity
in development is remarkable, as both types of leaves on
the plant have exactly the same genes. Environmental
signals can have a major effect on development.
Insectivorous leaves. Almost 200 species of flowering
plants are known to have leaves that trap insects, with
some digesting their soft parts. Plants with insectivorous
leaves often grow in acid swamps deficient in needed el-
ements, or containing elements in forms not readily
available to the plants; this inhibits the plants’ capacities

 

FIGURE 38.35

Modified leaves. In this dogwood “flower,” the white-colored
bracts (modified leaves) surround the several true flowers without
petals in the center.

to maintain metabolic processes sufficient to meet their
growth requirements. Their needs are, however, met by
the supplementary absorption of nutrients from the ani-

mal kingdom.

Pitcher plants (for example, Sarracenia, Darlingtonia,
Nepenthes) have cone-shaped leaves in which rainwater
can accumulate. The insides of the leaves are very
smooth, but there are stiff, downward-pointing hairs at
the rim. An insect falling into such a leaf finds it very
difficult to escape and eventually drowns. The nutrients
released when bacteria, and in most species digestive en-
zymes, decompose the insect bodies are absorbed into
the leaf. Other plants, such as sundews (Drosera), have
glands that secrete sticky mucilage that trap insects,
which are then digested by enzymes. The Venus flytrap
(Dionaea muscipula) produces leaves that look hinged at
the midrib. When tiny trigger hairs on the leaf blade are
stimulated by a moving insect, the two halves of the leaf
snap shut, and digestive enzymes break down the soft
parts of the trapped insect into nutrients that can be ab-
sorbed through the leaf surface. Nitrogen is the most
common nutrient needed. Curiously, the Venus flytrap
will not survive in a nitrogen-rich environment, perhaps
a trade-off made in the intricate evolutionary process
that resulted in its ability to capture and digest insects.

 

The leaves of plants exhibit a variety of adaptations,
including spines, vegetative reproduction, and even
leaves that are carnivorous.

 

Chapter 38 The Plant Body 775
