Leaf Internal
Structure

The entire surface of a leaf is covered

by a transparent epidermis, most of

whose cells have no chloroplasts.

The epidermis itself has a waxy cuticle Guard
of variable thickness, and may have °*!
different types of glands and tri-
chomes (hairs) present. The lower
epidermis (and occasionally the
upper epidermis) of most leaves con-
tains numerous slit-like or mouth-
shaped stomata (figure 38.33). Stom- (a)
ata, as discussed earlier, are flanked
by guard cells and function in gas ex-
change and regulation of water
movement through the plant.

The tissue between the upper and
lower epidermis is called mesophyll. Mesophyll is inter-
spersed with veins (vascular bundles) of various sizes. In
most dicot leaves, there are two distinct types of meso-
phyll. Closest to the upper epidermis are one to several
(usually two) rows of tightly packed, barrel-shaped to
cylindrical chlorenchyma cells (parenchyma with chloro-
plasts) that constitute the palisade mesophyll (figure
38.34). Some plants, including species of Eucalyptus, have
leaves that hang down, rather than extending horizontally.
They have palisade parenchyma on both sides of the leaf,
and there is, in effect, no upper side. In nearly all leaves
there are loosely arranged spongy mesophyll cells be-
tween the palisade mesophyll and the lower epidermis,
with many air spaces throughout the tissue. The intercon-
nected intercellular spaces, along with the stomata, func-
tion in gas exchange and the passage of water vapor from

FIGURE 38.33

J Upper
epidermis

| | Palisade
mesophyll

|_ Spongy
mesophyll

 

 

Lower
epidermis

 

FIGURE 38.34

  
 
 
 
  
 
 

Epidermal cell

Epidermal cell

     
     

Guard cell

 

Thickened
inner wall of
guard cell

Nucleus
Stoma

x

Chloroplast

Stoma

(b)

A stoma. (a) Surface view. (2) View in cross-section.

the leaves. The mesophyll of monocot leaves is not differ-
entiated into palisade and spongy layers and there is often
little distinction between the upper and lower epidermis.
This anatomical difference often correlates with a modi-
fied photosynthetic pathway that maximizes the amount of
CO) relative to O2 to reduce energy loss through pho-
torespiration (refer to chapter 10). Leaf anatomy directly
relates to its juggling act to balance water loss, gas ex-
change, and transport of photosynthetic products to the
rest of the plant.

 

Leaves are basically flattened bags of epidermis
containing vascular tissue and tightly packed palisade
mesophyll rich in chloroplasts and loosely packed
spongy mesophyll with many interconnected air spaces
that function in gas and water vapor exchange.

 

 

A leaf in cross-section. Transection of a leaf showing the arrangement of palisade and spongy mesophyll, a vascular bundle or vein, and

the epidermis with paired guard cells flanking the stoma.
774 PartX Plant Form and Function
