Cells Are Small

How many cells are big enough to see
with the unaided eye? Other than egg
cells, not many. Most are less than 50
micrometers in diameter, far smaller
than the period at the end of this sen-
tence.

The Resolution Problem

How do we study cells if they are too
small to see? The key is to understand
why we can’t see them. The reason we
can’t see such small objects is the
limited resolution of the human eye.
Resolution is defined as the minimum
distance two points can be apart and
still be distinguished as two separated
points. When two objects are closer
together than about 100 micrometers,
the light reflected from each strikes the
same “detector” cell at the rear of the
eye. Only when the objects are farther
than 100 micrometers apart will the
light from each strike different cells,
allowing your eye to resolve them as
two objects rather than one.

Microscopes

One way to increase resolution is to increase magnification,
so that small objects appear larger. Robert Hooke and
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek were able to see small cells by
magnifying their size, so that the cells appeared larger than
the 100-micrometer limit imposed by the human eye.
Hooke and van Leeuwenhoek accomplished this feat with
microscopes that magnified images of cells by bending
light through a glass lens. The size of the image that falls
on the sheet of detector cells lining the back of your eye
depends on how close the object is to your eye—the closer
the object, the bigger the image. Your eye, however, is
incapable of focusing comfortably on an object closer than
about 25 centimeters, because the eye is limited by the size
and thickness of its lens. Hooke and van Leeuwenhoek
assisted the eye by interposing a glass lens between object
and eye. The glass lens adds additional focusing power.
Because the glass lens makes the object appear closer, the
image on the back of the eye is bigger than it would be
without the lens.

Modern light microscopes use two magnifying lenses (and
a variety of correcting lenses) that act like back-to-back eyes.
The first lens focuses the image of the object on the second
lens, which magnifies it again and focuses it on the back of
the eye. Microscopes that magnify in stages using several
lenses are called compound microscopes. They can resolve
structures that are separated by more than 200 nm. An image
from a compound microscope is shown in figure 5.34.

80 = Part II Biology of the Cell

 

 

FIGURE 5.3

Human sperm cells viewed with three
different microscopes. (a) Image of sperm
taken with a light microscope.

(b) Transmission electron micrograph of a
sperm cell. () Scanning electron
micrograph of sperm cells.

Increasing Resolution

Light microscopes, even compound ones, are not powerful
enough to resolve many structures within cells. For exam-
ple, a membrane is only 5 nanometers thick. Why not just
add another magnifying stage to the microscope and so in-
crease its resolving power? Because when two objects are
closer than a few hundred nanometers, the light beams re-
flecting from the two images start to overlap. The only way
two light beams can get closer together and still be resolved
is if their “wavelengths” are shorter.

One way to avoid overlap is by using a beam of electrons
rather than a beam of light. Electrons have a much shorter
wavelength, and a microscope employing electron beams
has 1000 times the resolving power of a light microscope.
Transmission electron microscopes, so called because
the electrons used to visualize the specimens are transmitted
through the material, are capable of resolving objects only
0.2 nanometer apart—just twice the diameter of a hydrogen
atom! Figure 5.3) shows a transmission electron micro-
graph.

A second kind of electron microscope, the scanning
electron microscope, beams the electrons onto the surface
of the specimen from a fine probe that passes rapidly back
and forth. The electrons reflected back from the surface of
the specimen, together with other electrons that the speci-
men itself emits as a result of the bombardment, are ampli-
fied and transmitted to a television screen, where the image
can be viewed and photographed. Scanning electron mi-
croscopy yields striking three-dimensional images and has
improved our understanding of many biological and physi-
cal phenomena (figure 5.30).
