FIGURE 38.26

Section of periderm (50x). An early stage
in the development of periderm in
cottonwood (Populus sp.).

The cells of the vascular cambium divide indefinitely,
producing secondary tissues (mainly secondary xylem and
secondary phloem). The production of xylem is extensive in
trees and is called wood. Rings in the stump of a tree re-
veal annual patterns of growth; cell size varies depending
on growth conditions. In woody dicots, a second cam-
bium, the cork cambium, arises in the outer cortex (occa-
sionally in the epidermis or phloem) and produces box-
like cork cells to the outside and also may produce
parenchyma-like phelloderm cells to the inside; the cork
cambium, cork, and phelloderm are collectively referred
to as the periderm (figure 38.26). Cork tissues, whose cells
become impregnated with suberin shortly after they are
formed and then dic, constitute the outer bark. The
cork tissue, whose suberin is impervious to moisture, cuts
off water and food to the epidermis, which dies and
sloughs off. In young stems, gas exchange between stem
tissues and the air takes place through stomata, but as the
cork cambium produces cork, it also produces patches of
unsuberized cells beneath the stomata. These unsuber-
ized cells, which permit gas exchange to continue, are
called lenticels (figure 38.27).

 

The stem results from the dynamic growth of the shoot
apical meristem which initiates stem tissue and organs
including leaves. Shoot apical meristems initiate new
apical meristems at the junction of leaf and stem. These
meristems can form buds which reiterate the growth
pattern of the terminal bud or they can make flowers
directly.

 

770 Part XX Plant Form and Function

 

 

Epidermis
Cork

Cork cambium

Phelloderm

Collenchyma

Parenchyma

FIGURE 38.27

Lenticels. (2) Lenticels, the
numerous, small, pale, raised
areas shown here on cherry tree
bark (Prunus cerasifera), allow
gas exchange between the
external atmosphere and the
living tissues immediately
beneath the bark of woody
plants. Highly variable in form
in different species, lenticels are
an aid to the identification of
deciduous trees and shrubs in
winter. (b) Transverse section
through a lenticel (extruding
area) in a stem of elderberry,
Sambucus canadensis (30).

 
