   

Stem Structure
External Form

The shoot apical meristem initiates stem tissue and inter-
mittently produces bulges (primordia) that will develop
into leaves, other shoots, or even flowers (figure 38.22).
The stem is an axis from which organs grow. Leaves may
be arranged in a spiral around the stem, or they may be in
pairs opposite one another; they also may occur in whorls
(circles) of three or more. Spirals are the most common
and, for reasons still not understood, sequential leaves
tend to be placed 137.5° apart. This angle relates to the
golden mean, a mathematical ratio, that is found in nature
(the angle of coiling in some shells, for example), classical
architecture (the Parthenon wall dimensions), and even
modern art (Mondrian). The pattern of leaf arrangement
is called phyllotaxy and may optimize exposure of leaves
to the sun.

The region or area (no structure is
involved) of leaf attachment is called
a node; the area of stem between two
nodes is called an internode. A leaf
usually has a flattened blade and
sometimes a petiole (stalk). When
the petiole is missing, the leaf is then
said to be sessile. Note that the word
sessile as applied to plants has a differ-
ent meaning than it does when ap-
plied to animals (probably obvious, as
plants don’t get up and move
around!); in plants, it means immobile
or attached. The space between a
petiole (or blade) and the stem is
called an axil. An axillary bud is pro-
duced in each axil. This bud is a
product of the primary shoot apical (@)
meristem, which, with its associated FIGURE 38.23
leaf primordia, is called a terminal
bud. Axillary buds frequently de-
velop into branches or may form
meristems that will develop into
flowers. (Refer back to figure 38.6 to review these terms.)

Herbaceous stems do not produce a cork cambium. The
stems are usually green and photosynthetic, with at least

Bundle

= Leaf

scar

the outer cells of the cortex containing chloroplasts.
Herbaceous stems commonly have stomata, and may have
various types of trichomes (hairs).

Woody stems can persist over a number of years and
develop distinctive markings in addition to the original
organs that form. Terminal buds usually extend the
length of the shoot during the growing season. Some
buds, such as those of geraniums, are unprotected, but

768 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

 

ms are the backbone of the shoot, transporting nutrients and
ipporting the aerial plant organs.

FIGURE 38.22
A shoot apex
(200%). Scanning
electron
micrograph of the
apical meristem of
wheat (Triticum).

   
 

Terminal
bud

Axillary bud

Blade

 

 

Node

 

 

 

 

Internode

   
 

Terminal
bud scale
scars

. Stipules
Petiole

(b)

A woody twig. (a) In winter. (b) In summer.

most buds of woody plants have protective winter bud
scales that drop off, leaving tiny bud scars as the buds ex-
pand. Some twigs have tiny scars of a different origin. A
pair of butterfly-like appendages called stipules (part of
the leaf) develop at the base of some leaves. The stipules
can fall off and leave stipule scars. When leaves of decidu-
ous trees drop in the fall, they leave /eaf scars with tiny
bundle scars, marking where vascular connections were.
The shapes, sizes, and other features of leaf scars can be
distinctive enough to identify the plants in winter

(figure 38.23).
