Cortex

FIGURE 38.24

Early stage in differentiation of vascular
cambium in the castor bean, Ricirus
(25x). The outer part of the cortex consists
of collenchyma, and the inner part of
parenchyma.

Internal Form

As in roots, there is an apical meristem at the tip of each
stem, which produces primary tissues that contribute to the
stem’s increases in length. Three primary meristems de-
velop from the apical meristem. The protoderm gives rise to
the epidermis. The ground meristem produces parenchyma
cells. Parenchyma cells in the center of the stem constitute
the pith; parenchyma cells away from the center constitute
the cortex. The procambium produces cylinders of primary
xylem and primary phloem, which are surrounded by ground
tissue.

Epidermis
(outer layer)

Collenchyma
(layers below
epidermis)
Pith
Vascular
bundle
Xylem

Phloem

  

Cortex
(@)

FIGURE 38.25

 

Epidermis
Collenchyma

Parenchyma

Primary phloem
Secondary phloem
Vascular cambium

Secondary xylem

Primary xylem

Pith

A strand of xylem and phloem, called a trace, branches
off from the main cylinder of xylem and phloem and enters
the developing leaf, flower, or shoot. These spaces in the
main cylinder of conducting tissues are called gaps. In di-
cots, a vascular cambium develops between the primary
xylem and primary phloem (figure 38.24). In many ways,
this is a connect-the-dots game where the vascular cam-
bium connects the ring of primary vascular bundles. In
monocots, these bundles are scattered throughout the
ground tissue (figure 38.25) and there is no logical way to
connect them that would allow a uniform increase in girth.
This is why monocots do not have secondary growth.

Phloem

Ground tissue

Vascular bundles

 

Stems. Transverse sections of a young stem in (@) a dicot, the common sunflower, Helianthus annuus, in which the vascular bundles are
arranged around the outside of the stem (10x); and () a monocot, corn, Zea mays, with the scattered vascular bundles characteristic of the

class (5%).

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 769
