Modified Stems

Although most stems grow erect, there are some modifica-
tions that serve special purposes, including that of natural
vegetative propagation. In fact, the widespread artificial vege-
tative propagation of plants, both commercial and private,
frequently involves the cutting of modified stems into seg-
ments, which are then planted and produce new plants. As
you become acquainted with the following modified stems,
keep in mind that stems have /eaves at nodes, with internodes
between the nodes, and buds in the axils of the leaves, while
roots have no leaves, nodes, or axillary buds.

Bulbs. Onions, lilies, and tulips have swollen under-
ground stems that are really large buds with adventitious
roots at the base (figure 38.282). Most of a bulb consists
of fleshy leaves attached to a small, knoblike stem. In
onions, the fleshy leaves are surrounded by papery,
scalelike leaf bases of the long, green aboveground
leaves.

Corms. Crocuses, gladioluses, and other popular gar-
den plants produce corms that superficially resemble
bulbs. Cutting a corm in half, however, reveals no fleshy
leaves. Instead, almost all of a corm consists of stem,
with a few papery, brown nonfunctional leaves on the
outside, and adventitious roots below.

Rhizomes. Perennial grasses, ferns, irises, and many
other plants produce rhizomes, which typically are hori-
zontal stems that grow underground, often close to the
surface (figure 38.280). Each node has an inconspicuous
scalelike leaf with an axillary bud; much larger photo-
synthetic leaves may be produced at the rhizome tip. Ad-
ventitious roots are produced throughout the length of
the rhizome, mainly on the lower surface.

Runners and stolons. Strawberry plants produce hor-
izontal stems with long internodes, which, unlike rhi-
zomes, usually grow along the surface of the ground.
Several rumers may radiate out from a single plant (fig-
ure 38.28c). Some botanists use the term stolen synony-
mously with runner; others reserve the term stolon for a
stem with long internodes that grows underground, as
seen in Irish (white) potato plants. An Irish potato itself,
however, is another type of modified stem—a tuber.
Tubers. In Irish potato plants, carbohydrates may ac-
cumulate at the tips of stolons, which swell, becoming
tubers; the stolons die after the tubers mature (figure
38.28d). The “eyes” of a potato are axillary buds formed
in the axils of scalelike leaves. The scalelike leaves,
which are present when the potato is starting to form,
soon drop off; the tiny ridge adjacent to each “eye” of a
mature potato is a leaf scar.

Tendrils. Many climbing plants, such as grapes and
Boston ivy, produce modified stems knows as tendrils,
which twine around supports and aid in climbing (figure
38.28¢). Some tendrils, such as those of peas and pump-
kins, are actually modified leaves or leaflets.

Fleshy leaves Photosynthetic
leaf

   
 
   
  
  

Knoblike stem

Scalelike leaf
at each node

Rhizome

Adventitious
roots

(a) Bulbs (onion) (b) Rhizomes (iris)

Stolen Tuber (swollen

Nodes (axillary buds
adjacent to leaf scars)

tip of stolen)

Runner

 

(c) Runners (strawberry) (d) Tubers (potato)

Leaves (modified

as spines)

Tendril
Cladophyil
= q

() Tendrils (grape) () Cladophylls (prickly pear)
FIGURE 38.28

Types of modified stems.

Cladophylls. Cacti and several other plants produce
flattened, photosynthetic stems called cladophylls that re-
semble leaves (figure 38.28f). In cacti, the real leaves are
modified as spines.

 

Some plants possess modified stems that serve special
purposes including food storage, support, or vegetative
propagation.

 

Chapter 38. The Plant Body 771
