   

Carbohydrates

 

 

 

 

Water and carbohydrates H,0. —H
travel to all parts of the plant. and
minerals
FIGURE 39.8

   

 

Water and minerals}

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

enioae Water exits the plant
gradient of through stomata in leaves.
successively lower The water potential
water potentials. Carbohydrates of air is low.

== 4

 

 

xs he Water enters the
and H,0 _ | plant through the roots.
minerals aid | The water potential of
minerals. [soil is high.

 

 

 

Water movement through a plant. This diagram illustrates the path of water and inorganic materials as they move into, through, and

out of the plant body.

Water Potential

Plant biologists often discuss the forces that act on water
within a plant in terms of potentials. The turgor pressure,
which is a physical pressure that results as water enters
the cell vacuoles, is referred to as pressure potential.
Water coming through a garden hose is an example of
physical pressure. There is also a potential caused by an
uneven distribution of a solute on either side of a mem-
brane, which will result in osmosis (movement of water
to the side with the greater concentration of solute). By
applying pressure (on the side that has the greater con-
centration of solute), it is possible to prevent osmosis
from taking place. The smallest amount of pressure
needed to stop osmosis is referred to as the solute (or
osmotic) potential of the solution. Water will enter a
cell osmotically until it is stopped by the pressure poten-
tial caused by the cell wall. The water potential of a
plant cell is, in essence, the combination of its pressure
potential and solute potential; it represents the total po-
tential energy of the water in a plant. If two adjacent cells
have different water potentials, water will move from the
cell with the higher water potential to the cell with the
lower water potential. Water in a plant moves along a

gradient between the relatively high water potential in
the soil to successively lower water potentials in the
roots, stems, leaves, and atmosphere.

Water potential in a plant regulates movement of
water. At the roots there is a positive water potential (ex-
cept in the case of severe drought). On the surface of
leaves and other organs, water loss called transpiration
creates a negative pressure. It depends on its osmotic ab-
sorption by the roots and the negative pressures created
by water loss from the leaves and other plant surfaces (fig-
ure 39.8). The negative pressure generated by transpira-
tion is largely responsible for the upward movement of
water in xylem.

 

Aquaporins enhance water transport at the cellular
level, which ultimately affects bulk water transport.

The loss of water from the leaf surface, called
transpiration, literally pulls water up the stem from the
roots which have the greater water potential. This
works because of the strong cohesive forces between
molecules of water that allow them to stay “stu
together in a liquid column and adhesion to walls of
tracheids and vessels.

 

Chapter 39 Nutrition and Transport in Plants 783
