Soil

Plant growth is affected by soil composition. Soil is the
highly weathered outer layer of the earth’s crust. It is com-
posed of a mixture of ingredients, which may include sand,
rocks of various sizes, clay, silt, humus, and various other
forms of mineral and organic matter; pore spaces containing
water and air occur between the particles. The mineral frac-
tion of soils varies according to the composition of the rocks.
The crust includes about 92 naturally occurring elements;
table 2.1 in chapter 2 lists the most common of these ele-
ments and their percentage of the earth’s crust by weight.
Most elements are combined as inorganic compounds called
minerals; most rocks consist of several different minerals.
The soil is also full of microorganisms that break down and
recycle organic debris. About 5 metric tons of carbon is tied
up in the organisms that are present in the soil under a
hectare (0.06 mile?) of wheat land in England, an amount
that approximately equals the weight of 100 sheep!

Most roots are found in topsoil (figure 39.4), which is a
mixture of mineral particles of varying size (most less than
2 mm thick), living organisms, and humus. Humus consists
of partly decayed organic material. When topsoil is lost
because of erosion or poor landscaping, both the water-
holding capacity and the nutrient relationships of the soil
are adversely affected.

About half of the total soil volume is occupied by spaces
or pores, which may be filled with air or water, depending
on moisture conditions. Some of the soil water, because of
its properties described below, is unavailable to plants. Due
to gravity, some of the water that reaches a given soil will
drain through it immediately. Another fraction of the water
is held in small soil pores, which are generally less than
about 50 micrometers in diameter. This water is readily
available to plants. When it is depleted through evapora-
tion or root uptake, the plant will wilt and eventually die
unless more water is added to the soil.

Cultivation.

In natural communities, nutrients are recycled and made
available to organisms on a continuous basis. When these
communities are replaced by cultivated crops, the situation
changes drastically: the soil is much more exposed to ero-
sion and the loss of nutrients. For this reason, cultivated
crops and garden plants usually must be supplied with addi-
tional mineral nutrients.

One solution to this is crop rotation. For example, a
farmer might grow corn in a field one year and soybeans the
next year. Both crops remove nutrients from the soil, but the
plants have different nutritional requirements, and therefore
the soil does not lose the same nutrients two years in a row.
Soybean plants even add nitrogen compounds to the soil, re-
leased by nitrogen-fixing bacteria growing in nodules on their
roots. Sometimes farmers allow a field to lie fallow—that is,

780 = Part X Plant Form and Function

FIGURE 39.4

Most roots occur in
topsoil. The uppermost
layer in soil is called
topsoil, and it contains
organic matter, such as
roots, small animals, and
humus, and mineral
particles of various sizes.
Subsoil lies underneath
the topsoil and contains
larger mineral particles
and relatively little
organic matter. Beneath
the subsoil are layers of
bedrock, the raw
material from which soil
is formed over time and
weathering.

eC eal

 

they do not grow a crop in the field for a year or two. This al-
lows natural processes to rebuild the field’s store of nutrients.

Other farming practices that help maintain soil fertility
involve plowing under plant material left in fields. You can
do the same thing in a lawn or garden by leaving grass clip-
pings and dead leaves. Decomposers in the soil do the rest,
turning the plant material into humus.

Fertilizers are also used to replace nutrients lost in culti-
vated fields. The most important mineral nutrients that need
to be added to soils are nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and
potassium (K). All of these elements are needed in large
quantities (see table 39.1) and are the most likely to become
deficient in the soil. Both chemical and organic fertilizers are
often added in large quantities and can be significant sources
of pollution in certain situations (see chapter 30). Organic
fertilizers were widely used long before chemical fertilizers
were available. Substances such as manure or the remains of
dead animals have traditionally been applied to crops, and
plants are often plowed under to increase the soil’s fertility.
There is no basis for believing that organic fertilizers supply
any element to plants that inorganic fertilizers cannot pro-
vide and they can. However, organic fertilizers build up the
humus content of the soil, which often enhances its water-
and nutrient-retaining properties. For this reason, nutrient
availability to plants at different times of the year may be im-
proved, under certain circumstances, with organic fertilizers.

 

Soils contain organic matter and various minerals and
nutrients. Farming practices like crop rotation, plowing
crops under, and fertilization are often necessary to
maintain soil fertility.

 
