39.1
of photosynthesis.

Plant Nutrients

The major source of plant nutrition is the fixation of at-
mospheric CO) into simple sugar using the energy of the
sun. CO) enters through the stomata. O) is a product of
photosynthesis and atmospheric component that also
moves through the stomata. It is used in cellular respira-
tion to release energy from the chemical bonds in the
sugar to support growth and maintenance in the plant.
However, CO) and light energy are not sufficient for the
synthesis of all the molecules a plant needs. Plants require
a number of inorganic nutrients (table 39.1). Some of
these are macronutrients, which the plants need in rela-
tively large amounts, and others are micronutrients, which
are required in trace amounts. There are nine macronutri-
ents: carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen—the three elements
found in all organic compounds—as well as nitrogen

Plants require a variety of nutrients in addition to the direct products

(essential for amino acids), potassium, calcium, phospho-
rus, magnesium (the center of the chlorophyll molecule),
and sulfur. Each of these nutrients approaches or, as in the
case with carbon, may greatly exceed 1% of the dry weight
of a healthy plant. The seven micronutrient elements—
iron, chlorine, copper, manganese, zinc, molybdenum, and
boron—constitute from less than one to several hundred
parts per million in most plants (figure 39.2). The
macronutrients were generally discovered in the last cen-
tury, but the micronutrients have been detected much
more recently as technology developed to identify and
work with such small quantities.

Nutritional requirements are assessed in hydroponic
cultures; the plants roots are suspended in aerated water
containing nutrients. The solutions contain all the neces-
sary nutrients in the right proportions but with certain
known or suspected nutrients left out. The plants are then

Table 39.1 Essential Nutrients in Plants

Principal Form Approximate
in which Element Percent of

Elements Is Absorbed Dry Weight — Examples of Important Functions

MACRONUTRIENTS

Carbon (CO) 44 ‘Major component of organic molecules

Oxygen (O;, H20) 44 ‘Major component of organic molecules

Hydrogen (H,0) 6 ‘Major component of organic molecules

Nitrogen (NOs, NH) 1-4 Component of amino acids, proteins, nucleotides, nucleic acids,
chlorophyll, coenzymes, enzymes

Potassium (K+) 0.5-6 Protein synthesis, operation of stomata

Calcium (Ca**) 0.2-3.5 Component of cell walls, maintenance of membrane structure and
permeability, activates some enzymes

Magnesium (Mg*) 0.1-0.8 Component of chlorophyll molecule, activates many enzymes

Phosphorus (H,PO,-, HPO,-) 0.1-0.8 Component of ADP and ATP, nucleic acids, phospholipids, several
coenzymes

Sulfur (so) 0.05-1 Components of some amino acids and proteins, coenzyme A

MICRONUTRIENTS (CONCENTRATIONS IN PPM)

Chlorine (chy 100-10,000
Iron (Fess, Fe'*+) 25-300
Manganese (Mn+) 15-800
Zinc (Zn**) 15-100
Boron (BOs or B07) 5-75
Copper (Cu) 430
Molybdenum (MoO,") 0.15

778 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

Osmosis and ionic balance

Chlorophyll synthesis, cytochromes, nitrogenase

Activator of certain enzymes

Activator of many enzymes, active in formation of chlorophyll
Possibly involved in carbohydrate transport, nucleic acid synthesis
Activator or component of certain enzymes

Nitrogen fixation, nitrate reduction
