 

Cell radius tom
()

Surface area 12.57 cm?
(amr?)
Volume 4.189 cm?
(én)

FIGURE 5.4

10cm

1257 cm?

4189 cm?

Surface area-to-volume ratio. As a cell gets larger, its volume increases at a faster rate than its surface area. If the cell radius increases by
10 times, the surface area increases by 100 times, but the volume increases by 1000 times. A cell’s surface area must be large enough to

meet the needs of its volume.

Why Aren’t Cells Larger?

Most cells are not large for practical reasons. The most im-
portant of these is communication. The different regions of
a cell need to communicate with one another in order for
the cell as a whole to function effectively. Proteins and or-
ganelles are being synthesized, and materials are continually
entering and leaving the cell. All of these processes involve
the diffusion of substances at some point, and the larger a
cell is, the longer it takes for substances to diffuse from the
plasma membrane to the center of the cell. For this reason,
an organism made up of many relatively small cells has an
advantage over one composed of fewer, larger cells.

The advantage of small cell size is readily visualized in
terms of the surface area-to-volume ratio. As a cell’s
size increases, its volume increases much more rapidly
than its surface area. For a spherical cell, the increase in
surface area is equal to the square of the increase in di-
ameter, while the increase in volume is equal to the cube
of the increase in diameter. Thus, if two cells differ by a
factor of 10 cm in diameter, the larger cell will have 10’,
or 100 times, the surface area, but 103, or 1000 times,
the volume, of the smaller cell (figure 5.4). A cell’s sur-
face provides its only opportunity for interaction with

the environment, as all substances enter and exit a cell
via the plasma membrane. This membrane plays a key
role in controlling cell function, and because small cells
have more surface area per unit of volume than large
ones, the control is more effective when cells are rela-
tively small.

Although most cells are small, some cells are nonetheless
quite large and have apparently overcome the surface area-
to-volume problem by one or more adaptive mechanisms.
For example, some cells have more than one nucleus, allow-
ing genetic information to be spread around a large cell.
Also, some large cells actively move material around their
cytoplasm so that diffusion is not a limiting factor. Lastly,
some large cells, like your own neurons, are long and skinny
so that any given point in the cytoplasm is close to the
plasma membrane, and thus diffusion between the inside
and outside of the cell can still be rapid.

 

Multicellular organisms usually consist of many small
cells rather than a few large ones because small cells
function more efficiently. They have a greater relative
surface area, enabling more rapid communication
between the center of the cell and the environment.

 

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 81
