Water and Mineral Movement
Water and Mineral Movement through the Xylem

It is clear that root pressure is insufficient to push water
to the top of a tall tree, although it can help. So, what
does work? Otto Renner proposed the solution in Ger-
many in 1911. Passage of air across leaf surfaces results in
loss of water by evaporation, creating a pull at the open
upper end of the “tube.” Evaporation from the leaves pro-
duces a tension on the entire water column that extends
all the way down to the roots. Water has an inherent ten-
sile strength that arises from the cohesion of its mole-
cules, their tendency to form hydrogen bonds with one
another. The tensile strength of a column of water varies
inversely with the diameter of the column; that is, the
smaller the diameter of the column, the greater the tensile
strength. Because plants have transporting vessels of very
narrow diameter, the cohesive forces in them are strong.
The water molecules also adhere to the sides of the tra-
cheid or xylem vessels, further stabilizing the long column
of water.

The water column would fail if air bubbles were in-
serted (visualize a tower of blocks and then pull one out in
the middle). Anatomical adaptations decrease the proba-
bility of this. Individual tracheids and vessel members are
connected by one of more pits (cavities) in their walls. Air
bubbles are generally larger than the openings, so they
cannot pass through them. Furthermore, the cohesive
force of water is so great that the bubbles are forced into
rigid spheres that have no plasticity and therefore cannot
squeeze through the openings. Deformed cells or freezing
can cause small bubbles of air to form within xylem cells.
Any bubbles that do form are limited to the xylem ele-
ments where they originate, and water may continue to
rise in parallel columns. This is more likely to occur with
seasonal temperature changes. As a result, most of the ac-
tive xylem in woody plants occurs peripherally, toward the
vascular cambium.

Most minerals the plant needs enter the root through
active transport. Ultimately, they are removed from the
roots and relocated through the xylem to other metaboli-
cally active parts of the plant. Phosphorus, potassium, ni-
trogen, and sometimes iron may be abundant in the
xylem during certain seasons. In many plants, such a pat-
tern of ionic concentration helps to conserve these essen-
tial nutrients, which may move from mature deciduous
parts such as leaves and twigs to areas of active growth.
Keep in mind that minerals that are relocated via the
xylem must move with the generally upward flow
through the xylem. Not all minerals can re-enter the
xylem conduit. Calcium, an essential nutrient, cannot be
transported elsewhere once it has been deposited in plant
parts.

786 = Part X_ Plant Form and Function

Transpiration of Water from Leaves

More than 90% of the water taken in by the roots of a
plant is ultimately lost to the atmosphere through transpi-
ration from the leaves. Water moves into the pockets of air
in the leaf from the moist surfaces of the walls of the meso-
phyll cells. As you saw in chapter 38, these intercellular
spaces are in contact with the air outside of the leaf by way
of the stomata. Water that evaporates from the surfaces of
the mesophyll cells leaves the stomata as vapor. This water
is continuously replenished from the tips of the veinlets in
the leaves.

Water is essential for plant metabolism, but is continu-
ously being lost to the atmosphere through the stomata.
Photosynthesis requires a supply of CO? entering the
stomata from the atmosphere. This results in two some-
what conflicting requirements: the need to minimize the
loss of water to the atmosphere and the need to admit car-
bon dioxide. Structural features such as stomata and the cu-
ticle have evolved in response to one or both of these re-
quirements.

The rate of transpiration depends on weather condi-
tions like humidity and the time of day. After the sun sets,
transpiration from the leaves decreases. The sun is the ul-
timate source of potential energy for water movement.
The water potential that is responsible for water move-
ment is largely the product of negative pressure generated
by transpiration, which is driven by the warming effects of
sunlight.

The Regulation of Transpiration Rate. On a short-
term basis, closing the stomata can control water loss.
This occurs in many plants when they are subjected to
water stress. However, the stomata must be open at least
part of the time so that CO) can enter. As CO) enters the
intercellular spaces, it dissolves in water before entering
the plant’s cells. The gas dissolves mainly in water on the
walls of the intercellular spaces below the stomata. The
continuous stream of water that reaches the leaves from
the roots keeps these walls moist. A plant must respond
both to the need to conserve water and to the need to
admit CO),

Stomata open and close because of changes in the turgor
pressure of their guard cells. The sausage- or dumbbell-
shaped guard cells stand out from other epidermal cells not
only because of their shape, but also because they are the
only epidermal cells containing chloroplasts. Their distinc-
tive wall construction, which is thicker on the inside and
thinner elsewhere, results in a bulging out and bowing
when they become turgid. You can make a model of this
for yourself by taking two elongated balloons, tying the
closed ends together, and inflating both balloons slightly.
When you hold the two open ends together, there should
be very little space between the two balloons. Now place

 
