Nutrition and Transport
in Plants

Concept Outline

39.1 Plants require a variety of nutrients in addition to
the direct products of photosynthesis.

Plant Nutrients. Plants require a few macronutrients in
large amounts and several micronutrients in trace amounts.
Soil. Plant growth is significantly influenced by the
nature of the soil.

39.2 Some plants have novel strategies for obtaining
nutrients.

Nutritional Adaptations. Venus flytraps and other
carnivorous plants lure and capture insects and then digest
them to obtain energy and nutrients. Some plants entice
bacteria to produce organic nitrogen for them. These
bacteria may be free-living or form a symbiotic relationship
with a host plant. About 90% of all vascular plants rely on
fungal associations to gather essential nutrients, especially
phosphorus.

39.3 Water and minerals move upward through the
xylem.

Overview of Water and Mineral Movement through
Plants. The bulk movement of water and dissolved
minerals is the result of movement between cells, across cell
membranes, and through tubes of xylem.

Water and Mineral Absorption. Water and minerals
enter the plant through the roots.

Water and Mineral Movement. A combination of the
properties of water, structure of xylem, and transpiration of
water through the leaves results in the passive movement of
water to incredible heights. Water leaves the plant through
openings in the leaves called stomata. Too much water is
harmful to a plant, although many plants have adaptations
that make them tolerant of flooding.

39.4 Dissolved sugars and hormones are transported
in the phloem.

Phloem Transport Is Bidirectional. Sucrose and
hormones can move from shoot to root or root to shoot in
the phloem. Phloem transport requires energy to load and
unload sieve tubes.

 

FIGURE 39.1

A carnivorous plant. Most plants absorb water and essential
nutrients from the soil, but carnivorous plants are able to obtain
some nutrients directly from small animals.

Ve energy inputs are required for the ongoing con-
struction of a plant such as described in chapter 38. In
this chapter, we address two major questions: (1) what in-
puts, besides energy from the sun, does a plant need to sur-
vive? and (2) how do all parts of the complex plant body
share the essentials of life? Plants, like animals, need various
nutrients to remain alive and healthy. Lack of an important
nutrient may slow a plant’s growth or make the plant more
susceptible to disease or even death. Plants acquire these
nutrients through photosynthesis and from the soil,
although some take a more direct approach (figure 39.1).
Carbohydrates produced in leaves must be carried through-
out the plant, and minerals and water absorbed from the
ground must be transported up to the leaves and other parts
of the plant. As discussed in chapter 38, these two types of
transport take place in specialized tissues, xylem and
phloem.

777
