39.2 Some plants have novel strategies for obtaining nutrients.

Nutritional
Adaptations

Carnivorous Plants

Some plants are able to obtain nitro-
gen directly from other organisms,
just as animals do. These carnivorous
plants often grow in acidic soils, such
as bogs that lack organic nitrogen. By
capturing and digesting small animals
directly, such plants obtain adequate
nitrogen supplies and thus are able to
grow in these seemingly unfavorable
environments. Carnivorous plants
have modified leaves adapted to lure
and trap insects and other small ani-
mals (figure 39.5). The plants digest
their prey with enzymes secreted from
various types of glands.

The Venus flytrap (Dionaea mus-
cipula), which grows in the bogs of
coastal North and South Carolina,
has three sensitive hairs on each side
of each leaf, which, when touched,
trigger the two halves of the leaf to
snap together (see figure 39.1). Once
the Venus flytrap enfolds a prey item
within a leaf, enzymes secreted from
the leaf surfaces digest the prey.
These flytraps actually shut and open
by a growth mechanism. They have a
limited number of times they can
open and close as a result. In the sun-
dews, the glandular trichomes secrete
both sticky mucilage, which traps
small animals, and digestive enzymes.
Unlike Venus flytraps they do not
close rapidly and it is possible that
the two share a common ancestor.

Pitcher plants attract insects by
the bright, flowerlike colors within
their pitcher-shaped leaves and per-
haps also by sugar-rich secretions.
Once inside the pitchers, insects slide
down into the cavity of the leaf,
which is filled with water and diges-
tive enzymes.

Bladderworts, Utricularia, are
aquatic. They sweep small animals
into their bladderlike leaves by the
rapid action of a springlike trapdoor,
and then they digest these animals.

 

FIGURE 39.5

A carnivorous plant. A tropical Asian
pitcher plant, Nepenthes. Insects enter the
pitchers and are trapped and digested.
Complex communities of invertebrate
animals and protists inhabit the pitchers.

 

FIGURE 39.6

Nitrogen-fixing nodule. A root hair of
alfalfa is invaded by Rhizobium, a bacterium
(yellow structures) that fixes nitrogen.
Through a series of exchanges of chemical
signals, the plant cells divide to create a
nodule for the bacteria which differentiate
and begin producing ammonia.

Chapter 39

Nitrogen-Fixing Bacteria

Plants need ammonia (NH3) to build
amino acids, but most of the nitrogen
is in the atmosphere in the form of
N>. Plants lack the biochemical
pathways (including the enzyme ni-
trogenase) necessary to convert
gascous nitrogen to ammonia, but
some bacteria have this capacity.
Some of these bacteria live in close
association with the roots of plants.
Others go through an intricate dance
and end up being housed in plant tis-
sues created especially for them called
nodules (figure 39.6). Only legumes
are capable of forming root nodules
and there is a very specific recogni-
tion required by a bacteria species
and its host. Hosting these bacteria
costs the plant in terms of energy, but
is well worth it when there is little
ammonia in the soil. An energy con-
servation mechanism has evolved in
the legumes so that the root hairs will
not respond to bacterial signals when
nitrogen levels are high.

Mycorrhizae

While symbiotic relationships with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria are rare, sym-
biotic associations with mycorrhizal
fungi are found in about 90% of the
vascular plants. These fungi have
been described in detail in chapter 36.
In terms of plant nutrition, it is im-
portant to recognize the significant
role these organisms play in enhanc-
ing phosphorus transfer to the plant.
The uptake of some of the micronu-
trients is also enhanced. Functionally,
the mycorrhizae extend the surface
area of nutrient uptake substantially

Carnivorous plants obtain
nutrients, especially nitrogen,
directly by capturing and
digesting insects and other
organisms. Nitrogen can also be
obtained from bacteria living in
close association with the roots.
Fungi help plants obtain
phosphorus and other nutrients
from the soil.

781

Nutrition and Transport in Plants
