Water and Mineral Absorption

Most of the water absorbed by the plant comes in through
root hairs, which collectively have an enormous surface
area (figure 39.8). Root hairs are almost always turgid be-
cause their solute potential is greater than that of the sur-
rounding soil due to mineral ions being actively pumped
into the cells. Because the mineral ion concentration in
the soil water is usually much lower than it is in the plant,
an expenditure of energy (supplied by ATP) is required
for the accumulation of such ions in root cells. The
plasma membranes of root hair cells contain a variety of
protein transport channels, through which proton pumps
(see page 120) transport specific ions against even large
concentration gradients. Once in the roots, the ions,
which are plant nutrients, are transported via the xylem
throughout the plant.

The ions may follow the cell walls and the spaces
between them or more often go directly through the
plasma membranes and the protoplasm of adjacent cells
(figure 39.9). When mineral ions pass between the cell
walls, they do so nonselectively. Eventually, on their jour-
ney inward, they reach the endodermis and any further
passage through the cell walls is blocked by the Casparian

  

Casparian
strips

 

FIGURE 39.9

Vascular
cylinder

Water and
solutes

strips. Water and ions must pass through the plasma mem-
branes and protoplasts of the endodermal cells to reach the
xylem. However, transport through the cells of the endo-
dermis is selective. The endodermis, with its unique struc-
ture, along with the cortex and epidermis, controls which
ions reach the xylem.

Transpiration from the leaves (figure 39.10), which cre-
ates a pull on the water columns, indirectly plays a role in
helping water, with its dissolved ions, enter the root cells.
However, at night, when the relative humidity may ap-
proach 100%, there may be no transpiration. Under these
circumstances, the negative pressure component of water
potential becomes small or nonexistent.

Active transport of ions into the roots still continues to
take place under these circumstances. This results in an in-
creasingly high ion concentration with the cells, which
causes more water to enter the root hair cells by osmosis.
In terms of water potential, we say that active transport in-
creases the solute potential of the roots. The result is
movement of water into the plant and up the xylem
columns despite the absence of transpiration. This phe-
nomenon is called root pressure, which in reality is an os-
motic phenomenon.

   
 
   
  
 
 
     

7— Cell wall

Casparia
strip

Water
and
solutes

Endodermal
cells

Root
hair

‘The pathways of mineral transport in roots. Minerals are absorbed at the surface of the root, mainly by the root hairs. In passing
through the cortex, they must either follow the cell walls and the spaces between them or go directly through the plasma membranes and
the protoplasts of the cells, passing from one cell to the next by way of the plasmodesmata. When they reach the endodermis, however,
their further passage through the cell walls is blocked by the Casparian strips, and they must pass through the membrane and protoplast of

an endodermal cell before they can reach the xylem.

784 = =PartX Plant Form and Function
