39.3. Water and minerals move upward through the xylem.

Overview of Water and Mineral
Movement through Plants

Local Changes Result in the Long-Distance,
Upward Movement of Water

Most of the nutrients and water discussed above enter the
plant through the roots and move upward in the xylem. It
is not unusual for a large tree to have leaves more than 10
stories off the ground (figure 39.7). Did you ever wonder
how water gets from the roots to the top of a tree that
high? Water moves through the spaces between the proto-
plasts of cells, through plasmodesmata (membrane connec-
tions between cells), through cell membranes and through
the continuous tubing system in the xylem. We know that
there are interconnected, water-conducting xylem elements
extending throughout a plant. We also know that water
first enters the roots and then moves to the xylem. After
that, however, water rises through the xylem because of a
combination of factors and some exits through the stomata
in the leaves.

While most of our focus will be on the mechanics of
water transport through xylem, the movement of water at
the cellular level plays a significant role in bulk water
transport in the plant as well, although over much shorter
distances. You know that the Casparian strip in the root
forces water to move through cells. In the case of
parenchyma cells it turns out that most water also moves
across membranes rather than in the intercellular spaces.
For a long time, it was believed that water moved across
cell membranes only by osmosis through the lipid bilayer.
We now know that osmosis is enhanced by water channels
called aquaporins. These transport channels are found in
both plants and animals. In plants they exist in vacuole and
plasma membranes. There at least 30 different genes cod-
ing for aquaporin-like proteins in Arabidopsis. Some aqua-
porins only appear or open during drought stress. Aqua-
porins allow for faster water movement between cells than
osmosis. They are important not only in maintaining
water balance within a cell, but in getting water between
many plant cells and the xylem. The greatest distances
traveled by water molecules and dissolved minerals are in
the xylem.

Once water enters the xylem, it can move upward
100 m in the redwoods. Some “pushing” from the pres-
sure of water entering the roots is involved. However,
most of the force is “pulling” caused by water evaporating
(transpiration) through the stomata on the leaves and
other plant surfaces. This works because water molecules
stick to themselves with hydrogen bonds (cohesion) and
to the walls of the tracheid or xylem vessel (adhesion).
The result is an unusually stable column of liquid reach-
ing great heights.

782 = Part XX Plant Form and Function

 

FIGURE 39.7

How does water get to the top of this tree? We would expect
gravity to make such a tall column of water too heavy to be
maintained by capillary action. What pulls the water up?
