FIGURE 39.2

Mineral deficiencies in
plants. (a) Leaves of a
healthy Marglobe tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum)
plant. (b) Chlorine-
deficient plant with
necrotic leaves (leaves
with patches of dead
tissue). () Copper-
deficient plant with blue-
green, curled leaves.

(@ Zinc-deficient plant
with small, necrotic
leaves. (f) Manganese-
deficient plant with
chlorosis (yellowing)
between the veins. The
agricultural implications
of deficiencies such as
these are obvious; a
trained observer can
determine the nutrient
deficiencies that are
affecting a plant simply
by inspecting it.

(©)

allowed to grow and are studied for the presence of abnor-
mal symptoms that might indicate a need for the missing
element (figure 39.3). However, the water or vessels used
often contain enough micronutrients to allow the plants to
grow normally, even though these substances were not
added deliberately to the solutions. To give an idea of how
small the quantities of micronutrients may be, the standard
dose of molybdenum added to seriously deficient soils in
Australia amounts to about 34 grams (about one handful)
per hectare, once every 10 years! Most plants grow satis-
factorily in hydroponic culture, and the method, although
expensive, is occasionally practical for commercial pur-
poses. Analytical chemistry has made it much easier to take
plant material and test for levels of different molecules.
One application has been the investigation of elevated lev-
els of CO) (a result of global warming) on plant growth.
With increasing levels of CO), the leaves of some plants
increase in size, but the amount of nitrogen decreases rela-
tive to carbon. This decreases the nutritional value of the
leaves to herbivores.

 

The plant macronutrients carbon, oxygen, and
hydrogen constitute about 94% of a plant’s dry weight;
the other macronutrients—nitrogen, potassium,
calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and sulfur—each
approach or exceed 1% of a plant’s dry weight.

 

 

 

 

(b)

 

    
  

Suspected
nutrient is
not essential

 

cansPlany
— Monitor
of Meni
in s
Normal \
s a growth
Complete Solution lacking ait
nutrient ‘one suspected 4 “
solution essential nutrient
‘Abnormal, Suspected
rowel nutrient is
ab, 7 ~ essential
FIGURE 39.3

Identifying nutritional requirements of plants. A seedling is
first grown in a complete nutrient solution. The seedling is then
transplanted to solution that lacks one suspected essential nutrient.
The growth of the seedling is then studied for the presence of
abnormal symptoms, such as discolored leaves and stunted growth.
If the seedling’s growth is normal, the nutrient that was left out
may not be essential; if the seedling’s growth is abnormal, the
lacking nutrient is essential for growth.

Chapter 39 Nutrition and Transport in Plants 779
