Other Factors Regulating Transpiration. Factors such
as CO) concentration, light, and temperature can also af-
fect stomatal opening. When COQ) concentrations are high,
guard cells of many plant species lose turgor, and their
stomata close. Additional CQ) is not needed at such times,
and water is conserved when the guard cells are closed. The
stomata also close when the temperature exceeds 30° to
34°C when transpiration would increase substantially. In
the dark, stomata will open at low concentrations of CO).
In chapter 10, we mentioned CAM photosynthesis, which
occurs in some succulent like cacti. In this process, CO) is
taken in at night and fixed during the day. CAM photosyn-
thesis conserves water in dry environments where succulent
plants grow.

Many mechanisms to regulate the rate of water loss have
evolved in plants. One involves dormancy during dry times
of the year; another involves loss of leaves. Deciduous
plants are common in areas that periodically experience a
severe drought. Plants are often deciduous in regions with
severe winters, when water is locked up in ice and snow and
thus unavailable to them. In a general sense, annual plants
conserve water when conditions are unfavorable, simply by
going into dormancy as seeds.

Thick, hard leaves, often with relatively few stomata—
and frequently with stomata only on the lower side of the
leaf—lose water far more slowly than large, pliable leaves
with abundant stomata. Temperatures are significantly re-
duced in leaves covered with masses of woolly-looking tri-
chomes. These trichomes also increase humidity at the leaf
surface. Plants in arid or semiarid habitats often have their
stomata in crypts or pits in the leaf surface. Within these
depressions the water vapor content of the air may be high,
reducing the rate of water loss.

Plant Responses to Flooding

Plants can also receive too much water, and ultimately
“drown.” Flooding rapidly depletes available oxygen in the
soil and interferes with the transport of minerals and carbo-
hydrates in the roots. Abnormal growth often results. Hor-
mone levels change in flooded plants—ethylene (the only
hormone that is a gas) increases, while gibberellins and cy-
tokinins usually decrease. Hormonal changes contribute to
the abnormal growth patterns.

Oxygen-deprivation is among the most significant prob-
lems. Standing water has much less oxygen than moving
water. Generally, standing water flooding is more harmful
to a plant (riptides excluded). Flooding that occurs when a
plant is dormant is much less harmful than flooding when it
is growing actively.

Physical changes that occur in the roots as a result of
oxygen deprivation may halt the flow of water through the
plant. Paradoxically, even though the roots of a plant may
be standing in water, its leaves may be drying out. One
adaptive solution is that stomata of flooded plants often
close to maintain leaf turgor.

788 = PartX Plant Form and Function

 

FIGURE 39.13

Adaptation to flooded conditions. The “knees” of the bald
cypress (Taxodium) form whenever it grows in wet conditions,
increasing its ability to take in oxygen.

Adapting to Life in Fresh Water. Algal ancestors of
plants adapted to a freshwater environment from a salt-
water environment before the “move” onto land. This in-
volved a major change in controlling salt balance. Since
that time, many have “moved” back into fresh water and
grow in places that are often or always flooded naturally;
they have adapted to these conditions during the course of
their evolution (figure 39.13). One of the most frequent
adaptations among such plants is the formation of
aerenchyma, loose parenchymal tissue with large air
spaces in it (figure 39.14). Aerenchyma is very prominent in
water lilies and many other aquatic plants. Oxygen may be
transported from the parts of the plant above water to
those below by way of passages in the aerenchyma. This
supply of oxygen allows oxidative respiration to take place
even in the submerged portions of the plant.

Some plants normally form aerenchyma, whereas others,
subject to periodic flooding, can form it when necessary. In
corn, ethylene, which becomes abundant under the anaero-
bic conditions of flooding, induces aerenchyma formation.
Plants also respond to flooded conditions by forming larger
lenticels (which facilitate gas exchange) and additional ad-
ventitious roots.
