Chloroplasts

 

@
FIGURE 39.12

 

Guard cell

Chloroplasts Epidermal cell

 

| Thickened inner |
cell wall (rigid)

   

Stoma open Stoma closed

Solute potential is high; Solute potential is low;
water moves into guard water moves out of
cells guard cells

(b)

How a stoma opens and closes. (a) When potassium ions from surrounding cells are pumped into guard cells, the guard cell turgor
pressure increases as water enters by osmosis. The increased turgor pressure causes the guard cells to bulge, with the thick walls on the
inner side of each guard cell bowing outward, thereby opening the stoma. ()) When the potassium ions leave the guard cells and their
solute potential becomes low, they lose water and turgor, and the stoma closes.

duct tape on the inside edge of both balloons and inflate
each one a bit more. Hold the open ends together. You
should now be holding a doughnut-shaped pair of “guard
cells” with a “stoma” in the middle. Real guard cells rely on
the influx and efflux of water, rather than air, to open and
shut.

Loss of turgor in guard cells causes the uptake of potas-
sium (K*) ions through ATP-powered ion transport chan-
nels in their plasma membranes. This creates a solute po-
tential within the guard cells that causes water to enter
osmotically. As a result, these cells accumulate water and
become turgid, opening the stomata (figure 39.12). Keep-
ing the stomata open requires a constant expenditure of
ATP, and the guard cells remain turgid only as long as ions
are pumped into the cells. When stomata close, sucrose,
rather than K*, leaves the cell through sucrose transporters.
Water then leaves the guard cells, which lose turgor, and
the stomata close (figure 39.12). Why closing depends on
sucrose transport out of the cell and opening on K* uptake
is an open question. Experimental evidence is consistent
with several pathways regulating stomatal opening and
closing.

Photosynthesis in the guard cells apparently provides an
immediate source of ATP, which drives the active transport

of K+ by way of a specific K* channel; this K+ channel has
now been isolated and studied. In some species, Cl- accom-
panies the K* in and out of the guard cells, thus maintain-
ing electrical neutrality. In most species, both Cl- and
malate move in the opposite direction of K*.

When a whole plant wilts because there is insufficient
water available, the guard cells may also lose turgor, and as
a result, the stomata may close. The guard cells of many
plant species regularly become turgid in the morning, when
photosynthesis occurs, and lose turgor in the evening, re-
gardless of the availability of water. When they are turgid,
the stomata open, and CQ) enters freely; when they are
flaccid, CO) is largely excluded, but water loss is also re-
tarded.

Abscisic acid, a plant hormone discussed in chapter 41,
plays a primary role in allowing K* to pass rapidly out of
guard cells, causing the stomata to close in response to
drought. This hormone is released from chloroplasts and
produced in leaves. It binds to specific receptor sites in the
plasma membranes of guard cells. Plants likely control the
duration of stomatal opening through the integration of
several stimuli, including blue light. In the next chapter, we
will explore the interactions between the environment and
the plant in more detail.

Chapter 39 Nutrition and Transport in Plants 787
