39.4 Dissolved sugars and hormones are transported in the phloem.

Phloem Transport Is Bidirectional

Most carbohydrates manufactured in leaves and other
green parts are distributed through the phloem to the rest
of the plant. This process, known as translocation, is re-
sponsible for the availability of suitable carbohydrate
building blocks in roots and other actively growing re-
gions of the plant. Carbohydrates concentrated in storage
organs such as tubers, often in the form of starch, are also
converted into transportable molecules, such as sucrose,
and moved through the phloem. The pathway that sugars
and other substances travel within the plant has been
demonstrated precisely by using radioactive tracers, de-
spite the fact that living phloem is delicate and the process
of transport within it is easily disturbed. Radioactive car-
bon dioxide (14CO2) gets incorporated into glucose as a
result of photosynthesis. The glucose is used to make su-
crose, which is transported in the phloem. Such studies
have shown that sucrose moves both up and down in the
phloem.

Aphids, a group of insects that extract plant sap for food,
have been valuable tools in understanding translocation.
Aphids thrust their sty/ets (piercing mouthparts) into
phloem cells of leaves and stems to obtain abundant sugars
there. When a feeding aphid is removed by cutting its
stylet, the liquid from the phloem continues to flow
through the detached mouthpart and is thus available in
pure form for analysis (figure 39.16). The liquid in the
phloem contains 10 to 25% dry matter, almost all of which
is sucrose. Using aphids to obtain the critical samples and
radioactive tracers to mark them, it has been demonstrated
that movement of substances in phloem can be remarkably
fast; rates of 50 to 100 centimeters per hour have been
measured.

While the primary focus of this chapter is on nutrient
and water transport, it is important to note that phloem
also transports plant hormones. As we will explore in the
next chapter, environmental signals can result in the rapid
translocation of hormones in the plant.

Energy Requirements for Phloem Transport

The most widely accepted model of how carbohydrates in
solution move through the phloem has been called the
mass-flow hypothesis, pressure flow hypothesis, or
bulk flow hypothesis. Experimental evidence supports
much of this model. Dissolved carbohydrates flow from a
source and are released at a sink where they are utilized.
Carbohydrate sources include photosynthetic tissues, such
as the mesophyll of leaves, and food-storage tissues, such as
the cortex of roots. Sinks occur primarily at the growing
tips of roots and stems and in developing fruits.

790 = Part XX Plant Form and Function

 

(a)

FIGURE 39.16

Feeding on phloem. (a) Aphids, like this individual of
Macrosiphon rosae shown here on the edge of a rose leaf, feed on
the food-rich contents of the phloem, which they extract through
their piercing mouthparts (6), called stylets. When an aphid is
separated from its stylet and the cut stylet is left in the plant, the
phloem fluid oozes out of it and can then be collected and
analyzed.

In a process known as phloem loading, carbohydrates
(mostly sucrose) enter the sieve tubes in the smallest
veinlets at the source. This is an energy-requiring step, as
active transport is needed. Companion cells and
parenchyma cells adjacent to the sieve tubes provide the
ATP energy to drive this transport. Then, because of the
