Chapter 59

Summary

Questions

=
Vey

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

39.1 Plants require a variety of nutrients in addition to the direct products of photosynthesis.

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

¢ Plants require a few macronutrients in large amounts
and several micronutrients in trace amounts. Most of
these are obtained from the soil through the roots.

* Plant growth is significantly influenced by the nature

of the soil. Soils vary in terms of nutrient composi-
tion and water-holding capacity.

1. What is the difference
between a macronutrient and a
micronutrient? Explain how a
plant would utilize each of the
macronutrients.

@

39.2 Some plants have novel strategies for obtaining nutrients.

* Nutrients
* Soil

 

* Some plants entice bacteria to produce organic
nitrogen for them. These bacteria may be free-li
or form a symbiotic relationship with a host plant.

 

ing

* About 90% of all vascular plants rely on fungal
associations to gather essential nutrients.

2. The atmosphere is full of
nitrogen yet it is inaccessible to
most plants. Why is that? What
solution has evolved in legumes?

39.3 Water and minerals move upward through the xylem.

 

¢ Water and minerals enter the plant through the
roots. Energy is required for active transport.

¢ The bulk movement of water and minerals is the re-
sult of movement between cells, across cell mem-
branes, and through tubes of xylem. Aquaporins are
water channels that enhance osmosis.

¢ Acombination of the properties of water, structure of
xylem, and transpiration of water through the leaves
results in the passive movement of water to incredible
heights. The ultimate energy source for pulling water
through xylem vessels and tracheids is the sun.

© Water leaves the plant through openings in the leaves
called stomata. Stomata open when their guard cells
are turgid and bulge, causing the thickened inner
walls of these cells to bow away from the opening.

¢ Plants can tolerate long submersion in water, if they
can deliver oxygen to their submerged tissues.

3. What is pressure potential?
How does it differ from solute
potential? How do these
pressures cause water to rise in a
plant?

4, What proportion of water
that enters a plant leaves it via
transpiration?

yw

5. Why are root hairs usually
turgid? Does the accumulation
of minerals within a plant root
require the expenditure of
energy? Why or why not?

6. Under what environmental
condition is water transport
through the xylem reduced to
near zero? How much
transpiration occurs under these
circumstances?

7. Does stomatal control require
energy? Explain.

39.4 Dissolved sugars and hormones are transported in the phloem.

 

Movement

* Uptake by Roots
* Water Movement

* Student Research:
Heavy Metal Uptake

 

* Sucrose and hormones can move up and down in the
phloem between sources and sinks.

¢ The movement of water containing dissolved sucrose
and other substances in the phloem requires energy.
Sucrose is loaded into the phloem near sites of syn-
thesis, or sources, using energy supplied by the com-
panion cells or other nearby parenchyma cells.

792 Part X Plant Form and Function

8. What is translocation? What
is the driving force behind
translocation?

9. Describe the movement of
carbohydrates through a plant,
beginning with the source and
ending with the sink. Is this
process active or passive?
