0,, CO,

 

@
FIGURE 39.14

Gas exchange

   

Upper epidermis
Stoma Vein of leaf

Va Harel ieee

 

Air spaces Aerenchyma Lower epidermis

of leaf

(b)

‘Aerenchyma tissue. Gas exchange in aquatic plants. (2) Water lilies float on the surface of ponds where oxygen is collected and
transported to submerged portions of the plant. (J) Large air spaces in the leaves add buoyancy. The specialized parenchyma tissue that
forms these open spaces is called aerenchyma. Gas exchange occurs through stomata found only on the upper surface of the leaf.

Adapting to Life in Salt Water. Plants such as man-
groves that are normally flooded with salt water must not
only provide a supply of oxygen for their submerged parts,
but also control their salt balance. The salt must be ex-
cluded, actively secreted, or diluted as it enters. The arch-
ing silt roots of mangroves are connected to long, spongy,
air-filled roots that emerge above the mud. These roots,
called pneumatophores (see chapter 38), have large
lenticels on their above-water portions through which oxy-
gen enters; it is then transported to the submerged roots
(figure 39.15). In addition, the succulent leaves of man-
groves contain large quantities of water, which dilute the
salt that reaches them. Many plants that grow in such con-
ditions also secrete large quantities of salt.

 

‘Transpiration from leaves pulls water and minerals up
the xylem. This works because of the physical
properties of water and the narrow diameters of the
conducting tubes. Stomata open when their guard cells
become turgid. Opening and closing of stomata is
osmotically regulated. Biochemical, anatomical, and
morphological adaptations have evolved to reduce water
loss through transpiration. Plants are harmed by excess
water. However, plants can survive flooded conditions,
and even thrive in them, if they can deliver oxygen to
their submerged parts.

 

Section of
pneumatophore

= Lenticel

'
baa”

 

  

 

, transported
{ to submerged
} portions of plants
Pneumatophores
FIGURE 39.15

How mangroves get oxygen to their submerged part.
Mangrove plants grow in areas that are commonly flooded, and
much of each plant is usually submerged. However, modified
roots called pneumatophores supply the submerged portions of
the plant with oxygen because these roots emerge above the water
and have large lenticels. Oxygen can enter the roots through the
lenticels, pass into the abundant aerenchyma, and move to the rest
of the plant.

Chapter 39 Nutrition and Transport in Plants 789
