 

 

 

 

16 —— Wild-type
. —— gl2mutant
345+ — T7Gmutant
8
ae
8
2 o13-
ro
g 125
3
Cent
0 1 L ! L
0 1 2 38 4 5 6
(a) Number of cell divisions

 

 

8
T

a
T

3
T

a
T

 

Ratio of probability of longitudinal
division in T vesus A cells (pLT/pLA)

 

 

TTG mutant

 

Wild-type gl2 mutant

=

 

 

Comparing the differentiation and cell division of trichoblast (T) cells versus atrichoblast (A) cells in root epidermis. (a) As cell di-
visions proceeded, T cells and A cells were identified in the root epidermis of wild-type plants and two mutants, g/2 and TTG. Comparing
the ratio of T cells to A cells, there is an increase in the number of A cells compared to T cells in the T7G mutant. (b) The rate of cell di-
vision was also examined by comparing the ratio of probabilities of longitudinal anticlinal cell division in T cells and A cells among the
wild-type and mutant plants. This ratio was lowest in T7G mutants, indicating that this mutation affects cell division.

The Experiment

Two developmental mutants of A. thaliana were compared
to investigate whether the control of cell differentiation and
the rate of cell division were linked. One, TTG, alters early
events in root epidermal cell differentiation, while the other,
glabra2 (gl2) acts later.

The investigators first set out to map the surface of the
roots of each mutant type, as well as those of nonmutant
wild type. To avoid confusion in studying files of cells, it is
necessary to clearly identify the starting point of each file of
cells. To do this, roots were selected that contained clones
of trichoblast and atrichoblast produced by longitudinal cell
divisions perpendicular to the surface of the root. Called
longitudinal anticlinal cell divisions, these clones are rare
but easily recognized when stained with propidium iodide.
Careful mapping of individual cells with a confocal micro-
scope allowed investigators to determine the number and
location of trichoblast and atrichoblast cells present in the
epidermal tissue of each clone.

The Results

The researchers made two important observations based on
their visual identification of individual trichoblast and atri-
choblast cells in the various plant types examined.

1. The two cell types are produced at different rates. Among plants
that had been cultured for up to six cell divisions, they ob-
served a significant difference in the ratio of trichoblast (T)
versus atrichoblast (A) cells following two or more cell divi-
sions. In their study you can readily see that the TTG mutant
produces a significantly lower ratio of T cells to A cells com-
pared to the wild-type plants or g/2 mutants (see graph a
above). This strongly suggests that TTG is involved in con-
trolling the rate of cell division in the T cell file.

2. TTG controls the rate of longitudinal cell division. The re-

 

search team went on to examine longitudinal cell divisions
that fill in the gaps as cell division causes files of cells to ex-
tend outward from the meristem. The researchers set out to
determine the probability of such longitudinal anticlinal cell
division occurring in the three types of plants shown in graph
a. The more rapidly cell files are produced, the more often
longitudinal divisions would be required to fill in gaps be-
tween files. For proper root hair position to be maintained,
the rate of this longitudinal division would have to be tightly
coordinated with the rate of vertical division within the file.

The investigators found that longitudinal cell division, al-
ways rare, was usually seen, when it did occur, in T cell files.
Did the TTG mutation affect this process as well as file-ex-
tending cell divisions? This was determined by examining
the ratio of the probability of longitudinal anticlinal divi-
sions in T cells versus A cells (pL'T/pLA).

Researchers compared the ratio in wild-type plants with
that in the two mutants, TTG and g/2. Did the TTG muta-
tion alter longitudinal division? Yes! Their results indicate
at least a 60% reduction in the pLT/pLA ratio of the TTG
mutant compared to wild type and g/2 plants (see graph b
above). The percent of clones in the A file of the TTG mu-
tants exhibiting this type of cell division was twice that seen
in the wild-type or g/2 mutants.

This observation directly supports the hypothesis that
the TTG gene is not only required for cell division in the T
cell file, but also controls longitudinal cell divisions which
are characteristically more frequent in trichoblasts.

The research team concluded from these studies that
TTG is probably the earliest point of control of root epi-
dermis cell fate specification, and that this control most
likely acts by negatively controlling trichoblast cell fate.

To explore this experiment further, go to the Vir-
tual Lab at www.mhhe.com/raven6/vlab11.mhtml
