Early Plant Development

Concept Outline

40.1 Plant embryo development establishes a basic
body plan.

Establishing the Root-Shoot Axis. Asymmetric cell
division starts patterning the embryo. Early in
embryogenesis the root-shoot axis is established.
Establishing Three Tissue Systems. Three tissue
systems are established without any cell movement. While
the embryo is still a round ball, the root-shoot axis is
established. The shape of the plant is determined by planes
of cell division and direction of cell elongation. Nutrients
are used during embryogenesis, but proteins, lipids, and
carbohydrates are also set aside to support the plant during
germination before it becomes photosynthetic.

40.2 Seed formation protects the dormant embryo
from water loss.

How Seeds Form. Seeds allow plants to survive
unfavorable conditions and invade new habitats.

40.3 Fruit formation enhances the dispersal of seeds.

How Fruits Form. Seed-containing fruits are carried
far by animals, wind and water, allowing angiosperms
to colonize large areas.

40.4 Germination initiates post-seed development.

Mechanisms of Germination. External signals including
water, light, abrasion, and temperature can trigger
germination. Rupturing the seed coat and adequate oxygen
are essential. Stored reserves in the endosperm or
cotyledon are made available to the embryo during
germination.

 

FIGURE 40.1

This plant has recently emerged from its seed. It is extending
its shoot and leaves up into the air, toward light.

Lr chapter 37 we emphasized evolutionary changes in re-
production and physiology that gave rise to the highly
successful flowering plants (angiosperms). Chapters 38 and
39 explored the morphological and anatomical develop-
ment of the angiosperm sporophyte, where most of these
innovations occurred. In the next few chapters, we continue
our focus on the sporophyte generation of the an-
giosperms. In many cases, we will use the model plant Ara-
bidopsis, a weedy member of the mustard family. Its very
small genome has allowed plant biologists to study how
genes regulate plant growth and development. In this chap-
ter, we will follow the development of the embryo through
seed germination (figure 40.1). The next few chapters will
also continue to emphasize the roles of gene expression,
hormones, and environmental signals in regulating plant
development and function.

795
