40.1
Establishing the Root-Shoot Axis

In plants, three-dimensional shape and form arises by regu-
lating the amount and pattern of cell division. Even the
very first cell division is asymmetric resulting in two differ-
ent cell types. Early in embryo development most cells can
give rise to a wide range of cell and organ types, including
leaves. As development proceeds, the cells with multiple
potentials are restricted to regions called meristems. Many
meristems are established by the time embryogenesis ends
and the seed becomes dormant. Apical meristems will con-
tinue adding cells to the growing root and shoot tips after
germination. These generate the large numbers of cells
needed to form leaves, flowers, and all other components of
the mature plant. Apical meristem cells of corn, for exam-
ple, divide every 12 hours, producing half a million cells a
day in an actively growing corn plant. Lateral meristems
can cause an increase in the girth of some plants, while in-
tercalary meristems within the stems allow for elongation.
In addition to developing the root-shoot axis in em-
bryogenesis, cell differentiation occurs and three basic tis-
sue systems are established. These are the dermal,
ground, and vascular tissue systems and they are radially
patterned. These tissue systems contain various cell types
that can be highly differentiated for specific functions.

Triploid endosperm
mother cell

Root apex (radicle)

FIGURE 40.2

 

Plant embryo development establishes a basic body plan.

These tissue systems are organized radially around the
root-shoot axis.

While the embryo is developing, two other critical
events are occurring. A food supply is established that will
support the embryo during germination while it gains pho-
tosynthetic capacity. This starts with the second fertiliza-
tion event that produces endosperm in angiosperms. Sec-
ondly, ovule tissue (from the parental sporophyte)
differentiates to form a hard, protective covering around
the embryo. The seed (ovule containing the embryo) then
enters a dormant phase, signaling the end of embryogene-
sis. Environmental signals (for example, water, tempera-
ture, and light) can break dormancy and trigger a cascade
of internal events resulting in germination.

Early Cell Division and Patterning

The first division of the fertilized egg in a flowering plant
is asymmetric and generates cells with two different fates
(figure 40.2). One daughter cell is small, with dense cyto-
plasm. That cell, which will become the embryo, begins to
divide repeatedly in different planes, forming a ball of cells.
The other daughter cell divides repeatedly, forming an
elongated structure called a suspensor, which links the em-
bryo to the nutrient tissue of the seed. The suspensor also

Endosperm

Root apical
meristem

Stages of development in an angiosperm embryo. The very first cell division is asymmetric. Differentiation begins almost immediately

after fertilization.

796 = Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction
