 

Bacteria Are Simple Cells

Prokaryotes, the bacteria, are the sim-
plest organisms. Prokaryotic cells are
small, consisting of cytoplasm sur-
rounded by a plasma membrane and en-
cased within a rigid cell wall, with no
distinct interior compartments (figure
5.5). A prokaryotic cell is like a one-
room cabin in which eating, sleeping,
and watching TV all occur in the same
room. Bacteria are very important in
the economy of living organisms. They
harvest light in photosynthesis, break
down dead organisms and recycle their
components, cause disease, and are in-
volved in many important industrial
processes. Bacteria are the subject of
chapter 34.

FIGURE 5.5

Strong Cell Walls

Most bacteria are encased by a strong cell wall composed
of peptidoglycan, which consists of a carbohydrate matrix
(polymers of sugars) that is cross-linked by short
polypeptide units. No eukaryotes possess cell walls with
this type of chemical composition. With a few exceptions
like TB and leprosy-causing bacteria, all bacteria may be
classified into two types based on differences in their cell
walls detected by the Gram staining procedure. The
name refers to the Danish microbiologist Hans Christian
Gram, who developed the procedure to detect the pres-
ence of certain disease-causing bacteria. Gram-positive
bacteria have a thick, single-layered cell wall that retains
a violet dye from the Gram stain procedure, causing the
stained cells to appear purple under a microscope. More
complex cell walls have evolved in other groups of bacte-
ria. In them, the wall is multilayered and does not retain
the purple dye after Gram staining; such bacteria exhibit
the background red dye and are characterized as gram-
negative.

The susceptibility of bacteria to antibiotics often depends
on the structure of their cell walls. Penicillin and van-
comycin, for example, interfere with the ability of bacteria
to cross-link the peptide units that hold the carbohydrate
chains of the wall together. Like removing all the nails
from a wooden house, this destroys the integrity of the ma-
trix, which can no longer prevent water from rushing in,
swelling the cell to bursting.

Cell walls protect the cell, maintain its shape, and prevent
excessive uptake of water. Plants, fungi, and most protists
also have cell walls of a different chemical structure, which
we will discuss in later chapters.

82 Part II Biology of the Cell

Ils are far more complex than bacterial cells.

DNA

   
  
  
   

Flagellum

Capsule

 

Cell wall

Plasma
membrane

Structure of a bacterial cell. Generalized cell organization of a bacterium. Some
bacteria have hairlike growths on the outside of the cell called pili.

Long chains of sugars called polysaccharides cover the
cell walls of many bacteria. They enable a bacterium to ad-
here to teeth, skin, food—practically any surface that will
support their growth. Many disease-causing bacteria secrete
a jellylike protective capsule of polysaccharide around the
cell.

Rotating Flagella

Some bacteria use a flagellum (plural, flagella) to move.
Flagella are long, threadlike structures protruding from the
surface of a cell that are used in locomotion and feeding.
Bacterial flagella are protein fibers that extend out from a
bacterial cell. There may be one or more per cell, or none,
depending on the species. Bacteria can swim at speeds up to
20 cell diameters per second by rotating their flagella like
screws (figure 5.6). A “motor” unique to bacteria that is em-
bedded within their cell walls and membranes powers the
rotation. Only a few eukaryotic cells have structures that
truly rotate.

Simple Interior Organization

If you were to look at an electron micrograph of a bacterial
cell, you would be struck by the cell’s simple organiza-
tion. There are few, if any, internal compartments, and
while they contain simple structures like ribosomes, most
have no membrane-bounded organelles, the kinds so
characteristic of eukaryotic cells. Nor do bacteria have a
true nucleus. The entire cytoplasm of a bacterial cell is
one unit with no internal support structure. Consequently,
