Part

XI

Plant Growth and
Reproduction

The Control of Patterning in Plant
Root Development

Did you ever think of how a root grows? Down in the dark,
with gravity its only cue, the very tip of the root elongates,
periodically forming a node from which root branches will
extend. How does the root determine the position of its
branches, and the spacing between them? The serial organi-
zation of the root’s branches is controlled by events that
happen on a microscopic scale out at the very tip of the root,
the so-called root apex. There, within a space of a millime-
ter or less, molecular events occur that orchestrate how the
root will grow and what it will be like.

The problem of understanding how a plant’s root apex
controls the way a root develops is one example of a much
larger issue, perhaps the most challenging research problem
in modern botany: What mechanism mediates central pat-
tern formation in the plant kingdom? Almost nothing was
known of these mechanisms a decade ago, but intensive re-
search is now rapidly painting in the blank canvas.

Much of the most exciting research on plant pattern for-
mation is being performed on a small weedy relative of the
mustard plant, the wall cress Arabidopsis thaliana (see photo
above). With individual plants no taller than your thumb
that grow quickly in laboratory test-tubes, Arabidopsis is an
ideal model for studying plant development. Its genome,
about the size of the fruit fly Drosophila, has been completely
sequenced, greatly aiding research into the molecular events
underlying pattern formation.

To gain some insight into the sort of research being
done, we will focus on work being done by John Schiefel-
bein and colleagues at the University of Michigan. Schiefel-
bein has focused on one sharply defined aspect of plant root
pattern formation in Arabidopsis, the formation of root hairs
on the epidermis, the root’s outer layer of cells. These root
hairs constitute the principal absorbing surface of the root,
and their position is under tight central control.

In a nutshell, the problem of properly positioning root
hairs is one of balancing cell production and cell differentia-
tion. Cells in the growth zone beneath the surface of the
root—a sheath called a meristem—are constantly dividing.
The cells that are produced by the meristem go on to differ-

 

Arabidopsis thaliana. An important plant for studying root devel-
opment because it offers a simple pattern of cellular organization
in the root.

entiate into two kinds of cells: trichoblasts which form hair-
bearing epidermal cells, and atrichoblasts which form hair-
less epidermal cells. The positioning of trichoblasts among
atrichoblasts determines the pattern of root hairs on the de-
veloping root.

When researchers looked very carefully at the dividing
root meristem, they found that the initial cells determined
to be trichoblasts and atrichoblasts alternate with one an-
other in a ring of 16 cells around the circumference of the
root. As the cells divide, more and more cells are added,
forming columns of cells extending out in 16 files. As the
files extend farther and farther out, occasional side-ways di-
visions fill in the gaps that develop, forming new files.

Maintaining this simple architecture requires that the
root maintain a tight control of the plane and rate to cell di-
vision. Because this rate is different for the two cell types,
the root must also control the rate at which the cell types
differentiate. Schiefelbein set out to learn how the root apex
coordinates these two processes.

To get a handle on the process, Schiefelbein seized on a
recently characterized root pattern mutant called transparent
testa glabra (TTG). This mutant changes the pattern of root
hairs in Arabidopsis, and it has been proposed that it controls
whether a cell becomes a trichoblast or an atrichoblast. But
does it control the rate and orientation in the root meristem
epidermis?

To answer this question, Schiefelbein’s team used clonal
analysis to microscopically identify individual cell types in
the root epidermis, and set out to see if they indeed divide at
different rates, and if the TTG mutation affects these rates
differently. If so, there must be a link between cell differen-
tiation and the control of cell division in plants.

793

cence —_—

g Real S

Cc

111

Real People Do
