1.3. Darwin’s theory of evolution illustrates how science works.

Darwin’s Theory of
Evolution

Darwin’s theory of evolution explains
and describes how organisms on earth
have changed over time and acquired a
diversity of new forms. This famous
theory provides a good example of how
a scientist develops a hypothesis and
how a scientific theory grows and wins
acceptance.

Charles Robert Darwin (1809-1882;
figure 1.5) was an English naturalist
who, after 30 years of study and obser-
vation, wrote one of the most famous
and influential books of all time. This
book, On the Origin of Species by Means
of Natural Selection, or The Preservation
of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life,
created a sensation when it was pub-
lished, and the ideas Darwin expressed
in it have played a central role in the
development of human thought ever
since.

In Darwin’s time, most people be-
lieved that the various kinds of organ-
isms and their individual structures re-
sulted from direct actions of the Creator
(and to this day many people still believe
this to be true). Species were thought to
be specially created and unchangeable,
or immutable, over the course of time.
In contrast to these views, a number of
earlier philosophers had presented the
view that living things must have
changed during the history of life on
earth. Darwin proposed a concept he
called natural selection as a coherent,
logical explanation for this process, and
he brought his ideas to wide public at-
tention. His book, as its title indicates,
presented a conclusion that differed
sharply from conventional wisdom. Al-
though his theory did not challenge the
existence of a Divine Creator, Darwin
argued that this Creator did not simply
create things and then leave them forev-
er unchanged. Instead, Darwin’s God

 

FIGURE 1.5
Charles Darwin. This newly rediscovered photograph taken in 1881, the year before
Darwin died, appears to be the last ever taken of the great biologist.

expressed Himself through the operation of natural laws tionary theory deeply troubled not only many of his con-
that produced change over time, or evolution. These temporaries but Darwin himself.

views put Darwin at odds with most people of his time, The story of Darwin and his theory begins in 1831, when
who believed in a literal interpretation of the Bible and ac- he was 22 years old. On the recommendation of one of his
cepted the idea of a fixed and constant world. His revolu- professors at Cambridge University, he was selected to serve

10 Part The Origin of Living Things
