Chapter 40

Summary

=
Vey

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

 

www.biocourse.com

Questions Media Resources

40.1 Plant embryo development establishes a basic body plan.

 

¢ Plant shape is determined by the direction of cell
division and expansion.

* Three tissue systems form radially through regulated
cell division and differentiation.

* Shoot and root apical meristems are established to
continuously produce new tissues, which then differ-
entiate into body parts.

* Carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are stored for ger-
mination in the endosperm or cotyledons.

© Art Activity: Corn
Grain Structure

© Art Activity: Garden
Bean Seed Structure

1. The pattern of cell division
regulates the shape of an bs
embryo. Describe the cell 2
division pattern that results in
the single, outer layer of
protoderm in the globular stage
embryo.

 

2. What evidence supports the
claim that the shoot meristem is
genetically specified separately
from the root?

40.2 Seed formation protects the dormant embryo from water loss.

 

¢ The ovule wall (integuments) around the embryo
hardens to protect the embryo as embryogenesis
ends.

* Seed formation allows the embryo to enter a dormant
state and continue growth under more optimal condi-
tions.

40.3 Fruit formation enhances seed dispersal.

3. Why are seeds adaptively
important? Why may a seed
showing proper respiration and
synthesis of proteins and nucleic
acids and all other normal
metabolic activities still fail to
germinate?

a + Embryos and Seeds

 

¢ Fruits are an angiosperm innovation that develop
from the ovary wall (a modified leaf) that surrounds
the ovule(s).

* Fruits are highly diverse in terms of their dispersal
mechanisms, often displaying wings, barbs, or other
structures that aid in their transport from place to
place. Fruit dispersal methods are especially impor-
tant in the colonization of islands or other distant
patches of suitable habitat.

40.4 Germination initiates post-seed development.

4, Why is it advantageous for a
plant to produce fruit? How
does the genotype of the fruit
compare with the genotype of
the embryo? How does the
genotype of the seed wall
compare with the fruit wall?

 

 

* Inaseed, the embryo with its food supply is encased
within a sometimes rigid, relatively impermeable seed
coat that may need to be abraded before germination
can occur. Weather or passage through an animal’s
digestive tract may be necessary for germination to
begin.

¢ When temperature, light, and water conditions are
appropriate, germination can begin. In some cases, a
period of chilling is required prior to germination.
This adaptation protects seeds from germinating dur-
ing the cold season.

¢ At germination, the mobilization of the food reserves
is critical. Hormones control this process.

806 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

5. Explain how the embryo
signals the endosperm to obtain
sugars for growth during
germination.

6. Why does the root (actually
the radicle) of the embryo
emerge first?

@ * Germination
