FIGURE 40.3

Asymmetric cell division in a Fucus zygote.
An unequal distribution of material in the
fertilized egg leads to a bulge where the first
cell division will occur. This division results in
a smaller cell that will go on to divide and
produce the rhizoid that anchors the plant; the
larger cell divides to form the thallus or main
plant body. The point of sperm entry
determines where the smaller rhizoid cell will
form, but light and gravity can modify this to
ensure that the rhizoid will point downward
where it can anchor this brown alga. Calcium-
mediated currents set up an internal gradient of
charged molecules which lead to a weakening
of the cell wall where the rhizoid will form.
The fate of the two resulting cells is held in
memory by cell wall components.

Light

egg Bulge

provides a route for nutrients to reach the developing em-
bryo. The root-shoot axis also forms at this time. Cells
near the suspensor are destined to form a root, while those
at the other end of the axis ultimately become a shoot.

Investigating the asymmetry of the first cell division is
difficult because the fertilized egg is embedded within the
gametophyte, which is surrounded by sporophyte tissue
(ovule and carpel tissue). One approach has been to use the
brown algae Fucus as a model system. Although there is a
huge evolutionary difference between brown algae and the
angiosperms, there are similarities in early embryogenesis
which may have ancient origins. The egg is released prior
to fertilization so there are no extra tissues surrounding the
zygote (fertilized egg). One side of the zygote begins to
bulge establishing the vertical axis. Cell division occurs and
the original bulge becomes the smaller of the two cells. It
develops into a rhizoid that anchors the alga and the other
cell develops into the main body, or thallus, of the sporo-
phyte. This axis is first established by the point of sperm
entry, but can be changed by environmental signals, espe-
cially light and gravity which ensure that the rhizoid is
down and the thallus is up. Internal gradients are estab-
lished that specify where the rhizoid will form in response
to environmental signals (figure 40.3). The ability to “re-
member” where the rhizoid will form depends on the cell
wall. Enzymatic removal of the cell wall in Fucus cells spec-
ified to form either rhizoids or plant body, resulted in cells
that could give rise to both. Cell walls contain a wide vari-
ety of carbohydrates and proteins attached to the wall’s
structural fibers. Attempting to pin down the identities of
these suspected developmental signals is an area of active
research.

Another approach to investigating the initial asymmetry
in embryos has been to study mutants with abnormal sus-
pensors. By understanding what is going wrong, it is often
possible to infer normal developmental mechanisms. For
example, the suspensor mutant in Arabidopsis has aberrant

Thallus
uy cell
09 a _.
Fertilized /
Rhizoid
cell

Thallus

Rhizoid
First cell
division

(asymmetric)

Young alga
Adult alga

es
frog

tes ge

 

FIGURE 40.4
‘The embryo suppresses development of the suspensor as a
second embryo. This suspensor mutant of Arabidopsis has a defect
appear in embryo development followed by embryo-like
development of the suspensor.

development in the embryo followed by embryo-like devel-
opment of the suspensor (figure 40.4). From this, one can
conclude that the embryo normally prevents the suspensor
from developing into a second embryo.

 

Early in embryogenesis the root-shoot axis is
established.

 

Chapter 40 Early Plant Development 797
