40.4 Germination initiates post-seed development.

When conditions are satisfactory, the embryo emerges
from its desiccated state, utilizes food reserves, and re-
sumes growth. As the sporophyte pushes through the
seed coat it orients with the environment so the root
grows down and the shoot grows up. New growth comes
from delicate meristems that are protected from environ-
mental rigors. The shoot becomes photosynthetic and
the post-embryonic phase of growth and development is
underway.

Mechanisms of Germination

Germination is the first step in the development of the
plant outside of its seed coat. Germination occurs when
a seed absorbs water and its metabolism resumes. The
amount of water a seed can absorb is phenomenal and
creates a force strong enough to break the seed coat. At
this point, it is important that oxygen be available to the
developing embryo because plants, like animals, require
oxygen for cellular respiration. Few plants produce seeds
that germinate successfully under water, although some,
such as rice, have evolved a tolerance to anaerobic
conditions.

A dormant seed, although it may have imbibed a full
supply of water and may be respiring, synthesizing proteins
and RNA, and apparently carrying on normal metabolism,
may nonetheless fail to germinate without an additional
signal from the environment. This signal may be light of
the correct wavelengths and intensity, a series of cold days,
or simply the passage of time at temperatures appropriate
for germination. Seeds of many plants will not germinate
unless they have been stratified—held for periods of time
at low temperatures. This phenomenon prevents seeds of
plants that grow in cold areas from germinating until they
have passed the winter, thus protecting their seedlings from
cold conditions.

Germination can occur over a wide temperature
range (5° to 30°C), although certain species and specific
habitats may have relatively narrow optimum ranges.
Some seeds will not germinate even under the best con-
ditions. In some species, a significant fraction of a sea~
son’s seeds remain dormant, providing a gene pool of
great evolutionary significance to the future plant
population.

The Utilization of Reserves

Germination occurs when all internal and external re-
quirements are met. Germination and early seedling

804 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

growth require the utilization of metabolic reserves; these
reserves are stored in the starch grains of amyloplasts
(colorless plastids that store starch) and protein bodies.
Fats and oils also are important food reserves in some
kinds of seeds. They can readily be digested during ger-
mination, producing glycerol and fatty acids, which yield
energy through cellular respiration; they can also be con-
verted to glucose. Depending on the kind of plant, any of
these reserves may be stored in the embryo itself or in the
endosperm.

In the kernels of cereal grains, the single cotyledon is
modified into a relatively massive structure called the
scutellum (figure 40.15), from the Latin word meaning
“shield.” The abundant food stored in the scutellum is used
up first because these plants do not need to use the en-
dosperm during germination. Later, while the seedling is
becoming established, the scutellum serves as a nutrient
conduit from the endosperm to the embryo. This is one of
the best examples of how plant growth regulators modulate
development in plants (40.16). The embryo produces gib-
berellic acid which signals the outer layer of the endosperm
called the aleurone to produce O-amylase. This enzyme is
responsible for breaking the starch in the endosperm down
into sugars that are passed by the scutellum to the embryo.
Abscisic acid, another plant growth regulator, which is im-
portant in establishing dormancy, can inhibit this process.
Abscisic acid levels may be reduced further when a seed ab-
sorbs water.

The emergence of the embryonic root and shoot from
the seed during germination varies widely from species
to species. In most plants, the root emerges before the
shoot appears and anchors the young seedling in the soil
(see figure 40.15). In plants such as peas and corn, the
cotyledons may be held below ground; in other plants,
such as beans, radishes, and sunflowers, the cotyledons
are held above ground. The cotyledons may or may not
become green and contribute to the nutrition of the
seedling as it becomes established. The period from the
germination of the seed to the establishment of the
young plant is a very critical one for the plant’s survival;
the seedling is unusually susceptible to disease and
drought during this period.

 

During germination and early seedling establishment,
the utilization of food reserves stored in the embryo or
the endosperm is mediated by hormones, which, in
some cases, are gibberellins.

 
