| 40.2 Seed formation protects the dormant embryo from water loss.

How Seeds Form

A protective seed coat forms from the outer layers of ovule
cells, and the embryo within is now either surrounded by
nutritive tissue or has amassed stored food in its cotyle-
dons. The resulting package, known as a seed, is resistant to
drought and other unfavorable conditions; in its dormant
state, it is a vehicle for dispersing the embryo to distant
sites and allows a plant embryo to survive in environments
that might kill a mature plant. In some embryos, the
cotyledons are bent over to fit within the constraints of the
hardening ovule wall with the inward cotyledon being
slightly smaller for efficient packing (figure 40.8). Remem-
ber that the ovule wall is actually tissue from the previous
sporophyte generation.

Adaptive Importance of Seeds

Early in the development of an angiosperm embryo, a pro-
foundly significant event occurs: the embryo stops develop-
ing. In many plants, development of the embryo is arrested
soon after the meristems and cotyledons differentiate. The
integuments—the outer cell layers of the ovule—develop
into a relatively impermeable seed coat, which encloses the
seed with its dormant embryo and stored food. Seeds are
important adaptively in at least four ways:

Shoot apical
meristem

 

Procambium

Root apical
meristem

Root cap

FIGURE 40.8

   
  
  
   

1. They maintain dormancy under unfavorable condi-
tions and postpone development until better condi-
tions arise. If conditions are marginal, a plant can “af-
ford” to have some seeds germinate, because others
will remain dormant.

2. The seed affords maximum protection to the young
plant at its most vulnerable stage of development.

3. The seed contains stored food that permits develop-
ment of a young plant prior to the availability of an
adequate food supply from photosynthetic activity.

4. Perhaps most important, the dispersal of seeds facili-
tates the migration and dispersal of plant genotypes
into new habitats.

Once a seed coat forms, most of the embryo’s metabolic
activities cease. A mature seed contains only about 5% to
20% water. Under these conditions, the seed and the
young plant within it are very stable; it is primarily the pro-
gressive and severe desiccation of the embryo and the asso-
ciated reduction in metabolic activity that are responsible
for its arrested growth. Germination cannot take place
until water and oxygen reach the embryo, a process that
sometimes involves cracking the seed coat through abrasion
or alternate freezing and thawing. Seeds of some plants
have been known to remain viable for hundreds and, in rare
instances, thousands of years (figure 40.9).

Seed coat

Cotyledons

 

A mature angiosperm embryo. Note that two cotyledons have grown in a bent shape to accommodate the tight confines of the seed. In
some embryos, the shoot apical meristem will have already initiated a few leaf primordia as well.

800 Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction
