in one package. The fruit and seed
coat are from the prior sporophyte
generation. Within the seed are rem-
nants of the gametophyte generation
that produced the egg that was fertil-
ized to give rise to the next sporophyte
generation, the embryo.

The Dispersal of Fruits

Aside from the many ways fruits can
form, they also exhibit a wide array of
specialized dispersal methods. Fruits
with fleshy coverings, often shiny FIGURE 40.12

 

 

(b)

black or bright blue or red, normally Animal-dispersed fruits. (a) The bright red berries of this honeysuckle, Lonicera hispidula,

are dispersed by birds or other verte-
brates (figure 40.12). Like red flow-
ers, red fruits signal an abundant food
supply. By feeding on these fruits,
birds and other animals may carry
seeds from place to place and thus
transfer plants from one suitable habi-
tat to another.

Fruits with hooked spines, like those of burgrass (figure
40.120), are typical of several genera of plants that occur
in the northern deciduous woods. Such fruits are often
disseminated by mammals, including humans. Squirrels
and similar mammals disperse and bury fruits such as
acorns and other nuts. Other fruits, such as those of
maples, elms, and ashes, have wings which aid in their dis-
tribution by the wind. The dandelion provides another fa-
miliar example of a fruit type that is dispersed by wind
(figure 40.13), and the dispersal of seeds from plants such
as milkweeds, willows, and cottonwoods is similar. Or-
chids have minute, dustlike seeds, which are likewise
blown away by the wind.

Coconuts and other plants that characteristically occur
on or near beaches are regularly spread throughout a re-
gion by water (figure 40.14). This sort of dispersal is es-
pecially important in the colonization of distant island
groups, such as the Hawaiian Islands. It has been calcu-
lated that seeds of about 175 original angiosperms, nearly
a third from North America, must have reached Hawaii
to have evolved into the roughly 970 species found there
today. Some of these seeds blew through the air, others
were transported on the feathers or in the guts of birds,
and still others drifted across the Pacific. Although the
distances are rarely as great as the distance between
Hawaii and the mainland, dispersal is just as important
for mainland plant species that have discontinuous habi-
tats, such as mountaintops, marshes, or north-facing

cliffs.

 

Fruits, which are characteristic of angiosperms, are
extremely diverse. The evolution of specialized
structures allows fruits to be dispersed by animals,
wind, and water.

 

 

are highly attractive to birds, just as are red flowers. After eating the fruits, birds may carry
the seeds they contain for great distances either internally or, because of their sticky pulp,
stuck to their feet or other body parts. (b) The spiny fruits of this burgrass, Cenchrus incertus,
adhere readily to any passing animal, as you will know if you have ever stepped on them.

FIGURE 40.13
Wind-dispersed
fruits. False
dandelion,
Pyrrhopappus
carolinanus. The
“parachutes”
disperse the fruits
of both false and
true dandelions
widely in the
wind, much to the
gardener’s
despair.

 

FIGURE 40.14

A water-dispersed fruit. This fruit of the coconut, Cocos nucifers,
is sprouting on a sandy beach. Coconuts, one of the most useful
plants for humans in the tropics, have become established on
even the most distant islands by drifting on the waves.

Chapter 40 Early Plant Development 803
