gene in Arabidopsis is active in early and late embryo devel-
opment and may be responsible for maintaining an embry-
onic environment. It is possible to turn this gene on later
in development using recombinant DNA techniques (see
chapter 43). In that case, embryos can form on leaves!

Morphogenesis

The globular stage gives rise to a heart-shaped embryo in
one group of angiosperms (the dicots, see figure 40.5) and a
ball with a bulge on a single side in another group (the
monocots). The bulges are cotyledons (“first leaves”) and
are produced by the embryonic cells, not the shoot apical
meristem that begins forming during the globular stage.
This process, called morphogenesis (generation of form), re-
sults from changes in planes and rates of cell division. Be-
cause plant cells cannot move, the form of a plant body is
largely determined by the plane in which cells divide and
by controlled changes in cell shape as they expand osmoti-
cally after they form. Both microtubules and actin play a
role in establishing the position of the cell plate which de-
termines the direction of division. Plant growth-regulators
and other factors influence the orientation of bundles of
microtubules on the interior of the plasma membrane.
These microtubules also guide cellulose deposition as the
cell wall forms around the outside of a new cell, determin-
ing its final shape. For example, if you start with a box and
reinforce four of the six sides more heavily with cellulose,
the cell will expand and grow in the direction of the two
sides with less reinforcement. Much is being learned at the
cell biological level about morphogenesis from mutants
that divide, but cannot control their plane of cell division
or the direction of cell expansion.

 

 

Corn

(a)

Bean Sy
FIGURE 40.7 |
Endosperm in corn and bean. The corn ;
kernel has endosperm that is still present
at maturity, while the endosperm in the
bean has disappeared; the bean embryo’s
cotyledons take over food storage
functions. )

Food Storage

Throughout embryogenesis there is the production of
starch, lipids, and proteins. The seed storage proteins are
so abundant that the genes coding for them were the first
cloning targets for plant molecular biologists. As noted in
chapter 37, the evolutionary trend in the plants has been
toward increased protection of the embryo. One way this
is accomplished is through parental sporophyte input
transferred by the suspensor in angiosperms (in gym-
nosperms the suspensor serves only to push the embryo
closer to the gametophytic nutrient source produced by
multiple nuclear divisions without cell division). This hap-
pens concurrently with the development of the endosperm
(present only in angiosperms, although double fertilization
has been observed in the gymnosperm Ephedra) which may
be extensive or minimal. Endosperm in coconut is the
“milk” and is in liquid form. In corn the endosperm is
solid and in popping corn expands with heat to form the
edible part of popcorn. In peas and beans, the endosperm
is used up during embryo development and nutrients are
stored in thick, fleshy cotyledons (figure 40.7). The pho-
tosynthetic machinery is built in response to light. So, itis
critical that seeds have stored nutrients to aid in germina-
tion until the growing sporophyte can photosynthesize. A
seed buried too deeply will use up all its reserves before
reaching the surface and sunlight.

 

After the root-shoot axis is established, a radial, three-
tissue system, and a stored food supply, are formed
through controlled cell division and expansion.

 

Endosperm

Embryo

Embryo

Cotyledon

 

Chapter 40. Early Plant Development 799
