 

Bacterial cell wall

Rotary
motor

Flagellin

(b)
FIGURE 5.6

    
    

Sheath

Bacteria swim by rotating their flagella. (a) The photograph is of Vibrio cholerae, the microbe that causes the serious disease cholera. The
unsheathed core visible at the top of the photograph is composed of a single crystal of the protein flagellin. (J) In intact flagella, the core is
surrounded by a flexible sheath. Imagine that you are standing inside the Vibrio cell, turning the flagellum like a crank. (¢) You would
create a spiral wave that travels down the flagellum, just as if you were turning a wire within a flexible tube. The bacterium creates this

kind of rotary motion when it swims.

the strength of the cell comes primarily from its rigid wall
(see figure 5.5).

The plasma membrane of a bacterial cell carries out some
of the functions organelles perform in eukaryotic cells. When
a bacterial cell divides, for example, the bacterial chromosome,
a simple circle of DNA, replicates before the cell divides. The
two DNA molecules that result from the replication attach to
the plasma membrane at different points, ensuring that each
daughter cell will contain one of the identical units of DNA.
Moreover, some photosynthetic bacteria, such as cyanobacte-
ria and Prochloron (figure 5.7), have an extensively folded
plasma membrane, with the folds extending into the cell’s
interior. These membrane folds contain the bacterial
pigments connected with photosynthesis.

Because a bacterial cell contains no membrane-bounded
organelles, the DNA, enzymes, and other cytoplasmic con-
stituents have access to all parts of the cell. Reactions are not
compartmentalized as they are in eukaryotic cells, and the
whole bacterium operates as a single unit.

 

Bacteria are small cells that lack interior organization.
They are encased by an exterior wall composed of
carbohydrates cross-linked by short polypeptides, and
some are propelled by rotating flagella.

 

 

FIGURE 5.7

Electron micrograph of a photosynthetic bacterial cell.
Extensive folded photosynthetic membranes are visible in this
Prochloron cell (14,500x). The single, circular DNA molecule is
located in the clear area in the central region of the cell.

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 83
