Establishing Three Tissue Systems

Three basic tissues differentiate while the plant embryo is
still a ball of cells, the globular stage (figure 40.5), but no
cell movements are involved. The protoderm consists of the
outermost cells in a plant embryo and will become dermal
tissue. These cells almost always divide with their cell plate
perpendicular to the surface. This perpetuates a single
outer layer of cells. Dermal tissue produces cells that pro-
tect the plant from desiccation, including the stomata that
open and close to facilitate gas exchange and minimize
water loss. The bulk of the embryonic interior consists of
ground tissue cells that eventually function in food and water
storage. Lastly, procambium at the core of the embryo is
destined to form the future vascular tissue responsible for
water and nutrient transport.

Root and Shoot Formation

The root-shoot axis is established during the globular stage
of development. The shoot apical meristem will later give
rise to leaves and eventually reproductive structures.
While both the shoot and root meristems are apical meris-
tems, their formation is controlled independently. This
conclusion is supported by mutant analysis in Arabidopsis
where the shootmeristemless (stm) mutant fails to produce a
viable shoot, but does produce a root (figure 40.6). Simi-
larly, root meristem-specific genes have been identified.
For example, monopterous mutants of Arabidopsis lack
roots. The hormone auxin may play a role in root-shoot
axis formation. Auxin is one of six classes of hormones that

 

FIGURE 40.5

 

Wild type

SUITE

FIGURE 40.6

Shoot-specific genes specify formation of the shoot apical
meristem. The shootmeristemless mutant of Arabidopsis has a
normal root meristem, but fails to produce a shoot meristem.

regulate plant development and function that we will ex-
plore in more detail later in this unit.

As you study the development of roots and shoots after
germination, you will notice that many of the same patterns
of tissue differentiation seen in the embryo are reiterated in
the apical meristems. Remember that there are also many
events discussed earlier in this chapter that are unique to
embryogenesis. For example, the LEAFY COTYLEDON

 

Early developmental stages of Arabidopsis thaliana. (a) Early cell division has produced the embryo and suspensor. (b) Globular stage.

(cd) Heart-shaped stage.

798 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction
