Auxin

More than a century ago, an organic substance known as
auxin became the first plant hormone to be discovered.
Auxin increases the plasticity of plant cell walls and is in-
volved in elongation of stems. Cells can enlarge in re-
sponse to changes in turgor pressure when their cell walls
have enhanced plasticity from auxin action. The discov-
ery of auxin and its role in plant growth is an elegant ex-
ample of thoughtful experimental design. The historical
story is recounted here for that reason. Recent efforts
have uncovered an auxin receptor. Transport mecha-
nisms are also being unraveled. As with all the classes of
hormones, we are just beginning to understand, at a cel-
lular and molecular level, how hormones regulate growth
and development.

Discovery of Auxin

In his later years, the great evolutionist, Charles Darwin,
became increasingly devoted to the study of plants. In
1881, he and his son Francis published a book called The
Power of Movement of Plants. In this book, the Darwins re-
ported their systematic experiments on the response of
growing plants to light—responses that came to be
known as phototropisms. They used germinating oat
(Avena sativa) and canary grass (Phalaris canariensis)
seedlings in their experiments and made many observa-
tions in this field.

Charles and Francis Darwin knew that if light came pri-
marily from one direction, the seedlings would bend
strongly toward it. If they covered the tip of the shoot with
a thin glass tube, the shoot would bend as if it were not
covered. However, if they used a metal foil cap to exclude
light from the plant tip, the shoot would not bend (figure
41.8). They also found that using an opaque collar to ex-
clude light from the stem below the tip did not keep the
area above the collar from bending.

In explaining these unexpected findings, the Darwins
hypothesized that when the shoots were illuminated from
one side, they bent toward the light in response to an “in-
fluence” that was transmitted downward from its source at
the tip of the shoot. For some 30 years, the Darwins’ per-
ceptive experiments remained the sole source of informa-
tion about this interesting phenomenon. Then Danish
plant physiologist Peter Boysen-Jensen and the Hungarian
plant physiologist Arpad Paal independently demonstrated
that the substance that caused the shoots to bend was a
chemical. They showed that if the tip of a germinating
grass seedling was cut off and then replaced with a small
block of agar separating it from the rest of the seedling, the
seedling would grow as if there had been no change. Some-
thing evidently was passing from the tip of the seedling
through the agar into the region where the bending oc-
curred. On the basis of these observations under conditions
of uniform illumination or of darkness, Paal suggested that

814 = Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

Gam uae
oh

Lightproof cap
is

/ _— Transparent cap

Ce

Lightproof collar

(b) :

FIGURE 41.8
‘The Darwins’ experiment. (#) Young grass seedlings normally
bend toward the light. (b) The bending (1) did not occur when the
tip of a seedling was covered with a lightproof cap (2), but did
occur when it was covered with a transparent one (3). When a
collar was placed below the tip (4), the characteristic light
response took place. From these experiments, the Darwins
concluded that, in response to light, an “influence” that caused
bending was transmitted from the tip of the seedling to the area
below, where bending normally occurs.
