Dormancy

Sometimes modifying the direction of growth is not
enough to protect a plant from harsh conditions. The abil-
ity to cease growth and go into a dormant stage provides a
survival advantage. The extreme example is seed dormancy,
but there are intermediate approaches to waiting out the
bad times as well. Environmental signals both initiate and
end dormant phases in the life of a plant.

In temperate regions, we generally associate dormancy
with winter, when freezing temperatures and the accompa-
nying unavailability of water make it impossible for plants
to grow. During this season, buds of deciduous trees and
shrubs remain dormant, and apical meristems remain well
protected inside enfolding scales. Perennial herbs spend the
winter underground as stout stems or roots packed with
stored food. Many other kinds of plants, including most an-
nuals, pass the winter as seeds.

In some seasonally dry climates, seed dormancy occurs
primarily during the dry season, often the summer. Rain-
falls trigger germination when conditions for survival are
more favorable. Annual plants occur frequently in areas of
seasonal drought. Seeds are ideal for allowing annual plants
to bypass the dry season, when there is insufficient water
for growth. When it rains, they can germinate and the
plants can grow rapidly, having adapted to the relatively
short periods when water is available. Chapter 40 covered
some of the mechanisms involved in breaking seed dor-
mancy and allowing germination under favorable circum-
stances. These include the leaching from the seed coats of
chemicals that inhibit germination, or mechanically crack-
ing the seed coats, a procedure that is particularly suitable
for promoting growth in seasonally dry areas. Whenever
rains occur, they will leach out the chemicals from the seed
coats, and the hard coats of other seeds may be cracked
when they are being washed down along temporarily
flooded arroyos (figure 41.6).

Seeds may remain dormant for a surprisingly long time.
Many legumes (plants of the pea and bean family,
Fabaceae) have tough seeds that are virtually impermeable
to water and oxygen. These seeds often last decades and
even longer without special care; they will eventually ger-
minate when their seed coats have been cracked and water
is available. Seeds that are thousands of years old have been
successfully germinated!

A period of cold is necessary before some kinds of
seeds will germinate, as we mentioned in chapter 40. The
seeds of other plants will germinate only when adequate
water is available and the temperatures are relatively high.
For this reason, certain weeds germinate and grow in the
cooler part of the year and others in the warmer part of
the year. Similarly, a period of cold is needed before the
buds of some trees and shrubs will break dormancy and
develop normally. For this reason, many plants that nor-
mally grow in temperate regions do not thrive in warmer
regions near the equator, because even at high elevations

 

FIGURE 41.6

Palo verde (Cercidium floridum). This desert tree (a) has tough
seeds (b) that germinate only after they are cracked.

in the tropics it still does not get cold enough, and the
day-length relationships are different from those of tem-
perate regions.

 

Mature plants may become dormant in dry or cold
seasons that are unfavorable for growth. Dormant
plants usually lose their leaves and drought-resistant
winter buds are produced. Long unfavorable periods
may be bypassed through the production of seeds,
which themselves can remain dormant for long
periods.

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 811
