How Plants Grow in
Response to Their
Environment

 

Concept Outline

41.1 Plant growth is often guided by environmental
cues.

Tropisms. Plant growth is often influenced by light,
gravity, and contact with other plants and animals.
Dormancy. The ability to cease growth allows plants to
wait out the bad times.

41.2 The hormones that guide growth are keyed to
the environment.

Plant Hormones. Hormones are grouped into seven
classes.

Auxin. Auxin is involved in the elongation of stems.
Cytokinins. Cytokinins stimulate cell division.
Gibberellins. Gibberellins control stem elongation.
Brassinosteroids and Oligosaccharins. There are
several recent additions to the plant hormone family.
Ethylene. Ethylene controls leaves and flower abscision.
Abscisic Acid. Abscisic acid suppresses growth of buds
and promotes leaf senescence.

41.3 The environment influences flowering.

Plants Undergo Metamorphosis. ‘The transition of a
shoot meristem from vegetative to adult is called phase
change.

Pathways Leading to Flower Production. Photoperiod
is regulated in complex ways.

Identity Genes and the Formation of Floral Meristems
and Floral Organs. Floral meristem identity genes
activate floral organ identity genes.

41.4 Many short-term responses to the environment
do not require growth.

Turgor Movement. Changes in the water pressure
within plant cells result in quick and reversible plant
movements.

Plant Defense Responses. In addition to generalized
defense mechanisms, some plants have highly evolved
recognition mechanisms for specific pathogens.

 

 

FIGURE 41.1

Plant growth is affected by environmental cues. The branches
of this fallen tree are growing straight up in response to gravity
and light.

A ll organisms sense and interact with their environ-

ent. This is particularly true of plants. Plant survival
and growth is critically influenced by abiotic factors includ-
ing water, wind, and light. In this chapter, we will explore
how a plant senses such factors, and transduces these sig-
nals to elicit an optimal physiological, growth, or develop-
mental response. Hormones play an important role in the
internal signaling that brings about environmental re-
sponses, and is keyed in many ways to the environment.
The effect of the local environment on plant growth also
accounts for much of the variation in adult form within a
species (figure 41.1). Precisely regulated responses to the
environment not only allow a plant to survive from day to
day but also determine when a flowering plant will produce
a flower. The entire process of constructing a flower in
turn sets the stage for intricate reproductive strategies that
will be discussed in the next chapter.

807
