The Effects of Auxins

Auxin acts to adapt the plant to its environment in a highly
advantageous way. It promotes growth and elongation and
facilitates the plant’s response to its environment. Environ-
mental signals directly influence the distribution of auxin in
the plant. How does the environment—specifically, light—
exert this influence? Theoretically, it might destroy
the auxin, decrease the cells’ sensitivity to auxin, or cause
the auxin molecules to migrate away from the light into the
shaded portion of the shoot. This last possibility has proved
to be the case.

Ina simple but effective experiment, Winslow Briggs in-
serted a thin sheet of mica vertically between the half of the
shoot oriented toward the light and the half of the shoot
oriented away from it (figure 41.11). He found that light
from one side does not cause a shoot with such a barrier to
bend. When Briggs examined the illuminated plant, he
found equal auxin levels on both the light and dark sides of
the barrier. He concluded that a normal plant’s response to
light from one direction involves auxin migrating from the
light side to the dark side, and that the mica barrier pre-
vented a response by blocking the migration of auxin.

The effects of auxin are numerous and varied. Auxin
promotes the activity of the vascular cambium and the vas-
cular tissues. Also, auxins are present in pollen in large

   

Auxin in
seedling tip
Light : ;
<- “A 4 i 4
@) ) ©

quantities and play a key role in the development of fruits.
Synthetic auxins are used commercially for the same pur-
pose. Fruits will normally not develop if fertilization has
not occurred and seeds are not present, but frequently they
will if auxins are applied. Pollination may trigger auxin re-
lease in some species leading to fruit development occur-
ring even before fertilization.

How Auxin Works

In spite of this long history of research on auxin, its molec-
ular basis of action has been an enigma. The chemical
structure of IAA resembles that of the amino acid trypto-
phan, from which it is probably synthesized by plants (fig-
ure 41.12). Unlike animal hormones, a specific signal is not
sent to specific cells, eliciting a predictable response. There
are most likely multiple auxin perception sites. Auxin is also
unique among the plant hormones in that it is transported
toward the base of the plant. Two families of genes have
been identified in Arabidopsis that are involved in auxin
transport. For example, one protein is involved in the top
to bottom transport of auxin; while two other proteins
function in the root tip to regulate the growth response to
gravity. We are still a ways from linking the measurable
and observable effects of auxin to events that transpire after
it travels to a site and binds to a receptor.

24° CH, —COOH

a

H
(a) IAA (Indoleacetic acid)
NH,
|
CH, —CH

|
COOH
Light |
=> — a
(b) Tryptophan
(d) O—CH,— COOH

FIGURE 41.11

Phototropism and auxin: the Winslow Briggs experiments. The basic design of these

experiments was to place the tip of an oat seedling on an agar block, apply light from one

side, and observe the degree of curvature produced when the agar blocks were later placed

on the decapitated seedlings. However, Briggs inserted a barrier in various places and

noted how this affected the location of auxin. A comparison of (a) and (4) with similar
experiments performed in the dark showed that auxin production does not depend on
light; all produced approximately 24° of curvature. If a barrier was inserted in the agar
block (d), light caused the displacement of the auxin away from the light. Finally,
experiment (c) showed that it was displacement that had occurred, and not different rates
of auxin production on the dark and light sides, because when displacement was prevented
with a barrier, both sides of the agar block produced about 24° of curvature.

816 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

cl cl
() Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid
(2,4-D)
FIGURE 41.12

Auxins. (2) Indoleacetic acid (IAA), the
principal naturally occurring auxin. (6)
Tryptophan, the amino acid from which
plants probably synthesize IAA. (0)
Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), a
synthetic auxin, is a widely used herbicide.
