ground under deciduous plants that lose their leaves in
winter are more apt to germinate in the spring after the
leaves have decomposed and the seedlings are exposed to
direct sunlight. This greatly improves the chances the
seedlings will become established.

A second example of these relationships is the elonga-
tion of the shoot in an etiolated seedling (one that is pale
and slender from having been kept in the dark). Such plants
become normal when exposed to light, especially red light,
but the effects of such exposure are canceled by far-red
light. This indicates a relationship similar to that observed
in seed germination. There appears to be a link between
phytochrome light perception and brassinosteroids in the
etiolation response. Etiolation is an energy conservation
strategy to help plants growing in the dark reach the light
before they die. They don't green-up until there is light,
and they divert energy to growing as tall as possible
through internode elongation. The de-etiolated (det2) Ara-
bidopsis mutant has a poor etiolation response. It does not
have elongated internodes and greens up a bit in the dark.
Tt turns out that det2 mutants are defective in an enzyme
necessary for brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Researchers sus-
pect that brassinosteroids play a role in how plants respond
to light through phytochrome. Thus, because det2 mutants
lack brassinosteroids, they do not respond to light, or lack
of light, as normal plants do, and the det2 mutants grow
normally in the dark.

Red and far-red light also are used as signals for plant
spacing. The closer plants are together, the more likely
they are to grow tall and try to outcompete others for the
sunshine. Plants somehow measure the amount of far-red
light being bounced back to them from neighboring trees.
If their perception is messed up by putting a collar around
the stem with a solution that blocks light absorption, the
elongation response is no longer seen.

Gravitropism

When a potted plant is tipped over, the shoot bends and
grows upward (figure 41.4). The same thing happens when
a storm pushes over plants in a field. These are examples of
gravitropism, the response of a plant to the gravitational
field of the earth. We saw in chapter 40 that brown algae
orient their first cell division so the rhizoid grows down-
ward. Rhizoids also develop away from a unilateral light
source. Separating out phototropic effects is important in
the study of gravitropisms.

Gravitropic responses are present at germination when
the root grows down and the shoot grows up. Why does a
shoot have a negative gravitropic response (growth away
from gravity), while a root has a positive gravitropic re-
sponse? The opportunity to experiment on the space
shuttle in a gravity-free environment has accelerated re-
search in this area. Auxins play a primary role in gravit-
ropic responses, but they may not be the only way gravita-
tional information is sent through the plant. When John

 

 

 

Biological response
is blocked

 

 

 

 

 

 

+

Red light
(660 nm)

 

Far-red light
(730 nm)

Long period
of darkness

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
   

Phytochrome
r

t

Synthesis

 

 

 

 

 

Precursor|
Pp

FIGURE 41.3

How phytochrome works. Phytochrome is synthesized in the P,
form from amino acids, designated P, for phytochrome precursor.
When exposed to red light, P, changes to Pf, which is the active
form that elicits a response in plants. Ps, is converted to P, when.
exposed to far-red light, and it also converts to P, or is destroyed
in darkness. The destruction product is designated Py.

FIGURE 41.4

Plant response to
gravity. This plant
(Zebrina pendula) was
placed horizontally and
allowed to grow for

7 days. Note the
negative gravitational
response of the shoot.

Glenn made his second trip into space, he was accompa-
nied by an experiment designed to test the role of gravity
and electrical signaling in root bending. Analysis of grav-
itropic mutants is also adding to our understanding of
gravitropism. There are four steps that lead to a gravit-
ropic response:

1. Gravity is perceived by the cell

2. Signals form in the cell that perceives gravity

3. The signal is transduced intra- and intercellularly

4. Differential cell elongation occurs between cells in
the “up” and “down” sides of the root or shoot.

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 809
