One of the first steps in perceiving gravity is that amy-
loplasts, plastids that contain starch, sink toward the gravi-
tational field. These may interact with the cytoskeleton,
but the net effect is that auxin becomes more concentrated
on the lower side of the stem axis than on the upper side.
The increased auxin concentration on the lower side in
stems causes the cells in that area to grow more than the
cells on the upper side. The result is a bending upward of
the stem against the force of gravity—in other words there
is a negative gravitropic response. Such differences in hor-
mone concentration have not been as well documented in
roots. Nevertheless, the upper sides of roots oriented hori-
zontally grow more rapidly than the lower sides, causing
the root ultimately to grow downward; this phenomenon
is known as positive gravitropism. In shoots, the gravity-
sensing cells are in the endoderm. Mutants like scarecrow
and short root in Arabidopsis that lack normal endodermal
development fail to have a normal gravitropic response.
These endodermal cells are the sites of the amyloplasts in
the stems.

In roots, the gravity-sensing cells are located in the
root cap and the cells that actually do the asymmetric
growth are in the distal elongation zone which is closest
to the root cap. How the information gets transferred
over this distance is an intriguing problem. Auxin may be
involved, but when auxin transport is suppressed, there is
still a gravitropic response in the distal elongation zone.
Some type of electrical signaling involving membrane po-
larization has been hypothesized and this was tested
aboard the space shuttle. So far the verdict is still not in
on the exact mechanism.

It may surprise you to learn that in tropical rain forests,
roots of some plants may grow up the stems of neighboring
plants, instead of exhibiting the normal positive gravitropic
responses typical of other roots. The rainwater dissolves
nutrients, both while passing through the lush upper
canopy of the forest, and also subsequently as it trickles
down tree trunks. Such water functions as a more reliable
source of nutrients for the roots than the nutrient-poor
soils in which the plants are anchored. Explaining this in
terms of current hypotheses is a challenge. It has been pro-
posed that roots are more sensitive to auxin than shoots
and that auxin may actually inhibit growth on the lower
side of a root, resulting in a positive gravitropic response.
Perhaps in these tropical plants, the sensitivity to auxin in
roots is reduced.

Thigmotropism

Thigmotropism is a name derived from the Greek root
thigma, meaning “touch.” A thigmotropism is a response of
a plant or plant part to contact with the touch of an object,
animal, plant, or even the wind. (figure 41.5). When a ten-
dril makes contact with an object, specialized epidermal
cells, whose action is not clearly understood, perceive the
contact and promote uneven growth, causing the tendril to

810 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

FIGURE 41.5
Thigmotropism.
The thigmotropic
response of these
twining stems causes
them to coil around
the object with which
they have come in
contact.

curl around the object, sometimes within as little as 3 to 10
minutes. Both auxin and ethylene appear to be involved in
tendril movements, and they can induce coiling in the ab-
sence of any contact stimulus. In other plants, such as
clematis, bindweed, and dodder, leaf petioles or unmodified
stems twine around other stems or solid objects.

Again, Arabidopsis is proving valuable as a model system.
A gene has been identified that is expressed in 100-fold
higher levels 10 to 30 minutes after touch. Given the value
of a molecular genetics approach in dissecting the pathways
leading from an environmental signal to a growth response,
this gene provides a promising first step in understanding
how plants respond to touch.

Other Tropisms

The tropisms just discussed are among the best known, but
others have been recognized. They include electrotropism
(responses to electricity); chemotropism (response to chemi-
cals); traumotropism (response to wounding which we dis-
cuss on page 834); thermotropism (response to temperature);
aerotropism (response to oxygen); skototropism (response to
dark); and geomagnetotropism (response to magnetic fields).
Roots will often follow a diffusion gradient of water com-
ing from a cracked pipe and enter the crack. Some call such
growth movement Aydrotropism, but there is disagreement
whether responses to water and several other “stimuli” are
true tropisms.

 

While plants can’t move away or toward optimal
conditions, they can grow. Phototropisms are growth
responses of plants to a unidirectional source of light.
Gravitropism, the response of a plant to gravity,
generally causes shoots to grow up (negative
gravitropism) and roots to grow down (positive
gravitropism). Thigmotropisms are growth responses of
plants to contact.

 
