41.2 The hormones that guide growth are keyed to the environment.

Plant Hormones

While initial responses of plants to environmental signals
may rely primarily on electrical signaling, longer-term re-
sponses that alter morphology rely on complex physiologi-
cal networks. Many internal signaling pathways involve
plant hormones, which are the focus of this section. Hor-
mones are involved in responses to the environment, as
well as internally regulated development (examples of
which you saw in chapter 40).

Hormones are chemical substances produced in small,
often minute, quantities in one part of an organism and
then transported to another part, where they bring about
physiological or developmental responses. The activity of
hormones results from their capacity to stimulate certain
physiological processes and to inhibit others (figure
41.7). How they act in a particular instance is influenced
both by the hormone and the tissue that receives the
message.

In animals, hormones are usually produced at definite
sites, usually organs. In plants, hormones are not produced
in specialized tissues but, instead, in tissues that also carry

 

(@)

812 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

out other, usually more obvious, functions. There are seven
major kinds of plant hormones: auxin, cytokinins, gib-
berellins, brassinosteroids, oligosaccharins, ethylene, and
abscisic acid (table 41.1). Current research is focused on the
biosynthesis of hormones and on characterizing the hor-
mone receptors that trigger signal transduction pathways.
Much of the molecular basis of hormone function remains
enigmatic.

Because hormones are involved in so many aspects of
plant function and development, we have chosen to inte-
grate examples of hormone activity with specific aspects of
plant biology throughout the text. In this section, our goal
is to give you a brief overview of these hormones. Use this
section as a reference when specific hormones are discussed
in the next few chapters.

There are seven major kinds of plant hormones: auxin,
cytokinins, gibberellins, brassinosteroids,
oligosaccharins, ethylene, and abscisic acid.

 

(b)

FIGURE 41.7

Effects of plant hormones. Plant hormones, often
acting together, influence many aspects of plant
growth and development, including (a) leaf
abscission and (J) the formation of mature fruit.
