41.1 Plant growth is often guided by environmental cues.

‘Tropisms

Growth patterns in plants are often guided by environ-
mental signals. Tropisms (from trope, the Greek word for
“turn”) are positive or negative growth responses of plants
to external stimuli that usually come from one direction.
Some responses occur independently of the direction of
the stimuli and are referred to as nastic movements. For
example, a tendril of a pea plant will always coil in one di-
rection when touched. Tropisms, on the other hand, are
directional and offer significant compensation for the
plant’s inability to get up and walk away from unfavorable
environmental conditions. Tropisms contribute the vari-
ety of branching patterns we see within a species. Here we
will consider three major classes of plant tropisms: pho-
totropism, gravitropism, and thigmotropism. Tropisms
are particularly intriguing because they challenge us to
connect environmental signals with cellular perception of
the signal, transduction into biochemical pathways, and
ultimately an altered growth response.

 

Phototropism

Phototropic responses involve the bending of growing
stems and other plant parts toward sources of light (figure
41.2). In general, stems are positively phototropic, growing
toward a light source, while most roots do not respond to
light or, in exceptional cases, exhibit only a weak negative
phototropic response. The phototropic reactions of stems
are clearly of adaptive value, giving plants greater exposure
to available light. They are also important in determining
the development of plant organs and, therefore, the ap-
pearance of the plant. Individual leaves may display pho-
totropic responses. The position of leaves is important to
the photosynthetic efficiency of the plant. A plant hormone
called auxin (discussed later in this chapter) is probably in-
volved in most, if not all, of the phototropic growth re-
sponses of plants.

The first step in a phototropic response is perceiving
the light. Photoreceptors perceive different wavelengths
of light with blue and red being the most common. Blue
light receptors are being characterized and we are begin-
ning to understand how plants “see blue.” Much more is
known about “seeing red” and translating that perception
into a signal transduction pathway leading to an altered
growth response. Plants contain a pigment, phy-
tochrome, which exists in two interconvertible forms, P;
and P¥;. In the first form, phytochrome absorbs red light;
in the second, it absorbs far-red light. When a molecule
of P, absorbs a photon of red light (660 nm), it is instantly
converted into a molecule of Pj, and when a molecule of
Py absorbs a photon of far-red light (730 nm), it is in-
stantly converted to P,. P¥ is biologically active and P, is
biologically inactive. In other words, when Py; is present, a

808 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

FIGURE 41.2
Phototropism. Impatiens plant growing toward light.

given biological reaction that is affected by phytochrome
will occur. When most of the Ps has been replaced by P,,
the reaction will not occur (figure 41.3). While we refer
to phytochrome as a single molecule here, it is important
to note that several different phytochromes have now
been identified that appear to have specific biological
functions.

Phytochrome is a light receptor, but it does not act di-
rectly to bring about reactions to light. The existence of
phytochrome was conclusively demonstrated in 1959 by
Harry A. Borthwick and his collaborators at the U.S. De-
partment of Agriculture Research Center at Beltsville,
Maryland. It has since been shown that the molecule con-
sists of two parts: a smaller one that is sensitive to light
and a larger portion that is a protein. The protein compo-
nent initiates a signal transduction leading to a particular
tropism. The phytochrome pigment is blue, and its light-
sensitive portion is similar in structure to the phycobilins
that occur in cyanobacteria and red algae. Phytochrome is
present in all groups of plants and in a few genera of
green algac, but not in bacteria, fungi, or protists (other
than the few green algae). It is likely that phytochrome
systems for measuring light evolved among the green
algae and were present in the common ancestor of the
plants.

Phytochrome is involved in many plant growth re-
sponses. For example, seed germination is inhibited by far-
red light and stimulated by red light in many plants. Be-
cause chlorophyll absorbs red light strongly but does not
absorb far-red light, light passing through green leaves in-
hibits seed germination. Consequently, seeds on the
