FIGURE 41.9

Frits Went’s experiment. (1) Went
removed the tips of oat seedlings and
put them in agar, an inert, gelatinous
substance. (2) Blocks of agar were then
placed off-center on the ends of other
oat seedlings from which the tips had
been removed. (3) The seedlings bent
away from the side on which the agar
block was placed. Went concluded that
the substance that he named auxin
promoted the elongation of the cells
and that it accumulated on the side of
an oat seedling away from the light. @

Auxin in tip
of seeding

an unknown substance continually moves down from the
tips of grass seedlings and promotes growth on all sides.
Such a light pattern would not, of course, cause the shoot
to bend.

Then, in 1926, Dutch plant physiologist Frits Went car-
ried Paal’s experiments an important step further. Went
cut off the tips of oat seedlings that had been illuminated
normally and set these tips on agar. He then took oat
seedlings that had been grown in the dark and cut off their
tips in a similar way. Finally, Went cut tiny blocks from the
agar on which the tips of the light-grown seedlings had
been placed and placed them off-center on the tops of the
decapitated dark-grown seedlings (figure 41.9). Even
though these seedlings had not been exposed to the light
themselves, they bent away from the side on which the agar
blocks were placed.

Went then put blocks of pure agar on the decapitated
stem tips and noted either no effect or a slight bending to-
ward the side where the agar blocks were placed. Finally,
Went cut sections out of the lower portions of the light-
grown seedlings to see whether the active principle was
present in them. He placed these sections on the tips of de-
capitated, dark-green oat seedlings and again observed no
effect.

As a result of his experiments, Went was able to show
that the substance that had diffused into the agar from the
tips of light-grown oat seedlings could make seedlings
curve when they otherwise would have remained straight.
He also showed that this chemical messenger caused the
cells on the side of the seedling into which it flowed to
grow more than those on the opposite side (figure 41.10).
In other words, it enhanced rather than retarded cell elon-
gation. He named the substance that he had discovered
auxin, from the Greek word auxein, which means “to in-
crease.”

Went’s experiments provided a basis for understanding
the responses that the Darwins had obtained some 45 years
earlier. The oat seedlings bent toward the light because of

 

Auxin diffuses into
agar block

Shaded side
of seedling

  
 

Lighted side
of seedling

FIGURE 41.10

Auxin causes cells on the dark side to elongate. Went
determined that a substance called auxin enhanced cell elongation.
Plant cells that are in the shade have more auxin and grow faster
than cells on the lighted side, causing the plant to bend toward
light. Further experiments showed exactly why there is more auxin
on the shaded side of a plant.

differences in the auxin concentrations on the two sides of
the shoot. The side of the shoot that was in the shade had
more auxin, and its cells therefore elongated more than
those on the lighted side, bending the plant toward the
light.

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 815
