Pathways Leading to Flower
Production

The environment can promote or repress flowering. In
some cases, it can be relatively neutral. Light can be a sig-
nal that long, summer days have arrived in a temperate cli-
mate and conditions are favorable for reproduction. In
other cases, plants depend on light to accumulate sufficient
amounts of sucrose to fuel reproduction, but flower inde-
pendently of the length of day. Temperature can also be
used as a clue. Gibberellins are important and have been
linked to the vernalization pathway. Clearly, reproductive
success would be unlikely in the middle of a blizzard. As-
suming regulation of reproduction first arose in more con-
stant tropical environments, many of the day length and
temperature controls would have evolved as plants colo-
nized more temperate climates. Plants can rely primarily on
one pathway, but all three pathways can be present. The
complexity of the flowering pathways has been dissected
physiologically. Now analysis of flowering mutants is pro-
viding insight into the molecular mechanisms of the floral
pathways. The redundancy of pathways to flowering en-
sures that there will be another generation.

Light-Dependent Pathway

Flowering requires much energy accumulated via photosyn-
thesis. Thus, all plants require light for flowering, but this is
distinct from the photoperiodic, or light-dependent, flow-
ering pathway. Aspects of growth and development in
most plants are keyed to changes in the proportion of
light to dark in the daily 24-hour cycle (day length). This
provides a mechanism for organisms to respond to sea-
sonal changes in the relative length of day and night. Day
length changes with the seasons; the farther from the
equator, the greater the variation. Flowering responses of
plants to day length fall into several basic categories.
When the daylight becomes shorter than a critical
length, flowering is initiated in short-day plants (figure
41.27). When the daylight becomes longer than a critical
length, flowering is initiated in long-day plants. Other
plants, such as snapdragons, roses, and many native to the
tropics (for example, tomatoes), will flower when mature
regardless of day length, as long as they have received
enough light for normal growth. These are referred to as
day-neutral plants. Several grasses (for example, Indian
grass, Sorghastrum nutans), as well as ivy, have two critical

 

Long-day plants
atts

Short-day plants

 

Early

summer Midnight i

6AM.

 

Late
fall Midnight

6 PM. 6AM

 

FIGURE 41.27

 

 

Flash of light ca

6AM.

Noon

(b)

How flowering responds to day length.
{7 (a) This iris is a long-day plant that is
a, stimulated by short nights to flower in the
/ spring. The goldenrod is a short-day plant
i that, throughout its natural distribution in
the northern hemisphere, is stimulated by
long nights to flower in the fall. (0) If the
long night of winter is artificially
interrupted bya flash of light, the

 

Iris
Short length of dark
required for bloom

 

 

 

goldenrod will not flower, and the iris will.
Tn each case, it is the duration of
uninterrupted darkness that determines
when flowering will occur.

Goldenrod
Long length of dark
required for bloom

 

 

826 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction
