Cytokinins

Cytokinins comprise another group of naturally occurring
growth hormones in plants. Studies by Gottlieb Haber-
landt of Austria around 1913 demonstrated the existence of
an unknown chemical in various tissues of vascular plants
that, in cut potato tubers, would cause parenchyma cells to
become meristematic, and would induce the differentiation
of a cork cambium. The role of cytokinins, active compo-
nents of coconut milk, in promoting the differentiation of
organs in masses of plant tissue growing in culture later led
to their discovery. Subsequent studies have focused on the
role cytokinins play in the differentiation of tissues from
callus.

A cytokinin is a plant hormone that, in combination
with auxin, stimulates cell division and differentiation in
plants. Most cytokinins are produced in the root apical
meristems and transported throughout the plant. Develop-
ing fruits are also important sites of cytokinin synthesis. In
mosses, cytokinins cause the formation of vegetative buds
on the gametophyte. In all plants, cytokinins, working with
other hormones, seem to regulate growth patterns.

All naturally occurring cytokinins are purines that ap-
pear to be derivatives of, or have molecule side chains simi-
lar to, those of adenine (figure 41.14). Other chemically di-
verse molecules, not known to occur naturally, have effects
similar to those of cytokinins. Cytokinins promote growth
of lateral buds into branches (figure 41.15); though, along
with auxin and ethylene, they also play a role in apical
dominance (the suppression of lateral bud growth). Con-

 

ert

‘Apical bud
ee

crisis

818 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

  

NH.
N

Na »

LL

N N
|
H
Adenine

ww... —NH
G O

Kinetin

Hp — NH

q >

i
6-Benzylamino purine (BAP)

FIGURE 41.14
Some cytokinins. Two commonly used synthetic cytokinins
kinetin and 6-benzylamino purine. Note their resemblance to the
purine base adenine.

FIGURE 41.15

Cytokinins stimulate lateral

bud growth. (a) When the

Feet apical meristem of a plant is

ee intact, auxin from the apical
x bud will inhibit the growth of

NP lateral buds. (b) When the

apical bud is removed,
cytokinins are able to produce
the growth of lateral buds
into branches. (6) When the
apical bud is removed and
auxin is added to the cut
surface, axillary bud
outgrowth is suppressed.
