FIGURE 41.13

Acid growth
hypothesis. Auxin
stimulates the release of
hydrogen ions from the
target cells which alters
the pH of the cell wall.
This optimizes the
activity of enzymes
which break bonds in
the cell wall, allowing
them to expand.

 

One of the downstream effects of auxin is an increase in
plasticity of the plant cell wall. This will only work on
young cell walls without extensive secondary cell wall for-
mation. A more plastic wall will stretch more while its pro-
toplast is swelling during active cell growth. The acid
growth hypothesis provides a model linking auxin to cell
wall expansion (figure 41.13). Auxin causes responsive cells
to release hydrogen ions into the cell wall. This decreases
the pH which activates enzymes that can break bonds be-
tween cell wall fibers. Remember that different enzymes op-
erate optimally at different pHs. This hypothesis has been
experimentally supported in several ways. Buffers that pre-
vent cell wall acidification block cell expansion. Other com-
pounds that release hydrogen ions from the cell can also
cause cell expansion. The movement of hydrogen ions has
been observed in response to auxin treatment. This hypoth-
esis explains the rapid growth response. There are also de-
layed responses which most likely involve auxin-stimulated
gene expression.

Synthetic Auxins. Synthetic auxins such as NAA (naph-
thalene acetic acid) and IBA (indolebutyric acid) have many
uses in agriculture and horticulture. One of their most im-
portant uses is based on their prevention of abscission, the
process that causes a leaf or other organ to fall from a
plant. Synthetic auxins are used to prevent fruit drop in ap-
ples before they are ripe and to hold berries on holly that is
being prepared for shipping. Synthetic auxins are also used
to promote flowering and fruiting in pineapples and to in-
duce the formation of roots in cuttings.

    

|_- Cellulose fiber in cell wall
|_— Enzyme (inactive)
| Cross bridge

 

1. Auxin causes cells to pump
hydrogen ions into the cell wall

 

Active
enzyme

 

2. pH in the cell wall decreases,
activating enzymes that break
cross-bridges between cellulose
fibers in the cell wall.

 

 

3. Cellulose fibers loosen and
allow the cell to expand as turgor
pressure inside the cell pushes
against the cell wall.

 

 

 

 

Synthetic auxins are routinely used to control weeds.
When used as herbicides, they are applied in higher con-
centrations than IAA would normally occur in plants. One
of the most important synthetic auxin herbicides is 2,4-
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, usually known as 2,4-D (see
figure 41.12c). It kills weeds in grass lawns by selectively
eliminating broad-leaved dicots. The stems of the dicot
weeds cease all axial growth.

The herbicide 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, better
known as 2,4,5-T, is closely related to 2,4-D. 2,4,5-T was
widely used as a broad-spectrum herbicide to kill weeds and
seedlings of woody plants. It became notorious during the
Vietnam War as a component of a jungle defoliant known
as Agent Orange and was banned in 1979 for most uses in
the United States. When 2,4,5-T is manufactured, it is un-
avoidably contaminated with minute amounts of dioxin.
Dioxin, in doses as low as a few parts per billion, has pro-
duced liver and lung diseases, leukemia, miscarriages, birth
defects, and even death in laboratory animals. Vietnam vet-
erans and children of Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent
Orange have been among the victims.

 

Auxin is synthesized in apical meristems of shoots. It
causes young stems to bend toward light when it
migrates toward the darker side, where it makes young
cell walls more plastic and thereby promotes cell
elongation. By interacting with other hormones, auxin
can promote an increase in girth and is involved in
growth responses to gravity and fruit ripening.

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 817
