you look at very old brick buildings that are covered with
ivy, you will notice the uppermost branches are falling off
because they have transitioned to the adult phase of
growth and have lost the ability to produce adventitious
roots. It is important to remember that even though a
plant has reached the adult stage of development, it may
or may not produce reproductive structures. Other factors
may be necessary to trigger flowering.

Generally it is easier to get a plant to revert from an
adult to vegetative state than to induce phase change exper-
imentally. Applications of gibberellins and severe pruning
can cause reversion. There is evidence in peas and Ara-
bidopsis for genetically controlled repression of flowering.
The embryonic flower mutant of Arabidopsis flowers almost
immediately (figure 41.25), which is consistent with the hy-
pothesis that the wild-type allele suppresses flowering. It is
possible that flowering is the default state and that mecha-
nisms have evolved to delay flowering. This delay allows
the plant to store more energy to be allocated for repro-
duction.

The best example of inducing the juvenile to adult
transition comes from the construction of transgenic
plants that overexpress a gene necessary for flowering,
that is found in many species. This gene, LEAFY, was FIGURE 41.25
cloned in Arabidopsis and its promoter was replaced with a In Arabidopsis, the embryonic flower gene may repress
viral promoter that results in constant, high levels of flowering. The embryonic flower mutant flowers upon
LEAFY transcription. This gene construct was then in- germination.
troduced into cultured aspen cells which were used to re-
generate plants. When LEAFY is
overexpressed in aspen, flowering oc-
curs in weeks instead of years (figure
41.26). Phase change requires both
sufficient signal and the ability to per-
ceive the signal. Some plants acquire
competence in the shoot to perceive a
signal of a certain intensity. Others
acquire competence to produce suffi-
cient promotive signal(s) and/or de-
crease inhibitory signal(s).

 

Plants become reproductively
competent through changes in
signaling and perception. The
transition to the adult stage of
development where reproduction
is possible is called phase change.
Plants in the adult phase of
development may or may not
produce reproductive structures
(flowers), depending on
environmental cues.

 

FIGURE 41.26

Overexpression of a flowering gene can accelerate phase change. (2) An aspen tree
normally grows for several years before producing flowers. (#) Overexpression of the
Arabidopsis flowering gene, LEAFY, causes rapid flowering in a transgenic aspen.

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 825
