Abscisic Acid

Abscisic acid, a naturally occurring plant hormone, ap-
pears to be synthesized mainly in mature green leaves,
fruits, and root caps. The hormone earned its name be-
cause applications of it appear to stimulate leaf senescence
(aging) and abscission, but there is little evidence that it
plays an important role in this process. In fact, it is believed
that abscisic acid may cause ethylene synthesis, and that it
is actually the ethylene that promotes senescence and absci-
sion. When abscisic acid is applied to a green leaf, the areas
of contact turn yellow. Thus, abscisic acid has the exact op-
posite effect on a leaf from that of the cytokinins; a yellow-
ing leaf will remain green in an area where cytokinins are
applied.

Abscisic acid probably induces the formation of winter
buds—dormant buds that remain through the winter—by
suppressing growth. The conversion of leaf primordia into
bud scales follows (figure 41.222). Like ethylene, it may
also suppress growth of dormant lateral buds. It appears
that abscisic acid, by suppressing growth and elongation of
buds, can counteract some of the effects of gibberellins
(which stimulate growth and elongation of buds); it also
promotes senescence by counteracting auxin (which tends
to retard senescence). Absci:
mancy and is antagonistic to gibberellins during germina-

 

 

acid plays a role in seed dor-

tion. It is also important in controlling the opening and
closing of stomata (figure 41.22).

Abscisic acid occurs in all groups of plants and appar-
ently has been functioning as a growth-regulating sub-
stance since early in the evolution of the plant kingdom.
Relatively little is known about the exact nature of its phys-
iological and biochemical effects. These effects are very
rapid—often taking place within a minute or two—and
therefore they must be at least partly independent of gene
expression. Some longer-term effects of abscisic acid in-
volve the regulation of gene expression, but the way this
occurs is poorly understood. Abscisic acid levels become
greatly elevated when the plant is subject to stress, espe-
cially drought. Like other plant hormones, abscisic acid
probably will prove to have valuable commercial applica-
tions when its mode of action is better understood. It is a
particularly strong candidate for understanding desiccation
tolerance.

Abscisic acid, produced chiefly in mature green leaves
and in fruits, suppresses growth of buds and promotes
leaf senescence. It also plays an important role in
controlling the opening and closing of stomata. Abscisic
acid may be critical in ensuring survival under
environmental stress, especially water stresses.

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 41.22

Effects of abscisic acid. (a) Abscisic acid plays a role in the
formation of these winter buds of an American basswood. These
buds will remain dormant for the winter, and bud scales—
modified leaves—will protect the buds from desiccation.

(0) Abscisic acid also affects the closing of stomata by influencing
the movement of potassium ions out of guard cells.

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 823
