Brassinosteroids and
Oligosaccharins

Brassinosteroids

Although we’ve known about brassinosteroids for 30 years,
it is only recently that they have claimed their place as a
class of plant hormones. They were first discovered in Bras-
sica pollen, hence the name. Their historical absence in dis-
cussions of hormones may be partially due to their func-
tional overlap with other plant hormones, especially auxins
and gibberellins. Additive effects among these three classes
have been reported. The application of molecular genetics
to the study of brassinosteroids has led to tremendous ad-
vances in our understanding of how they are made and, to
some extent, how they function in signal transduction path-
ways. What is particularly intriguing about brassinosteroids
are similarities to animal steroid hormones (figure 41.20).
One of the genes coding for an enzyme in the brassinos-
teroid biosynthetic pathway has significant similarity to an
enzyme used in the synthesis of testosterone and related
steroids. Brassinosteroids have been identified in algae and
appear to be quite ubiquitous among the plants. It is plausi-
ble that their evolutionary origin predated the plant-animal
split.

Brassinosteroids have a broad spectrum of physiological
effects—elongation, cell division, bending of stems, vascu-
lar tissue development, delayed senescence, membrane po-
larization, and reproductive development. Environmental
signals can trigger brassinosteroid actions. Mutants have
been identified that alter the response to brassinosteroid,
but signal transduction pathways remain to be uncovered.
From an evolutionary perspective, it will be quite interest-
ing to see how these pathways compare with animal steroid
signal transduction pathways.

Oligosaccharins

In addition to cellulose, plant cell walls are composed of
numerous complex carbohydrates called oligosaccharides.
There is some evidence that these cell wall components
function as signaling molecules as well as structural wall
components. Oligosaccharides that are proposed to have a
hormonelike function are called oligosaccharins. Oligosac-
charins can be released from the cell wall by enzymes se-
creted by pathogens. These carbohydrates are believed to
signal defense responses, such as the hypersensitive re-
sponse discussed later in this chapter. Another oligosaccha-
rin has been shown to inhibit auxin-stimulated elongation
of pea stems. These molecules are active at concentrations
one to two orders of magnitude less than the traditional
plant hormones. You have seen how auxin and cytokinin
ratios can affect organogenesis in culture. Oligosaccharins
also affect the phenotype of regenerated tobacco tissue, in-
hibiting root formation and stimulating flower production
in tissues that are competent to regenerate flowers. How

OH
OH
HO.
HO
°
Brassinolide
CH_OH
c=0

10. ~ -OH
CH,

x
x=
9°
x=

Cortisol

OH
CH,

CH,

Testosterone

OH
CH,

‘

HO’

Estradiol

FIGURE 41.20
Brassinosteroids, such as brassinolide, have structural
similarities to animal steroid hormones.

the culture results translate to in vivo systems is an open
question. The structural biochemistry of oligosaccharins
makes them particularly challenging molecules to study.
How they interface with cells and initiate signal transduc-
tion pathways is an open question.

 

Brassinosteroids are structurally similar to animal
steroid hormones. They have many effects on plant
growth and development that parallel those of auxins
and gibberellins. Oligosaccharins are complex
carbohydrates that are released from cell walls and
appear to regulate both pathogen responses and growth
and development in some plants.

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 821
