 

Auxin: High Low Intermediate
Cytokinin: Low High Intermediate
FIGURE 41.16

Relative amounts of cytokinins and auxin affect organ
regeneration in culture. In the case of tobacco, (a) high auxin to
cytokinin ratios favor root development; (}) high cytokinin to
auxin ratios favor shoot development; and () intermediate
concentrations result in the formation of undifferentiated cells.
These developmental responses to cytokinin/auxin ratios in
culture are species specific.

versely, cytokinins inhibit formation of lateral roots, while
auxins promote their formation. As a consequence of these
relationships, the balance between cytokinins and auxin,
along with other factors, determines the appearance of a
mature plant. In addition, the application of cytokinins to
leaves detached from a plant retards their yellowing. They
function as anti-aging hormones.

The action of cytokinins, like that of other hormones,
has been studied in terms of its effects on growth and dif-
ferentiation of masses of tissue growing in defined media.
Plant tissue can form shoots, roots, or an undifferentiated
mass of tissues, depending on the relative amounts of auxin
and cytokinin (figure 41.16). In the early cell-growth exper-
iments coconut “milk” was an essential factor. Eventually,
it was discovered that coconut “milk” is not only rich in
amino acids and other reduced nitrogen compounds re-
quired for growth, but it also contains cytokinins. Cy
tokinins seem to be essential for mitosis and cell division.
They apparently promote the synthesis or activation of
proteins that are specifically required for mitosis.

Cytokinins have also been used against plants by
pathogens. The bacteria Agrobacterium, for example, intro-

 

 

FIGURE 41.17

Crown gall tumor. Sometimes cytokinins can be used against the
plant by a pathogen. In this case Agrobacterium tumefaciens (a
bacteria) has incorporated a piece of its DNA into the plant
genome. This DNA contains genes coding for enzymes necessary
for cytokinin and auxin biosynthesis. The increased levels of these
hormones in the plant cause massive cell division and the
formation of a tumor.

duces genes into the plant genome that increase the rate of
cytokinin, as well as auxin, production. This causes massive
cell division and the formation of a tumor called crown gall
(figure 41.17). How these hormone biosynthesis genes
ended up in a bacterium is an intriguing evolutionary ques-
tion. Coevolution does not always work to the plant’s
advantage.

 

Cytokinins are plant hormones that, in combination
with auxin, stimulate cell division and, along with a
number of other factors, determine the course of
differentiation. In contrast to auxins, cytokinins are
purines that are related to or derived from adenine.

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 819
