| 41.3. The environment influences flowering.

Plants Undergo
Metamorphosis

Overview of Initiating Flowering

Carefully regulated processes deter-
mine when and where flowers will
form. Plants must often gain compe-
tence to respond to internal or exter-
nal signals regulating flowering. Once
plants are competent to reproduce, a
combination of factors including light,
temperature, and both promotive and
inhibitory internal signals determine
when a flower is produced (figure
41.23). These signals turn on genes
that specify where the floral organs,
sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels will
form. Once cells have instructions to become a specific flo-
ral organ, yet another developmental cascade leads to the
three-dimensional construction of flower parts.

Juvenile

FIGURE 41.23

Phase Change

Plants go through developmental changes leading to re-
productive maturity just like many animals. This shift
from juvenile to adult development is seen in the meta-
morphosis of a tadpole to an adult frog or caterpillar to a
butterfly that can then reproduce. Plants undergo a simi-
lar metamorphosis that leads to the production of a
flower. Unlike the frog that loses its tail, plants just keep
adding on structures to existing structures with their
meristems. At germination, most plants are incapable of

 

(@)

824 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

rapa change

 

Temperature

Light

 

ammo promoters,
floral inhibitors .
Adult Flowering

Factors involved in initiating flowering. This is a model of environmentally cued and
internally processed events that result in a shoot meristem initiating flowers.

producing a flower, even if all the environmental cues are
optimal. Internal developmental changes allow plants to
obtain competence to respond to external and/or internal
signals that trigger flower formation. This transition is re-
ferred to as phase change. Phase change can be morpho-
logically obvious or very subtle. Take a look at an oak tree
in the winter. The lower leaves will still be clinging to the
branches, while the upper ones will be gone (figure
41.24a). Those lower branches were initiated by a juvenile
meristem. The fact that they did not respond to environ-
mental cues and drop their leaves indicates that they are
young branches and have not made a phase change. Ivy
also has distinctive juvenile and adult phases of growth
(figure 41.240). Stem tissue produced by a juvenile meris-
tem initiates adventitious roots that can cling to walls. If

FIGURE 41.24

Phase change. (2) The lower
branches of this oak tree represent
the juvenile phase of development
and cling to their leaves in the
winter. The lower leaves are not
able to form an abscission layer and
break off the tree in the fall. Such
visible changes are marks of phase
change, but the real test is whether
or not the plant is able to flower. (b)
Juvenile ivy (/eft) makes adventitious
roots and has an alternating leaf
arrangement. Adult ivy (right)
cannot make adventitious roots and
has leaves with a different
morphology that are arranged on an
upright stem in a spiral.
