 

Ethylene

Long before its role as a plant hormone
was appreciated, the simple, gaseous
hydrocarbon ethylene (H)C=CH)2) was
known to defoliate plants when it
leaked from gaslights in streetlamps.
Ethylene is, however, a natural product
of plant metabolism that, in minute
amounts, interacts with other plant
hormones. When auxin is transported
down from the apical meristem of the
stem, it stimulates the production of

Wild type
tomatoes

Gene for ethylene
biosynthesis enzyme

Transcription {)

— mRNA

Translation

Enzyme "@o
aihyene (Qua)
biosynthesis

 

Ethylene synthesis

%,

 

 

 

ethylene in the tissues around the lat-
eral buds and thus retards their growth.
Ethylene also suppresses stem and root
elongation, probably in a similar way.
An ethylene receptor has been identi-
fied and characterized. It appears to
have evolved early in the evolution of
photosynthetic organisms, sharing fea-
tures with environmental-sensing pro-
teins identified in bacteria.

Ethylene plays a major role in fruit
ripening. At first, auxin, which is pro-
duced in significant amounts in polli-

Transgenic
tomatoes

6

 

Antisense copy of gene

DNA
{Transcription 7,

= GC

Sense mRNA Antisense mRNA

Hybridization S >

No translation
and
no ethylene synthesis

  

 

 

Ethylene >

 

nated flowers and developing fruits,

stimulates ethylene production; this, in FIGURE 41.21

turn, hastens fruit ripening. Complex
carbohydrates are broken down into
simple sugars, chlorophylls are broken
down, cell walls become soft, and the
volatile compounds associated with fla-
vor and scent in ripe fruits are produced.

One of the first observations that led

Genetic regulation of fruit ripening. An antisense copy of the gene for ethylene
biosynthesis prevents the formation of ethylene and subsequent ripening of transgenic fruit.
‘The antisense strand is complementary to the sequence for the ethylene biosynthesis gene.
After transcription, the antisense mRNA pairs with the sense mRNA, and the double-
stranded mRNA cannot be translated into a functional protein. Ethylene is not produced,
and the fruit does not ripen. The fruit is sturdier for shipping in its unripened form and can
be ripened later with exposure to ethylene. Thus, while wild-type tomatoes may already be
rotten and damaged by the time they reach stores, transgenic tomatoes stay fresh longer.

to the recognition of ethylene as a plant

hormone was the premature ripening in

bananas produced by gases coming from oranges. Such rela-
tionships have led to major commercial uses of ethylene.
For example, tomatoes are often picked green and artifi-
cially ripened later by the application of ethylene. Ethylene
is widely used to speed the ripening of lemons and oranges
as well. Carbon dioxide has the opposite effect of arresting
ripening. Fruits are often shipped in an atmosphere of car-
bon dioxide. A biotechnology solution has also been devel-
oped (figure 41.21). One of the genes necessary for ethylene
biosynthesis has been cloned, and its antisense copy has
been inserted into the tomato genome. The antisense copy
of the gene is a nucleotide sequence that is complementary
to the sense copy of the gene. In this transgenic plant, both
the sense and antisense sequences for the ethylene biosyn-
thesis gene are transcribed. The sense and antisense mRNA
sequences then pair with each other. This blocks transla-
tion, which requires single-stranded RNA; ethylene is not
synthesized, and the transgenic tomatoes do not ripen.
Sturdy green tomatoes can be shipped without ripening and

822 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

rotting. Exposing these tomatoes to ethylene later will allow
them to ripen.

Studies have shown that ethylene plays an important eco-
logical role. Ethylene production increases rapidly when a
plant is exposed to ozone and other toxic chemicals, temper-
ature extremes, drought, attack by pathogens or herbivores,
and other stresses. The increased production of ethylene
that occurs can accelerate the loss of leaves or fruits that have
been damaged by these stresses. Some of the damage associ-
ated with exposure to ozone is due to the ethylene produced
by the plants. The production of ethylene by plants attacked
by herbivores or infected with diseases may be a signal to ac-
tivate the defense mechanisms of the plants. This may in-
clude the production of molecules toxic to the pests.

 

Ethylene, a simple gaseous hydrocarbon, is a naturally
occurring plant hormone. Among its numerous effects is
the stimulation of ripening in fruit. Ethylene production
is also elevated in response to environmental stress.

 
