Gibberellins

Gibberellins are named after the fungus Gibberella fu-
jikuroi, which causes rice plants, on which it is parasitic, to
grow abnormally tall. Japanese plant pathologist Eiichi
Kurosawa investigated Bakane (“foolish seedling”) disease
in the 1920s. He grew Gibberella in culture and obtained a
substance that, when applied to rice plants, produced
bakane. This substance was isolated and the structural for-
mula identified by Japanese chemists in 1939. British
chemists reconfirmed the formula in 1954. Although such
chemicals were first thought to be only a curiosity, they
have since turned out to belong to a large class of more
than 100 naturally occurring plant hormones called gib-
berellins. All are acidic and are usually abbreviated to GA
(for gibberellic acid), with a different subscript (GA1, GA,
and so forth) to distinguish each one. While gibberellins
function endogenously as hormones, they also function as
pheromones in ferns. In ferns gibberellin-like compounds
released from one gametophyte can trigger the develop-
ment of male reproductive structures on a neighboring ga-
metophyte.

Gibberellins, which are synthesized in the apical por-
tions of stems and roots, have important effects on stem
elongation. The elongation effect is enhanced if auxin is
also present. The application of gibberellins to dwarf mu-
tants is known to restore the normal growth and develop-
ment in many plants (figure 41.18). Some dwarf mutants
produce insufficient amounts of gibberellin; while others
lack the ability to perceive gibberellin. The large number
of gibberellins are all part of a complex biosynthetic path-
way that has been unraveled using gibberellin-deficient
mutants in maize (corn). While many of these gibberellins
are intermediate forms in the production of GAj, recent
work shows that different forms may have specific biologi-
cal roles.

In chapter 41, we noted the role gibberellins stimulate
the production of *-amylase and other hydrolytic en-
zymes needed for utilization of food resources during ger-
mination and establishment of cereal seedlings. How are
the genes encoding these enzymes transcribed? Experi-
mental studies in the aleurone layer surrounding the en-
dosperms of cereal grains have shown that transcription
occurs when the gibberellins initiate a burst of messenger
RNA (mRNA) and protein synthesis. GA somehow en-
hances DNA binding proteins, which in turn allow DNA
transcription of a gene. Synthesis of DNA does not seem
to occur during the early stages of seed germination but
becomes important when the radicle has grown through
the seed coats.

Gibberellins also affect a number of other aspects of
plant growth and development. These hormones also has-
ten seed germination, apparently because they can substi-
tute for the effects of cold or light requirements in this
process. Gibberellins are used commercially to space grape

820 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

FIGURE 41.18

Effects of gibberellins. This rapid cycling member of the
mustard family plant (Brassica rapa) will “bolt” and flower because
of increased gibberellin levels. Mutants such as the rosette mutant
shown here (lef?) are defective in producing gibberellins. They can
be rescued by applying gibberellins. Other mutants have been
identified that are defective in perceiving gibberellins and they
will not respond to gibberellin applications.

 

FIGURE 41.19

Applications of gibberellins increase the space between
grapes. Larger grapes develop because there is more room
between individual grapes.

flowers by extending internode length so the fruits have
more room to grow (figure 41.19).

 

Gibberellins are an important class of plant hormones
that are produced in the apical regions of shoots and
roots. They play the major role in controlling stem
elongation for most plants, acting in concert with auxin
and other hormones.

 
