 

FIGURE 41.35
Sleep movements in bean leaves. In
the bean plant, leaf blades are oriented
horizontally during the day and
vertically at night.

10:00 p.m.

The leaves of some plants with similar mechanisms may
track the sun, with their blades oriented at right angles to
it; how their orientation is directed is, however, poorly un-
derstood. Such leaves can move quite rapidly (as much as
15° an hour). This movement maximizes photosynthesis
and is analogous to solar panels that are designed to track
the sun.

Some of the most familiar of these reversible changes
are seen in leaves and flowers that “open” during the day
and “close” at night. For example, the flowers of four
o’clocks open at 4 P.M. and evening primrose petals open at
night. The blades of plant leaves that exhibit such a daily
shift in position may not actually fold; instead, their orien-
tation may be changed as a result of turgor movements.
Bean leaves are horizontal during the day when their pul-
vini are turgid, but become more or less vertical at night as
the pulvini lose turgor (figure 41.35). These sleep move-
ments reduce water loss from transpiration during the
night, but maximize photosynthetic surface area during the
day. In these cases, the movement is closely tied to an in-
ternal rhythm.

Circadian Clocks

How do leaves know when to “sleep”? They have endoge-
nous circadian clocks that set a rhythm with a period of
about 24 hours (actually it is closer to 22 or 23 hours).

While there are shorter and much longer, naturally occur-

 

3:00 p.m.

 

12:00 MIDNIGHT

ring rhythms, circadian rhythms are particularly common
and widespread because of the day-night cycle on earth.
Jean de Mairan, a French astronomer, first identified circa-
dian rhythms in 1729. He studied the sensitive plant which,
in addition to having a touch response, closes its leaflets
and leaves at night like the bean plant described above.
When de Mairan put the plants in total darkness, they con-
tinued “sleeping” and “waking” just as they did when ex-
posed to night and day. This is one of four characteristics
of a circadian rhythm: it must continue to run in the ab-
sence of external inputs. It must be about 24 hours in dura-
tion and can be reset or entrained. (Perhaps you’ve experi-
enced entrainment when traveling to a different time zone
in the form of jet-lag recovery.) The fourth characteristic is
that the clock can compensate for differences in tempera-
ture. This is quite unique when you consider what you
know about biochemical reactions; most rates of reactions
vary significantly based on temperature. Circadian clocks
exist in many organisms and appear to have evolved inde-
pendently multiple times. The mechanism behind the clock
is not fully understood, but is being actively investigated at
the molecular level.

 

Turgor movements of plants are reversible and involve
changes in the turgor pressure of specific cells.
Circadian clocks are endogenous timekeepers that keep
plant movements and other responses synchronized
with the environment.

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 833
