Identity Genes and the Formation of
Floral Meristem and Floral Organs

Arabidopsis and snapdragon are valuable model systems
for identifying flowering genes and understanding their
interactions. The three pathways, discussed in the previ-
ous section, lead to an adult meristem becoming a floral
meristem by either activating or repressing the inhibition
of floral meristem identity genes (figure 41.32). Two of
the key floral meristem identity genes are LEAFY and
APETALAI. These genes establish the meristem as a
flower meristem. They then turn on floral organ identity
genes. The floral organ identity genes define four con-
centric whorls moving inward in the floral meristem as
sepal, petal, stamen, and carpel. Meyerowitz and Coen
proposed a model, called the ABC model, to explain how
three classes of floral organ identity genes could specify
four distinct organ types (figure 41.33). The ABC model
proposes that three classes of organ identity genes (A, B,
and C) specify the floral organs in the four floral whorls.
By studying mutants the researchers have determined the
following:

1. Class A genes alone specify the sepals.

2. Class A and class B genes together specify the petals.

3. Class B and class C genes together specify the
stamens.

4. Class C genes alone specify the carpels.

The beauty of their ABC model is that it is entirely testable
by making different combinations of floral organ identity

Repression of floral inhibitors

Activation of floral meristem identity genes

   

 

mutants. Each class of genes is expressed in two whorls,
yielding four different combinations of the gene products.
When any one class is missing, there are aberrant floral or-
gans in predictable positions.

It is important to recognize that this is actually only the
beginning of the making of a flower. These organ identity
genes are transcription factors that turn on many more
genes that will actually give rise to the three-dimensional
flower. There are also genes that “paint” the petals. Com-
plex biochemical pathways lead to the accumulation of an-
thocyanin pigments in vacuoles. These pigments can be or-
ange, red, or purple and the actual color is influenced by
pH and by the shape of the petal.

The Formation of Gametes

The ovule within the carpel has origins more ancient than
the angiosperms. Floral parts are modified leaves, and
within the ovule is the female gametophyte. This next
generation develops from placental tissue in the ovary. A
megaspore mother cell develops and meiotically gives rise
to the embryo sac. Usually two layers of integument tissue
form around this embryo sac and will become the seed
coat. Genes responsible for the initiation of integuments
and also those responsible for the formation of the integu-
ment have been identified. Some also affect leaf structure.
This chapter has focused on the complex and elegant
process that gives rise to the reproductive structure called
the flower. It is indeed a metamorphosis, but the subtle
shift from mitosis to meiosis in the megaspore mother cell
leading to the development of a haploid,
gamete-producing gametophyte is per-
haps even more critical. The same can be
said for pollen formation in the anther of
the stamen. As we will see in the next
chapter, the flower houses the haploid
generations that will produce gametes.
The flower also functions to increase the
probability that male and female gametes
from different (or sometimes the same
plant) will unite.

Floral meristem

Floral structures form as a result of
floral meristem identity genes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cold 7 . *
temperature turning on floral organ identity genes
which specify where sepals, petals,
stamens, and carpels will form. This
is followed by organ development
J which involves many complex
aot nt ‘Autonomous Temperature pathways that account for floral
jependen lependen iversi ji
pathway pathway pathway diversity among species.
FIGURE 41.32

Model for flowering. The light-dependent, temperature-dependent, and autonomous
flowering pathways promote the formation of floral meristems from adult meristems by
repressing floral inhibitors and activating floral meristem identity genes.

830 = Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction
