photoperiods; they will not flower if the days are too
long, and they also will not flower if the days are too
short. In some species, there is a sharp distinction be-
tween long and short d In others, flowering occurs
more rapidly or slowly depending on the length of day.
These plants rely on other flowering pathways as well
and are called facultative long- or short-day plants. The
garden pea is an example of a facultative long-day plant.
In all of these plants, it is actually the length of darkness
(night), not the length of day, that is physiologically sig-
nificant. Using light as a cue permits plants to flower

 

when abiotic environmental conditions are optimal, polli-
nators are available, and competition for resources with
other plants may be less. For example, the spring
ephemerals flower in the woods before the canopy leafs
out, blocking sunlight necessary for photosynthesis.

At middle latitudes, most long-day plants flower in the
spring and early summer; examples of such plants include
clover, irises, lettuce, spinach, and hollyhocks. Short-day
plants usually flower in late summer and fall, and include
chrysanthemums, goldenrods, poinsettias, soybeans, and
many weeds. Commercial plant growers use these re-
sponses to day length to bring plants into flower at spe-
cific times. For example, photoperiod is manipulated in
greenhouses so poinsettias flower just in time for the
winter holidays (figure 41.28). The geographic distribu-
tion of certain plants may be determined by flowering re-
sponses to day length.

Photoperiod is perceived by several different forms of
phytochrome and also a blue-light-sensitive molecule
(cryptochrome). The conformational change in a light re-
ceptor molecule triggers a cascade of events that leads to
the production of a flower. There is a link between light
and the circadian rhythm regulated by an internal clock
that facilitates or inhibits flowering. At a molecular level
the gaps between light signaling and production of flowers
are rapidly filling in and the control mechanisms are quite
complex. Here is one example of how day length affects a
specific flowering gene in Arabidopsis, a facultative long-day
plant that flowers in response to both far-red and blue
light. Red light inhibits flowering. The gene CONSTANS
(CO) is expressed under long days but not short days. The
loss of CO product does not alter when a plant flowers
under short days, but delays flowering under long days.
What happens is that the gene is positively regulated by
cryptochrome that perceives blue light under long days.
Cryptochrome appears to inhibit the inhibition of flower-
ing by phytochrome B exposed to red light. Simply put,
flowering is promoted by repressing a gene that represses
flowering! CO is a transcription factor that turns on other
genes which results in the expression of LEAFY. As dis-
cussed in the section on phase change, LEAFY is one of the
key genes that “tells” a meristem to switch over to flower-
ing. We will see that other pathways also converge on this
important gene.

 

 

FIGURE 41.28

Manipulation of photoperiod in greenhouses ensures that
short-day poinsettias flower in time for the winter holidays.
Note that the colorful “petals” are actually sepals. Even after
flowering is induced, there are many developmental events leading
to the production of species-specific flowers.

The Flowering Hormone: Does It Exist? The Holy
Grail in plant biology has been a flowering hormone,
quested unsuccessfully for more than 50 years. A consider-
able amount of evidence demonstrates the existence of sub-
stances that promote flowering and substances that inhibit
it. Grafting experiments have shown that these substances
can move from leaves to shoots. The complexity of their
interactions, as well as the fact that multiple chemical mes-
sengers are evidently involved, has made this scientifically
and commercially interesting search very difficult, and to
this day, the existence of a flowering hormone remains
strictly hypothetical. We do know that LEAFY can be ex-
pressed in the vegetative as well as the reproductive por-
tions of plants. Clearly, information about day length gath-
ered by leaves is transmitted to shoot apices. Given that
there are multiple pathways to flowering, several signals
may be facilitating communication between leaves and
shoots. We also know that roots can be a source of floral
inhibitors affecting shoot development.

 

 

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 827
