| 41.4 Many short-term responses to the environment do not require growth.

Larger predators, microbes, water, and wind often present
a plant with rapid immediate stress. Response, to be effec-
tive, must also be immediate. There is little time for
growth, and plants instead invoke a variety of other kinds
of responses. Many environmental cues trigger rapid and
reversible localized plant movements, for example. The
rapid folding of leaves can startle a potential predator. Leaf
folding can also prevent water loss by reducing the surface
area available for transpiration. Some localized plant move-
ments are triggered by unpredictable environmental sig-
nals, Other movements are tied into daily internal rhythms
established by cyclic environmental signals like light and
temperature. Plants lack a nervous system in the conven-
tional sense. Some of the rapid signaling, however, is the
result of electric charge moving through an organ as a wave
of membrane ion exchange, not unlike that seen in animals.
This is translated into movement by changing the turgor
pressure of cells.

Turgor Movement

Turgor is pressure within a living cell resulting from diffu-
sion of water into it. If water leaves turgid cells (ones with

Pulvinus Cells retaining

turgor

 

  

(a) Ss (b)

832 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

turgor pressure), the cells may collapse, causing plant
movement; conversely, water entering a limp cell may also
cause movement as the cell once more becomes turgid.
Many other plants, including those of the legume family
(Fabaceae), exhibit leaf movements in response to touch or
other stimuli. After exposure to a stimulus, the changes in
leaf orientation are mostly associated with rapid turgor
pressure changes in pulvini (singular: pulvinus), which are
multicellular swellings located at the base of each leaf or
leaflet. When leaves with pulvini, such as those of the sen-
sitive plant (Mimosa pudica), are stimulated by wind, heat,
touch, or, in some instances, intense light, an electrical sig-
nal is generated. The electrical signal is translated into a
chemical signal, with potassium ions, followed by water,
migrating from the cells in one half of a pulvinus to the in-
tercellular spaces in the other half. The loss of turgor in
half of the pulvinus causes the leaf to “fold.” The move-
ments of the leaves and leaflets of the sensitive plant are es-
pecially rapid; the folding occurs within a second or two
after the leaves are touched (figure 41.34). Over a span of
about 15 to 30 minutes after the leaves and leaflets have
folded, water usually diffuses back into the same cells from
which it left, and the leaf returns to its original position.

Cells losing
turgor

 

FIGURE 41.34

Sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica). (a) The
blades of Mimosa leaves are divided into
numerous leaflets; at the base of each leaflet
isa swollen structure called a pulvinus.

(d) Changes in turgor cause leaflets to fold
in response to a stimulus. () When leaves
are touched (center two leaves above), they
fold due to loss of turgor.
