Shoot
removed
here

,

¥

Shoot -
removed “a

- “4

Intact Rooted Flowering
plant shoot rooted

shoot
(a) Shoot florally determined

FIGURE 41.30

Shoot “
removed
here

—
Shoot
removed : f
Intact Rooted Flowering
plant shoot rooted
shoot

(b) Shoot not florally determined

Plants can remember. At a certain point in the flowering process, shoots become committed to making a flower. This is called floral
determination. (a) Florally determined axillary buds “remember” their position when rooted in a pot. That is, they produce the same
number of nodes that they would have if they had grown out on the plant, and then they flower. (#) Those that are not yet florally
determined cannot remember how many nodes they have left, so they start counting again. That is, they develop like a seedling and then

flower. (After McDaniel 1996.)

Determination for flowering is tested at the organ or
whole plant level by changing the environment and ascer-
taining whether or not the fate has changed. How does flo-
ral determination correlate with molecular level changes?
In Arabidopsis, floral determination correlates with the in-
crease of LEAFY gene expression and has occurred by the
time a second flowering gene, APETALAI, is expressed.
Because all three flowering pathways appear to converge
with increased levels of LEAFY, this determination event
should occur in species with a variety of balances among

the pathways.

 

Plants use light receptor molecules to measure the
length of night. This information is then used to signal
pathways that promote or inhibit flowering. Light
receptors in the leaves trigger events that result in
changes in the shoot meristem. Vernalization is the
requirement for a period of chilling before a plant can
flower. The autonomous pathway leads to flowering
independent of environmental cues. Plants integrate
information about position in regulating flowering and
both promoters and inhibitors of flowering are
important.

 

  

Control plants:
Control plants: Experimental plants: Lower leaves were

no treatment pot-on-pot treatment continually removed
FIGURE 41.31

Roots can inhibit flowering. Adventitious roots formed as
bottomless pots were continuously placed over growing tobacco
plants, delaying flowering. The delay in flowering is caused by the
roots, not the loss of the leaves. This was shown by removing leaves
on control plants at the same time and in the same position as leaves
on experimental plants that became buried as pots were added.

Chapter 41 How Plants Grow in Response to Their Environment 829
