Chapter 41

Summary

SECON

   

www.mhhe.com/raven6e www.biocourse.com

Questions Media Resources

41.1 Plant growth is often guided by environmental cues.

 

¢ Tropisms in plants are growth responses to external
stimuli, such as light, gravity, or contact.

¢ Dormancy is a plant adaptation that carries a plant
through unfavorable seasons or periods of drought.

41.2. The hormones that guide growth are keyed to the

1. In general, which part of a
plant is positively phototropic?
What is the adaptive significance
of this reaction?

z * Photoperiod

environment.

 

¢ Auxin migrates away from light and promotes the
elongation of plant cells on the dark side, causing
stems to bend in the direction of light.

* Cytokinins are necessary for mitosis and cell division
in plants. They promote growth of lateral buds and
inhibit formation of lateral roots.

* Gibberellins, along with auxin, play a major role in
stem elongation in most plants. They also tend to
hasten the germination of seeds and to break
dormancy in buds.

41.3 The environment influences flowering.

2. How does auxin affect the
plasticity of the plant cell walls?

- * Hormones

* Student Research:
Plant Growth

3. Where are most cytokinins
produced? From what
biomolecule do cytokinins
appear to be derived?

4, What plant hormones could
be lacking in genetically dwarfed
plants?

 

 

¢ The transition of a shoot meristem from vegetative to
adult development is called phase change. During
phase change, plants gain competence to produce a
floral signal(s) and or perceive a signal.

© The light-dependent pathway uses information from
light receptor molecules integrated with a biological
clock to determine if the length of night is sufficient
for flowering.

¢ The autonomous path functions independently of
environmental cues. Internal floral inhibitor(s) from
roots and leaves and floral promoter(s) from leaves
move through the plant.

* Student Research:
Selection in Flowering
Plants

5. A plant has undergone phase
change. Although it is an adult,
it does not flower. How might

you get this plant to flower?

 

6. You have recently moved
from Canada to Mexico and
brought some seeds from your
favorite plants. They germinate
and produce beautiful leaves, but
never flower. What went wrong?

41.4 Many short-term responses to the environment do not require growth.

 

¢ Changes in turgor pressure reflect responses to
environmental signals that can protect plants from
predation.

¢ Other reversible movements in plants are caused by
changes in turgor pressure that are regulated by
internal circadian rhythms.

¢ Plants have the ability to recognize and respond to
invaders through cellular level recognition and
response.

836 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

7. How are motor cells involved
in the function of the pulvinus?
What happens in the motor cells
of the sensitive plant (Mimosa
pudica) when its leaves are
touched?

8. In what ways can a plant
protect itself from pathogenic
microbes? From animals?
