Plant Defense Responses

Interactions between plants and other organisms can be
symbiotic (for example, nitrogen-fixing bacteria and
mycorrhizae) or pathogenic. In evolutionary terms, these
two types of interactions may simply be opposite sides of
the same coin. The interactions have many common as-
pects and are the result of coevolution between two species
that signal and respond to each other. In the case of
pathogens, the microbe or pest is “winning,” at least for
that second in evolutionary time. In chapter 38, we dis-
cussed surface barriers the plant constructs to block inva-
sion. In this section, we will focus on cellular level re-
sponses to attacks by microbes and animals.

Recognizing the Invader

Half a century ago, Flor proposed that there is a plant re-
sistance gene (R) whose product interacts with that of a
pathogen avirulence gene (avr). This is called the gene-for-
gene model and several pairs of avr and R genes have been
cloned in different species pathogenized by microbes,
fungi, and insects, in one case. This has been motivated
partially by the agronomic benefit of identifying genes that
can be added to protect other plants from invaders. Much
is now known about the signal transduction pathways that
follow the recognition of the pathogen by the R gene.
These pathways lead to the triggering of the hypersensitive
response (HR) which leads to rapid cell death around the
source of the invasion and also a longer-term resistance
(figure 41.36). There is not always a gene-for-gene re-
sponse, but plants still have defense responses to pathogens
and also mechanical wounding. Some of the response path-
ways may be similar. Also, oligosaccharins in the cell walls
may serve as recognition and signaling molecules.

While our focus is on invaders outside the plant king-
dom, more is being learned about how parasitic plants in-
vade other plants. There are specific molecules released
from the root hairs of the host that the parasitic plant rec-
ognizes and responds to with invasive action. Less is known
about the host response and so far the different defense
genes that are activated appear to be ineffective.

Responding to the Invader

When a plant is attacked and there is gene-for-gene recog-
nition, the HR response leads to very rapid cell death
around the site of attack. This seals off the wounded tissue

834 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

to prevent the pathogen or pest from moving into the rest
of the plant. Hydrogen peroxide and nitric oxide are pro-
duced and may signal a cascade of biochemical events re-
sulting in the localized death of host cells. They may also
have negative effects on the pathogen, although antioxidant
abilities have coevolved in pathogens. Other antimicrobial
agents produced include the phytoalexins which are chemi-
cal defense agents. A variety of pathogenesis-related genes
(PR genes) are expressed and their proteins can either func-
tion as antimicrobial agents or signals for other events that
protect the plant.

In the case of virulent invaders (no R gene recognition),
there are changes in local cell walls that at least partially
block the movement of the pathogen or pest farther into
the plant. In this case there is not an HR response and the
local plant cells are not suicidal.

When an insect takes a mouthful of a leaf, defense
responses are also triggered. Mechanical damage causes re-
sponses that have some similar components, but the reac-
tion may be slower. Biochemically, it is distinct from some
of the events triggered by signals in the insect’s mouth.
Such responses are collectively called wound responses.
Wound responses are a challenge in designing other types
of experiments with plants that involve cutting or otherwise
mechanically damaging the tissue. It is important to run
control experiments to be sure you are answering your
question and not observing a wound response.

Preparing for Future Attacks

In addition to the HR or other local responses, plants are
capable of a systemic response to a pathogen or pest at-
tack. This is called a systemic acquired response (SAR).
Several pathways lead to broad-ranging resistance that
lasts for a period of days. The signals that induce SAR in-
clude salicylic acid and jasmonic acid. Salicylic acid is the
active ingredient in aspirin too! SAR allows the plant to
respond more quickly if it is attacked again. However, this
is not the same as the human immune response where an-
tibodies (proteins) that recognize specific antigens (for-
cign proteins) persist in the body. SAR is neither as spe-
cific or long lasting.

 

Plants defend themselves from invasion in ways
reminiscent of the animal immune system. When an.
invader is recognized, localized cell death seals off the
infected area.

 
