‘Temperature-Dependent Pathway

Lysenko solved the problem of winter wheat seed rotting in
the fields in Russia by chilling the seeds and planting them
in the spring. Winter wheat would not flower without a pe-
riod of chilling, called vernalization. Unfortunately a great
many problems, including mistreatment of Russian geneti-
cists, resulted from this scientifically significant discovery.
Lysenko erroneously concluded that he had converted one
species, winter wheat, to another, spring wheat, by simply
altering the environment. There was a shift from science to
politics. Genetics and Darwinian evolution were suspect for
half a century. Social history aside, the valuable lesson here
is that cold temperatures can accelerate or permit flowering
in many species. As with light, this ensures that plants
flower at more optimal times.

Vernalization may be necessary for seeds or plants in
later stages of development. Analysis of mutants in
Arabidopsis and pea indicate that vernalization is a sepa-
rate flowering pathway that may be linked to the hor-
mone gibberellin. In this pathway, repression may also
lead to flowering. High levels of one of the genes in the
pathway may block the promotion of flowering by gib-
berellins. When plants are chilled, there is less of this
gene product and gibberellin activity may increase. It is
known that gibberellins enhance the expression of
LEAFY. One proposal is that both the vernalization and
autonomous pathways share a common intersection af-
fecting gibberellin promotion of flowering. Weigel has
shown that gibberellin actually binds the promoter of the
LEAFY gene, so its effect on flowering is direct. The con-
nection between gibberellin levels and temperature also
needs to be understood.

Autonomous Pathway

The autonomous pathway to flowering is independent of
external cues except for basic nutrition. Presumably this
was the first pathway to evolve. Day-neutral plants often
depend primarily on the autonomous pathway which allows
plants to “count” and “remember.” A field of day-neutral
tobacco will produce a uniform number of nodes before
flowering. If the shoots of these plants are removed at dif-
ferent positions, axillary buds will grow out and produce
the same number of nodes as the removed portion of the
shoot (figure 41.29). At a certain point in development
shoots become committed or determined to flower (figure
41.30). The upper axillary buds of flowering tobacco will
remember their position when rooted or grafted. The ter-
minal shoot tip becomes florally determined about four
nodes before it initiates a flower. In some other species,
this commitment is less stable and/or occurs later.

How do shoots know where they are and at some point
“remember” that information? It is clear that there are in-
hibitory signals from the roots. If bottomless pots are con-
tinuously placed over a growing tobacco plant and filled

828 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

Shoot at
removed
here
—
Intact Shoot Replacement
plant removed shoot
(a) Upper axillary bud removed
Shoot
removed
-
> -*
Intact Shoot Replacement
plant removed shoot

(b) Lower axillary bud removed

FIGURE 41.29
Plants can count. When axillary buds of flowering tobacco
plants are released from apical dominance by removing the main
shoot, they replace the number of nodes that were initiated by the
main shoot. (After McDaniel 1996.)

with soil, flowering is delayed by the formation of adventi-
tious roots (figure 41.31). Control experiments with leaf re-
moval show that it is the addition of roots and not the loss
of leaves that delays flowering. A balance between floral
promoting and inhibiting signals may regulate when flow-
ering occurs in the autonomous pathway and the other
pathways as well.
