Birds. Several interesting groups of plants are regularly
visited and pollinated by birds, especially the humming-
birds of North and South America and the sunbirds of
Africa (figure 42.12). Such plants must produce large
amounts of nectar because if the birds do not find enough
food to maintain themselves, they will not continue to visit
flowers of that plant. Flowers producing large amounts of
nectar have no advantage in being visited by insects because
an insect could obtain its energy requirements at a single
flower and would not cross-pollinate the flower. How are
these different selective forces balanced in flowers that are
“specialized” for hummingbirds and sunbirds?

Ultraviolet light is highly visible to insects. Carotenoids,
yellow or orange pigments frequently found in plants, are
responsible for the colors of many flowers, such as sunflow-
ers and mustard. Carotenoids reflect both in the yellow
range and in the ultraviolet range, the mixture resulting in
a distinctive color called “bee’s purple.” Such yellow flow-
ers may also be marked in distinctive ways normally invisi-
ble to us, but highly visible to bees and other insects (figure
42.13). These markings can be in the form of a bull’s-eye
or a landing strip.

Red does not stand out as a distinct color to most in-
sects, but it is a very conspicuous color to birds. To most
insects, the red upper leaves of poinsettias look just like the
other leaves of the plant. Consequently, even though the
flowers produce abundant supplies of nectar and attract
hummingbirds, insects tend to bypass them. Thus, the red
color both signals to birds the presence of abundant nectar
and makes that nectar as inconspicuous as possible to in-
sects. Red is also seen again in fruits that are dispersed by

birds.

Other Animals. Other animals including bats and small
rodents may aid in pollination. The signals here also are
species specific. These animals also assist in dispersing the
seeds and fruits that result from pollination. Monkeys are
attracted to orange and yellow and will be effective in dis-
persing those fruits.

Wind-Pollinated Angiosperms

Many angiosperms, representing a number of different
groups, are wind-pollinated—a characteristic of early seed
plants. Among them are such familiar plants as oaks,
birches, cottonwoods, grasses, sedges, and nettles. The
flowers of these plants are small, greenish, and odorless;
their corollas are reduced or absent (see figures 42.14 and
42.15). Such flowers often are grouped together in fairly
large numbers and may hang down in tassels that wave
about in the wind and shed pollen freely. Many wind-
pollinated plants have stamen- and carpel-containing flow-
ers separated among individuals or on a single individual. If
the pollen-producing and ovule-bearing flowers are sepa-
rated, it is certain that pollen released to the wind will
reach a flower other than the one that sheds it, a strategy

 

 

FIGURE 42.12

Hummingbirds and flowers. A long-tailed hermit hummingbird
extracts nectar from the flowers of Heliconia imbricata in the
forests of Costa Rica. Note the pollen on the bird’s beak.
Hummingbirds of this group obtain nectar primarily from long,
curved flowers that more or less match the length and shape of
their beaks.

 

(@) (b)

FIGURE 42.13

How a bee sees a flower. (a) The yellow flower of
Ludwigia peruviana (Onagraceae) photographed in normal
light and (6) with a filter that selectively transmits
ultraviolet light. The outer sections of the petals reflect
both yellow and ultraviolet, a mixture of colors called
“bee’s purple”; the inner portions of the petals reflect
yellow only and therefore appear dark in the photograph
that emphasizes ultraviolet reflection. To a bee, this
flower appears as if it has a conspicuous central bull’s-eye.

that greatly promotes outcrossing. Some wind-pollinated
plants, especially trees and shrubs, flower in the spring, be-
fore the development of their leaves can interfere with the
wind-borne pollen. Wind-pollinated species do not depend
on the presence of a pollinator for species survival.

 

Bees are the most frequent and characteristic
pollinators of flowers. Insects often are attracted by the
odors of flowers. Bird-pollinated flowers are
characteristically odorless and red, with the nectar not
readily accessed by insects.

 

Chapter 42 Plant Reproduction 845
