Self-Pollination

All of the modes of pollination that we have considered
thus far tend to lead to outcrossing, which is as highly ad-
vantageous for plants as it is for eukaryotic organisms gen-
erally. Nevertheless, self-pollination also occurs among an-
giosperms, particularly in temperate regions. Most of the
self-pollinating plants have small, relatively inconspicuous
flowers that shed pollen directly onto the stigma, some-
times even before the bud opens. You might logically ask
why there are many self-pollinated plant species if out-
crossing is just as important genetically for plants as it is for
animals. There are two basic reasons for the frequent oc-
currence of self-pollinated angiosperms:

1. Self-pollination obviously is ecologically advanta-
geous under certain circumstances because self-
pollinators do not need to be visited by animals to
produce seed. As a result, self-pollinated plants expend
less energy in the production of pollinator attractants
and can grow in areas where the kinds of insects or
other animals that might visit them are absent or very
scarce—as in the Arctic or at high elevations.

2. In genetic terms, self-pollination produces progenies
that are more uniform than those that result from out-
crossing. Remember that because meiosis is involved,
there is still recombination and the offspring will not
be identical to the parent. However, such progenies
may contain high proportions of individuals well-
adapted to particular habitats. Self-pollination in nor-
mally outcrossing species tends to produce large num-
bers of ill-adapted individuals because it brings
together deleterious recessive genes; but some of these
combinations may be highly advantageous in particu-
lar habitats. In such habitats, it may be advantageous
for the plant to continue self-pollinating indefinitely.
This is the main reason many self-pollinating plant
species are weeds—not only have humans made weed
habitats uniform, but they have also spread the weeds
all over the world.

 

 

Factors That Promote Outcrossing

Outcrossing, as we have stressed, is of critical importance
for the adaptation and evolution of all eukaryotic organ-
isms. Often flowers contain both stamens and pistils, which
increase the likelihood of self-pollination. One strategy to
promote outcrossing is to separate stamens and pistils.

In various species of flowering plants—for example, wil-
lows and some mulberries—staminate and pistillate flowers
may occur on separate plants. Such plants, which produce
only ovules or only pollen, are called dioecious, from the
Greek words for “two houses.” Obviously, they cannot self-
pollinate and must rely exclusively on outcrossing. In other
kinds of plants, such as oaks, birches, corn (maize), and
pumpkins, separate male and female flowers may both be
produced on the same plant. Such plants are called monoe-

846 Part XI. Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

 

FIGURE 42.14
Staminate and
pistillate flowers
of a birch, Betula.
Birches are
monoecious; their
staminate flowers
hang down in long,
yellowish tassels,
while their pistillate
flowers mature into
clusters of small,
brownish, conelike
structures.

FIGURE 42.15
Wind-pollinated
flowers. The large
yellow anthers,
dangling on very
slender filaments, are
hanging out, about to
shed their pollen to the
wind; later, these
flowers will become
pistillate, with long,
feathery stigmas—well
suited for trapping
windblown pollen—
sticking far out of them.
Many grasses, like this
one, are therefore
dichogamous.

cious, meaning “one house” (figure 42.14). In monoecious
plants, the separation of pistillate and staminate flowers,
which may mature at different times, greatly enhances the
probability of outcrossing.

Even if, as usually is the case, functional stamens and
pistils are both present in each flower of a particular plant
species, these organs may reach maturity at different times.
Plants in which this occurs are called dichogamous. If the
stamens mature first, shedding their pollen before the stig-
mas are receptive, the flower is effectively staminate at that
time. Once the stamens have finished shedding pollen, the
stigma or stigmas may then become receptive, and the
flower may become essentially pistillate (figures 42.15 and
42.16). This has the same effect as if the flower completely
lacked either functional stamens or functional pistils; its
outcrossing rate is thereby significantly increased.
