FIGURE 42.9

Pollen grains. (a) In the Easter lily,
Lilium candidum, the pollen tube
emerges from the pollen grain through
the groove or furrow that occurs on one
side of the grain. (J) Ina plant of the
sunflower family, Hyoseris longiloba, three
pores are hidden among the
ornamentation of the pollen grain. The
pollen tube may grow out through any
one of them.

 

Pollen Formation

Pollen grains form in the two pollen sacs located in the
anther. Each pollen sac contains specialized chambers in
which the microspore mother cells are enclosed and pro-
tected. The microspore mother cells undergo meiosis to
form four haploid microspores. Subsequently, mitotic di-
visions form four pollen grains. Inside each pollen grain

is a generative cell; this cell will later divide to produce i 2 Antipodals

two sperm cells. fe Hy) Grd antipodal
Pollen grain shapes are specialized for specific flower not visible)

species. As discussed in more detail later in the chapter, ; 4 i 2 Polar nuclei

fertilization requires that the pollen grain grow a tube that
penetrates the style until it encounters the ovary. Most
pollen grains have a furrow from which this pollen tube | og 1 Fog
emerges; some grains have three furrows (figure 42.9).

Embryo Sac Formation.

Eggs develop in the ovules of the angiosperm flower.
Within each ovule is a megaspore mother cell. Each
megaspore mother cell undergoes meiosis to produce
four haploid megaspores. In most plants, only one of
these megaspores, however, survives; the rest are ab-
sorbed by the ovule. The lone remaining megaspore un-
dergoes repeated mitotic divisions to produce eight hap-
loid nuclei that are enclosed within a seven-celled 4 jrature embryo sac ofa lily. The eight haploid muclei
embryo sac. Within the embryo sac, the cight nuclei are produced by mitotic divisions of the haploid megaspore are
arranged in precise positions. One nucleus is located near labeled.

the opening of the embryo sac in the egg cell. Two are
located in a single cell in the middle of the embryo sac
and are called polar nuclei; two nuclei are contained in
cells called synergids that flank the egg cell; and the
other three nuclei reside in cells called the antipodals, lo-
cated at the end of the sac, opposite the egg cell (figure In angiosperms, both male and female structures often
42.10). The first step in uniting the sperm in the pollen occur together in the same individual flower. These
grain with the egg and polar nuclei is to get pollen ger- reproductive structures are not a permanent part of the

oo . . adult individual and the germ line is not set aside early
minating on the stigma of the carpel and growing toward in development
the embryo sac. ———

 

FIGURE 42.10

 

 

Chapter 42. Plant Reproduction 843
