The Nuclear Envelope: Getting In and Out

The surface of the nucleus is bounded by two phospho-
lipid bilayer membranes, which together make up the
nuclear envelope (sce figure 5.10). The outer mem-
brane of the nuclear envelope is continuous with the
cytoplasm’s interior membrane system, called the endo-
plasmic reticulum. Scattered over the surface of the
nuclear envelope, like craters on the moon, are shallow
depressions called nuclear pores. These pores form 50
to 80 nanometers apart at locations where the two mem-
brane layers of the nuclear envelope pinch together.
Rather than being empty, nuclear pores are filled with
proteins that act as molecular channels, permitting certain
molecules to pass into and out of the nucleus. Passage is
restricted primarily to two kinds of molecules: (1) proteins
moving into the nucleus to be incorporated into nuclear
structures or to catalyze nuclear activities; and (2) RNA
and protein-RNA complexes formed in the nucleus and
exported to the cytoplasm.

The Chromosomes: Packaging the DNA

In both bacteria and eukaryotes, DNA contains the hered-
itary information specifying cell structure and function.
However, unlike the circular DNA of bacteria, the DNA
of eukaryotes is divided into several linear chromosomes.
Except when a cell is dividing, its chromosomes are fully
extended into threadlike strands, called chromatin, of
DNA complexed with protein. This open arrangement
allows proteins to attach to specific nucleotide sequences
along the DNA. Without this access, DNA could not
direct the day-to-day activities of the cell. The chromo-
somes are associated with packaging proteins called
histones. When a cell prepares to divide, the DNA coils
up around the histones into a highly condensed form. In
the initial stages of this condensation, units of histone
can be seen with DNA wrapped around like a sash.
Called nucleosomes, these initial aggregations resemble
beads on a string (figure 5.11). Coiling continues until
the DNA is in a compact mass. Under a light micro-
scope, these fully condensed chromosomes are readily
seen in dividing cells as densely staining rods (figure
5.12). After cell division, eukaryotic chromosomes uncoil
and can no longer be individually distinguished with a
light microscope. Uncoiling the chromosomes into a
more extended form permits enzymes to makes RNA
copies of DNA. Only by means of these RNA copies can
the information in the DNA be used to direct the
synthesis of proteins.

 

The nucleus of a eukaryotic cell contains the cell’s
hereditary apparatus and isolates it from the rest of
the cell. A distinctive feature of eukaryotes is the
organization of their DNA into complex
chromosomes.

 

Chromosome.

   

Central histone | Nucleosome

Spacer histone
r if ESS |
FIGURE 5.11

Nucleosomes. Each nucleosome is a region in which the DNA is
wrapped tightly around a cluster of histone proteins.

 

FIGURE 5.12

Eukaryotic chromosomes. These condensed chromosomes
within an onion root tip are visible under the light microscope
(500x).

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 87
