| 42.2 Flowering plants use animals or wind to transfer pollen between flowers.

Formation of Angiosperm Gametes

Reproductive success depends on uniting the gametes (egg
and sperm) found in the embryo sacs and pollen grains of
flowers. As mentioned previously, plant sexual life cycles
are characterized by an alternation of generations, in which
a diploid sporophyte generation gives rise to a haploid ga-
metophyte generation. In angiosperms, the gametophyte
generation is very small and is completely enclosed within
the tissues of the parent sporophyte. The male gameto-
phytes, or microgametophytes, are pollen grains. The fe-
male gametophyte, or megagametophyte, is the embryo
sac. Pollen grains and the embryo sac both are produced in
separate, specialized structures of the angiosperm flower.

Anther

Megaspore
mother cell (2n)

 

Meiosis
—

FIGURE 42.8

Megaspores (n)

Like animals, angiosperms have separate structures for
producing male and female gametes (figure 42.8), but the
reproductive organs of angiosperms are different from
those of animals in two ways. First, in angiosperms, both
male and female structures usually occur together in the
same individual flower (with exceptions noted in chapter
38). Second, angiosperm reproductive structures are not
permanent parts of the adult individual. Angiosperm flow-
ers and reproductive organs develop seasonally, at times of
the year most favorable for pollination. In some cases, re-
productive structures are produced only once and the par-
ent plant dies. It is significant that the germ line for an-
giosperms is not set aside early in development, but forms
quite late, as detailed in chapter 40.

Pollen grains (n)

(microgametophyte)
=> Meiosis Mitosis
—_—_
mes Ae @
mother cell (en) Microspores (n)
Tube cell Generative
nucleus cell

Surviving
megaspore

   

 

Degenerated

megaspores 8-nucleate embryo sac

(megagametophyte) (n)

Formation of pollen grains and the embryo sac. Diploid (27) microspore mother cells are housed in the anther and divide by meiosis to
form four haploid (7) microspores. Each microspore develops by mitosis into a pollen grain. The generative cell within the pollen grain
will later divide to form two sperm cells. Within the ovule, one diploid megaspore mother cell divides by meiosis to produce four haploid
megaspores. Usually only one of the megaspores will survive, and the other three will degenerate. The surviving megaspore divides by
mitosis to produce an embryo sac with eight nuclei.

842 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction
