of our food is derived, directly or indirectly, from flowering
plants; in fact, more than 90% of the calories we consume
come from just over 100 species. Angiosperms are also
sources of medicine, clothing, and building materials.
While the other plant phyla also provide resources, they
are outnumbered seven to one by the angiosperms. For ex-
ample, there are only about 750 extant gymnosperm
species!

Why Are the Angiosperms Successful?

When flowering plants originated, Africa and South Amer-
ica were still connected to each other, as well as to Antarc-
tica and India, and, via Antarctica, to Australia and New
Zealand (figure 42.3). These landmasses formed the great
continent known as Gondwanaland. In the north, Eurasia
and North America were united, forming another super-
continent called Laurasia. The huge landmass formed by
the union of South America and Africa spanned the equator
and probably had a climate characterized by extreme tem-
peratures and aridity in its interior. Similar climates occur
in the interiors of major continents at present. Much of the
early evolution of angiosperms may have taken place in
patches of drier and less favorable habitat found in the inte-
rior of Gondwanaland. Many features of flowering plants
seem to correlate with successful growth under arid and
semiarid conditions.

The transfer of pollen between flowers of separate
plants, sometimes over long distances, ensures outcrossing
(cross-pollination between individuals of the same
species) and may have been important in the early success
of angiosperms. The various means of effective fruit dis-
persal that evolved in the group were also significant in
the success of angiosperms (see chapter 40). The rapid
life cycle of some of the angiosperms (Arabidopsis can go
from seed to adult flowering plant in 24 days) was an-
other factor. Asexual reproduction has given many inva-
sive species a competitive edge. Xylem vessels and other
anatomical and morphological features of the an-
giosperms correlate with their biological success. As early
angiosperms evolved, all of these advantageous features
became further elaborated and developed, and the pace of
their diversification accelerated.

The Rise to Dominance

Angiosperms began to dominate temperate and tropical
terrestrial communities about 80 to 90 million years ago,
during the second half of the Cretaceous Period. We can
document the relative abundance of different groups of
plants by studying fossils that occur at the same time and
place. In rocks more than 80 million years old, the fossil
remains of plant phyla other than angiosperms, includ-
ing lycopods, horsetails, ferns, and gymnosperms, are

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 42.3

The alignment of the continents when the angiosperms first
appeared in the fossil record about 130 million years ago.
Africa, Madagascar, South America, India, Australia, and
Antarctica were all connected and part of the huge continent of
Gondwanaland, which eventually separated into the discrete
landmasses we have today.

most common. Angiosperms arose in temperate and
tropical terrestrial communities in a relatively short
time.

At about the time that angiosperms became abundant in
the fossil record, pollen, leaves, flowers, and fruits of some
families that still survive began to appear. For example,
representatives of the magnolia, beech, and legume fami-
lies, which were in existence before the end of the Creta-
ceous Period (65 million years ago), are alive and flourish-
ing today.

A number of insect orders that are particularly associ-
ated with flowers, such as Lepidoptera (butterflies and
moths) and Diptera (flies), appeared or became more
abundant during the rise of angiosperms. Plants and in-
sects have clearly played a major role in each other’s pat-
terns of evolution, and their interactions continue to be
of fundamental importance. Additional animals, includ-
ing birds and mammals, now assist in pollination and
seed dispersal.

 

By 80 to 90 million years ago, angiosperms were
dominant in terrestrial habitats throughout the world.

 

Chapter 42. Plant Reproduction 839
