Evolution of the Flower

Pollination in angiosperms does not involve direct contact
between the pollen grain and the ovule. Pollen matures
within the anthers and is transported, often by insects,
birds, or other animals, to the stigma of another flower.
When pollen reaches the stigma, it germinates, and a
pollen tube grows down, carrying the sperm nuclei to the
embryo sac. After double fertilization takes place, develop-
ment of the embryo and endosperm begins. The seed ma-
tures within the ripening fruit; the germination of the seed
initiates another life cycle.

Successful pollination in many angiosperms depends on
the regular attraction of pollinators such as insects, birds,
and other animals, so that pollen is transferred between
plants of the same species. When animals disperse pollen,
they perform the same functions for flowering plants that
they do for themselves when they actively search out mates.
The relationship between plant and pollinator can be quite
intricate. Mutations in either partner can block reproduc-
tion. If a plant flowers at the “wrong” time, the pollinator
may not be available. If the morphology of the flower or
pollinator is altered, there may be physical barriers to polli-
nation. Clearly floral morphology has coevolved with polli-
nators and the result is much more complex and diverse
than the initiation of four distinct whorls of organs de-
scribed in chapter 40.

Characteristics of Floral Evolution

The evolution of the angiosperms is a focus of chapter 37.
Here we need to keep in mind that the diversity of an-
giosperms is partly due to the evolution of a great variety of
floral phenotypes that may enhance the effectiveness of
pollination. All floral organs are thought to have evolved
from leaves. In early angiosperms, these organs maintain
the spiral phyllotaxy often found in leaves. The trend has
been toward four distinct whorls. A complete flower has four
whorls of parts (calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoe-
cium), while an incomplete flower lacks one or more of the
whorls (figure 42.4).

In both complete and incomplete flowers, the calyx usu-
ally constitutes the outermost whorl; it consists of flattened
appendages, called sepals, which protect the flower in the
bud. The petals collectively make up the corolla and may
be fused. Petals function to attract pollinators. While these
two outer whorls of floral organs are sterile, they can en-
hance reproductive success.

Androecium (from the Greek andros, “man”, + oikos,
“house”) is a collective term for all the stamens (male
structures) of a flower. Stamens are specialized structures
that bear the angiosperm microsporangia. There are simi-
lar structures bearing the microsporangia in the pollen
cones of gymnosperms. Most living angiosperms have sta-
mens whose filaments (“stalks”) are slender and often
threadlike, and whose four microsporangia are evident at

840 Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction

Microspore
mother cell (2n)

 

 

Anther
Megaspore
/ ean mother cell (2n)
Ovule
. o. MEIOSIS
wo —

 

FIGURE 42.4
Structure of an angiosperm flower.

the apex in a swollen portion, the anther. Some of the
more primitive angiosperms have stamens that are flattened
and leaflike, with the sporangia producing from the upper
or lower surface.

The gynoecium (from the Greek gyne, “woman,” +
oikos, “house”) is a collective term for all the female parts of
a flower. In most flowers, the gynoecium, which is unique
to angiosperms, consists of a single carpel or two or more
fused carpels. Single or fused carpels are often referred to
as the simple or compound pistils, respectively. Most flow-
ers with which we are familiar—for example, those of
tomatoes and oranges—have a single compound pistil. In
other mostly primitive flowers—for example, buttercups
and stonecups—there may be several to many separate pis-
tils, each formed from a single carpel. Ovules (which de-
velop into seeds) are produced in the pistil’s swollen lower
portion, the ovary, which usually narrows at the top into a
slender, necklike style with a pollen-receptive stigma at its
apex. Sometimes the stigma is divided, with the number of
stigma branches indicating how many carpels are in the
particular pistil. Carpels are essentially inrolled floral leaves
with ovules along the margins. It is possible that the first
carpels were leaf blades that folded longitudinally; the mar-
gins, which had hairs, did not actually fuse until the fruit
developed, but the hairs interlocked and were receptive to
pollen. In the course of evolution, there is evidence the
hairs became localized into a stigma, a style was formed,
and the fusing of the carpel margins ultimately resulted in a
pistil. In many modern flowering plants, the carpels have
become highly modified and are not visually distinguish-
able from one another unless the pistil is cut open.

Trends of Floral Specialization

Two major evolutionary trends led to the wide diversity
of modern flowering plants: (1) separate floral parts have
