Plant Reproduction

 

Concept Outline

42.1 Angiosperms have been incredibly successful, in
part, because of their reproductive strategies.

Rise of the Flowering Plants. Animal and wind
dispersal of pollen increases genetic variability in a species.
Seed and fruit dispersal mechanisms allow offspring to
colonize distant regions. Other features such as shortened
life cycles may also have been responsible for the rapid
diversification of the flowering plants.

Evolution of the Flower. A complete flower has four
whorls, containing protective sepals, attractive petals, male
stamens, and female ovules.

42.2 Flowering plants use animals or wind to transfer
pollen between flowers.

Formation of Angiosperm Gametes. The male
gametophytes are the pollen grains, and the female
gametophyte is the embryo sac.

Pollination. Evolutionary modifications of flowers have
enhanced effective pollination.

Self-Pollination. _Self-pollination is favored in stable
environments, but outcrossing enhances genetic variability.
Fertilization. Angiosperms use two sperm cells, one to
fertilize the egg, the other to produce a nutrient tissue

BE
called endosperm.

42.3 Many plants can clone themselves by asexual
reproduction.

Asexual Reproduction. Some plants do without sexual
reproduction, instead cloning new individuals from parts of
themselves.

42.4 How long do plants and plant organs live?

‘The Life Span of Plants. Clonal plants can live
indefinitely through their propagules. Parts of plants

senesce and die. Some plants reproduce sexually only once
and die.

 

FIGURE 42.1
Reproductive success in flowering plants. Unique reproductive
systems and strategies have coevolved between plants and animals,
accounting for almost 250,000 flowering plants inhabiting all but
the harshest environments on earth.

he remarkable evolutionary success of flowering plants

can be linked to their reproductive strategies (figure
42.1). The evolution and development of flowers has been
discussed in chapters 37 and 41. Here we explore reproduc-
tive strategies in the angiosperms and how their unique fea-
tures, flowers and fruits, have contributed to their success.
This is, in part, a story of coevolution between plants and
animals that ensures greater genetic diversity by dispersing
plant gametes widely. However, in a stable environment,
there are advantages to maintaining the status quo geneti-
cally. Asexual reproduction is a strategy to clonally propa-
gate individuals. An unusual twist to sexual reproduction in

 

some flowering plants is that senescence and death of the
parent plant follows.

837
