grouped together, or fused, and (2) floral parts have been
lost or reduced (figure 42.5). In the more advanced an-
giosperms, the number of parts in each whorl has often
been reduced from many to few. The spiral patterns of at-
tachment of all floral parts in primitive angiosperms have,
in the course of evolution, given way to a single whorl at
each level. The central axis of many flowers has short-
ened, and the whorls are close to one another. In some
evolutionary lines, the members of one or more whorls
have fused with one another, sometimes joining into a
tube. In other kinds of flowering plants, different whorls
may be fused together. Whole whorls may even be lost
from the flower, which may lack sepals, petals, stamens,
carpels, or various combinations of these structures. Mod-
ifications often relate to pollination mechanisms and, in
some cases like the grasses, wind has replaced animals for
pollen dispersal.

While much floral diversity is the result of natural se-
lection related to pollination, it is important to recognize
the impact breeding (artificial selection) has had on
flower morphology. Humans have selected for practical
or aesthetic traits that may have little adaptive value to
species in the wild. Maize (corn), for example, has been
selected to satisfy the human palate. Human intervention
ensures the reproductive success of each generation;
while in a natural setting modern corn would not have
the same protection from herbivores as its ancestors, and
the fruit dispersal mechanism would be quite different
(see figure 21.13). Floral shops sell heavily bred species
with modified petals, often due to polyploidy, that en-
hance their economic value, but not their ability to at-
tract pollinators. In making inferences about symbioses
between flowers and pollinators, be sure to look at native
plants that have not been genetically altered by human
intervention.

Trends in Floral Symmetry

Other trends in floral evolution have affected the symmetry
of the flower (figure 42.6). Primitive flowers such as those
of buttercups are radically symmetrical; that is, one could
draw a line anywhere through the center and have two
roughly equal halves. Flowers of many advanced groups are
bilaterally symmetrical; that is, they are divisible into two
equal parts along only a single plane. Examples of such
flowers are snapdragons, mints, and orchids. Such bilater-
ally symmetrical flowers are also common among violets
and peas. In these groups, they are often associated with
advanced and highly precise pollination systems. Bilateral
symmetry has arisen independently many times. In snap-
dragons, the cyclodia gene regulates floral symmetry, and in
its absence flowers are more radial (figure 42.7). Here the
evolutionary introduction of a single gene is sufficient to
cause a dramatic change in morphology. Whether the same
gene or functionally similar genes arose in parallel in other
species is an open question.

 

 

 

FIGURE 42.5
Trends in floral
specialization.
Wild geranium,
Geranium
maculatum. The
petals are reduced
to five each, the
stamens to ten.

FIGURE 42.6
Bilateral
symmetry in an
orchid. While
primitive flowers
are usually radially
symmetrical,
flowers of many
advanced groups,
such as the orchid
family
(Orchidaceae), are
bilaterally
symmetrical.

 

FIGURE 42.7
Genetic regulation of asymmetry in flowers. (/eft) Snapdragon
flowers normally have bilateral symmetry. (right) The gyclodia gene
regulates floral symmetry, and giclodia mutant snapdragons have
radially symmetrical flowers.

 

The first angiosperms likely had numerous free, spirally
arranged flower parts. Modification of floral parts
appears to be closely tied to pollination mechanisms.
More recently, horticulturists have bred plants for
aesthetic reasons resulting in an even greater diversity
of flowers.

 

Chapter 42. Plant Reproduction 841
