Pollination

Pollination is the process by which pollen is
placed on the stigma. Pollen may be carried
to the flower by wind or by animals, or it
may originate within the individual flower
itself. When pollen from a flower’s anther
pollinates the same flower’s stigma, the
process is called se/f-pollination.

Pollination in Early Seed Plants

Early seed plants were pollinated passively,
by the action of the wind. As in present-day
conifers, great quantities of pollen were shed
and blown about, occasionally reaching the
vicinity of the ovules of the same species. In-
dividual plants of any given species must
grow relatively close to one another for such
a system to operate efficiently. Otherwise, the chance that
any pollen will arrive at the appropriate destination is very
small. The vast majority of windblown pollen travels less
than 100 meters. This short distance is significant com-
pared with the long distances pollen is routinely carried by
certain insects, birds, and other animals.

Pollination by Animals

The spreading of pollen from plant to plant by pollinators
visiting flowers of specific angiosperm species has played an
important role in the evolutionary success of the group. It
now seems clear that the earliest angiosperms, and perhaps
their ancestors also, were insect-pollinated, and the coevo-
lution of insects and plants has been important for both
groups for over 100 million years. Such interactions have
also been important in bringing about increased floral spe-
cialization. As flowers become increasingly specialized, so
do their relationships with particular groups of insects and
other animals.

 

Bees. Among insect-pollinated angiosperms, the most
numerous groups are those pollinated by bees (figure
42.11). Like most insects, bees initially locate sources of
food by odor, then orient themselves on the flower or
group of flowers by its shape, color, and texture. Flowers
that bees characteristically visit are often blue or yellow.
Many have stripes or lines of dots that indicate the location
of the nectaries, which often occur within the throats of
specialized flowers. Some bees collect nectar, which is used
as a source of food for adult bees and occasionally for lar-
vae. Most of the approximately 20,000 species of bees visit
flowers to obtain pollen. Pollen is used to provide food in
cells where bee larvae complete their development.

Only a few hundred species of bees are social or semi-
social in their nesting habits. These bees live in colonies, as
do the familiar honeybee, Apis mellifera, and the bumble-

844 Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

FIGURE 42.11
Pollination by a
bumblebee. As this
bumblebee, Bombus,
squeezes into the
bilaterally symmetrical,
advanced flower of a
member of the mint
family, the stigma
contacts its back and
picks up any pollen that
the bee may have
acquired during a visit to
a previous flower.

bee, Bombus. Such bees produce several generations a year
and must shift their attention to different kinds of flowers
as the season progresses. To maintain large colonies, they
also must use more than one kind of flower as a food source
at any given time.

Except for these social and semi-social bees and about
1000 species that are parasitic in the nests of other bees, the
great majority of bees—at least 18,000 species—are soli-
tary. Solitary bees in temperate regions characteristically
have only a single generation in the course of a year. Often
they are active as adults for as little as a few weeks a year.

Solitary bees often use the flowers of a given group of
plants almost exclusively as sources of their larval food.
The highly constant relationships of such bees with those
flowers may lead to modifications, over time, in both the
flowers and the bees. For example, the time of day when
the flowers open may correlate with the time when the bees
appear; the mouthparts of the bees may become elongated
in relation to tubular flowers; or the bees’ pollen-collecting
apparatuses may be adapted to the pollen of the plants that
they normally visit. When such relationships are estab-
lished, they provide both an efficient mechanism of pollina-
tion for the flowers and a constant source of food for the
bees that “specialize” on them.

Insects Other Than Bees. Among flower-visiting in-
sects other than bees, a few groups are especially promi-
nent. Flowers such as phlox, which are visited regularly by
butterflies, often have flat “landing platforms” on which
butterflies perch. They also tend to have long, slender flo-
ral tubes filled with nectar that is accessible to the long,
coiled proboscis characteristic of Lepidoptera, the order of
insects that includes butterflies and moths. Flowers like
jimsonweed, evening primrose, and others visited regularly
by moths are often white, yellow, or some other pale color;
they also tend to be heavily scented, thus serving to make
the flowers easy to locate at night.

 
