The Endoplasmic Reticulum:
Compartmentalizing the Cell

The interior of a eukaryotic cell is packed with membranes
(table 5.1). So thin that they are invisible under the low re-
solving power of light microscopes, this endomembrane
system fills the cell, dividing it into compartments, channel-
ing the passage of molecules through the interior of the cell,
and providing surfaces for the synthesis of lipids and some
proteins. The presence of these membranes in eukaryotic
cells constitutes one of the most fundamental distinctions
between eukaryotes and prokaryotes.

The largest of the internal membranes is called the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The term endoplasmic means
“within the cytoplasm,” and the term reticulum is Latin for
“a little net.” Like the plasma membrane, the ER is
composed of a lipid bilayer embedded with proteins. It
weaves in sheets through the interior of the cell, creating a
series of channels between its folds (figure 5.13). Of the
many compartments in eukaryotic cells, the two largest are
the inner region of the ER, called the cisternal space, and
the region exterior to it, the cytosol.

Rough ER: Manufacturing Proteins for Export

The ER surface regions that are devoted to protein synthe-
sis are heavily studded with ribosomes, large molecular
aggregates of protein and ribonucleic acid (RNA) that trans-
late RNA copies of genes into protein (we will examine
ribosomes in detail later in this chapter). Through the elec-
tron microscope, these ribosome-rich regions of the ER
appear pebbly, like the surface of sandpaper, and they are
therefore called rough ER (sce figure 5.13).

The proteins synthesized on the surface of the rough ER
are destined to be exported from the cell. Proteins to be ex-
ported contain special amino acid sequences called signal
sequences. As a new protein is made by a free ribosome
(one not attached to a membrane), the signal sequence of
the growing polypeptide attaches to a recognition factor
that carries the ribosome and its partially completed protein
to a “docking site” on the surface of the ER. As the protein
is assembled it passes through the ER membrane into the
interior ER compartment, the cisternal space, from which it
is transported by vesicles to the Golgi apparatus (figure
5.14). The protein then travels within vesicles to the inner
surface of the plasma membrane, where it is released to the
outside of the cell.

Table 5.1 Eukaryotic Cell Structures and Their Functions

Structure Description

Cell wall Outer layer of cellulose or chitin; or absent
Cytoskeleton Network of protein filaments

Flagella (cilia) Cellular extensions with 9 + 2 arrangement of pairs of

microtubules
Plasma membrane

Endoplasmic reticulum —_ Network of internal membranes

Lipid bilayer with embedded proteins

Function

Protection; support
Structural support; cell movement
Motility or moving fluids over surfaces

Regulates what passes into and out of cell;
cell-to-cell recognition

Forms compartments and vesicles;
participates in protein and lipid synthesis
Control center of cell; directs protein
synthesis and cell reproduction

Packages proteins for export from cell;
forms secretory vesicles

Nucleus Structure (usually spherical) surrounded by double
membrane that contains chromosomes

Golgi apparatus Stacks of flattened vesicles

Lysosomes Vesicles derived from Golgi apparatus that contain
hydrolytic digestive enzymes

Microbodies Vesicles formed from incorporation of lipids and
proteins containing oxidative and other enzymes

Mitochondria Bacteria-like elements with double membrane

Chloroplasts Bacteria-like elements with membranes containing
chlorophyll, a photosynthetic pigment

Chromosomes Long threads of DNA that form a complex with
protein

Nucleolus Site of genes for rRNA synthesis

Ribosomes Small, complex assemblies of protein and RNA, often

bound to endoplasmic reticulum

88 = Part II Biology of the Cell

Digest worn-out organelles and cell debris;
play role in cell death

Isolate particular chemical activities from
rest of cell

“Power plants” of the cell; sites of oxidative
metabolism

Sites of photosynthesis

Contain hereditary information

Assembles ribosomes
Sites of protein synthesis
