| 42.4 How long do plants and plant organs live?

The Life Span of Plants

Plant Life Spans Vary Greatly

Once established, plants live for highly
variable periods of time, depending on
the species. Life span may or may not
correlate with reproductive strategy.
Woody plants, which have extensive
secondary growth, nearly always live
longer than herbaceous plants, which
have limited or no secondary growth.
Bristlecone pine, for example, can live
upward of 4000 years. Some herba-
ceous plants send new stems above the
ground every year, producing them
from woody underground structures.
Others germinate and grow, flowering
just once before they die. Shorter-lived
plants rarely become very woody be-
cause there is not enough time for the
accumulation of secondary tissues. De-
pending on the length of their life cy-
cles, herbaceous plants may be annual, biennial, or
perennial, while woody plants are generally perennial
(figure 42.20). Determining life span is even more com-
plicated for clonally reproducing organisms. Aspen trees
form huge clones from asexual reproduction of their
roots. Collectively, an aspen clone may form the largest
“organism” on earth. Other asexually reproducing plants
may cover less territory but live for thousands of years.
Creosote bushes in the Mojave Desert have been identi-
fied that are up to 12,000 years old!

FIGURE 42.20

years or more.

Annual Plants

Annual plants grow, flower, and form fruits and seeds
within one growing season; they then die when the
process is complete. Many crop plants are annuals, includ-
ing corn, wheat, and soybeans. Annuals generally grow
rapidly under favorable conditions and in proportion to
the availability of water or nutrients. The lateral mer-
istems of some annuals, like sunflowers or giant ragweed,
do produce poorly developed secondary tissues, but most
are entirely herbaceous. Annuals typically die after flower-
ing once, the developing flowers or embryos using hor-
monal signaling to reallocate nutrients so the parent plant
literally starves to death. This can be demonstrated by
comparing a population of bean plants where the beans
are continually picked with a population where the beans
are left on the plant. The frequently picked population
will continue to grow and yield beans much longer than
the untouched population. The process that leads to the
death of a plant is called senescence.

850 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

Annual and perennial plants. Plants live
for very different lengths of time. (a)
Desert annuals complete their entire life
span in a few weeks. (b) Some trees, such
as the giant redwood (Sequoiadendron
giganteum), which occurs in scattered
groves along the western slopes of the
Sierra Nevada in California, live 2000

 

Biennial Plants

Biennial plants, which are much less common than an-
nuals, have life cycles that take two years to complete.
During the first year, biennials store photosynthate in
underground storage organs. During the second year of
growth, flowering stems are produced using energy
stored in the underground parts of the plant. Certain
crop plants, including carrots, cabbage, and beets, are bi-
ennials, but these plants generally are harvested for food
during their first season, before they flower. They are
grown for their leaves or roots, not for their fruits or
seeds. Wild biennials include evening primroses, Queen
Anne’s lace, and mullein. Many plants that are considered
biennials actually do not flower until they are three or
more years of age, but all biennial plants flower only
once before they die.

Perennial Plants

Perennial plants continue to grow year after year and
may be herbaceous, as are many woodland, wetland, and
prairie wildflowers, or woody, as are trees and shrubs.
The majority of vascular plant species are perennials.
Herbaceous perennials rarely experience any secondary
growth in their stems; the stems die each year after a pe-
riod of relatively rapid growth and food accumulation.
Food is often stored in the plants’ roots or underground
stems, which can become quite large in comparison to
their less substantial aboveground counterparts.
