© 42.3, Many plants can clone themselves by asexual reproduction.

Asexual Reproduction

While self-pollination reduces genetic variability, asexual
reproduction results in genetically identical individuals be-
cause only mitotic cell divisions occur. In the absence of
meiosis, individuals that are highly adapted to a relatively
unchanging environment persist for the same reasons that
self-pollination is favored. Should conditions change dra-
matically, there will be less variation in the population for
natural selection to act upon and the species may be less
likely to survive. Asexual reproduction is also used in agri-
culture and horticulture to propagate a particularly desir-
able plant whose traits would be altered by sexual repro-
duction, even self-pollination. Most roses and potatoes for
example, are vegetatively propagated.

Vegetative Reproduction

Ina very common form of asexual reproduction called veg-
etative reproduction, new plant individuals are simply
cloned from parts of adults (figure 42.19). The forms of
vegetative reproduction in plants are many and varied.

Stolons. Some plants reproduce by means of runners, or
stolons—long, slender stems that grow along the surface of
the soil. In the cultivated strawberr,

 

for example, leaves,
flowers, and roots are produced at every other node on the
runner. Just beyond each second node, the tip of the run-
ner turns up and becomes thickened. This thickened por-
tion first produces adventitious roots and then a new shoot
that continues the runner.

Rhizomes.
important reproductive structures, particularly in grasses
and sedges. Rhizomes invade areas near the parent plant,
and each node can give rise to a new flowering shoot. The
noxious character of many weeds results from this type of
growth pattern, and many garden plants, such as irises, are
propagated almost entirely from rhizomes. Corms, bulbs,
and tubers are rhizomes specialized for storage and repro-
duction. White potatoes are propagated artificially from
tuber segments, each with one or more “eyes.” The eyes, or
“seed pieces,” of potato give rise to the new plant.

Underground stems, or rhizomes, are also

Suckers. The roots of some plants—for example, cherry,
apple, raspberry, and blackberry—produce “suckers,” or
sprouts, which give rise to new plants. Commercial vari-
eties of banana do not produce seeds and are propagated by
suckers that develop from buds on underground stems.
When the root of a dandelion is broken, as it may be if one
attempts to pull it from the ground, each root fragment
may give rise to a new plant.

Adventitious Leaves. In a few species, even the leaves
are reproductive. One example is the house plant Kalanchoé

 

FIGURE 42.19.

Vegetative reproduction. Small plants arise from notches along
the leaves of the house plant Kalanchoé daigremontiana.

daigremontiana, familiar to many people as the “maternity
plant,” or “mother of thousands.” The common names of
this plant are based on the fact that numerous plantlets
arise from meristematic tissue located in notches along the
leaves. The maternity plant is ordinarily propagated by
means of these small plants, which, when they mature, drop
to the soil and take root.

   

Apomixis

In certain plants, including some citruses, certain grasses
(such as Kentucky bluegrass), and dandelions, the em-
bryos in the seeds may be produced asexually from the
parent plant. This kind of asexual reproduction is known
as apomixis. The seeds produced in this way give rise to
individuals that are genetically identical to their parents.
Thus, although these plants reproduce asexually by
cloning diploid cells in the ovule, they also gain the ad-
vantage of seed dispersal, an adaptation usually associated
with sexual reproduction. As you will see in chapter 43,
embryos can also form via mitosis when plant tissues are
cultured. In general, vegetative reproduction, apomixis,
and other forms of asexual reproduction promote the
exact reproduction of individuals that are particularly
well suited to a certain environment or habitat. Asexual
reproduction among plants is far more common in harsh
or marginal environments, where there is little margin
for variation. There is a greater proportion of asexual
plants in the arctic, for example, than in temperate
regions.

 

Plants that reproduce asexually clone new individuals
from portions of the root, stem, leaves, or ovules of
adult individuals. The asexually produced progeny are
genetically identical to the parent individual.

 

Chapter 42 Plant Reproduction 849
