Chapter 42

Summary

Questions

ce
www.mhhe.com/raven6e

 

=
www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

42.1 Angiosperms have been incredibly successful, in part, because of their reproductive strategies.

 

¢ Angiosperms have been successful because they can
be relatively drought-resistant, and smaller
herbaceous angiosperms have relatively short life
cycles. Most important, however, are their flowers
and fruits. Flowers make possible the precise transfer
of pollen and, therefore, outcrossing, even when the
stationary individual plants are widely separated.
Fruits, with their complex adaptations, facilitate the
wide dispersal of angiosperms.

* Modification of floral parts, especially petals, has

been key in facilitating pollination. Bilateral
symmetry has evolved independently, multiple times.

1, What characteristics of early
angiosperms are thought to
contribute to their success.

2. What flower whorl is
collectively made up of petals?
With which other flower parts
are the petals of most flowers
homologous?

3. What is an androecium? Of
which flower parts is it
composed?

42.2 Flowering plants use animals or wind to transfer pollen between flowers.

 

¢ Bees are the most frequent and constant pollinators
of flowers. Insects often are attracted by the odors of
flowers rather than color. Birds are attracted to red
flowers, but not odors.

¢ Self-pollination reduces genetic variability among
offspring. Outcrossing increases genetic diversity.
© Outcrossing in different angiosperms is promoted by

the separation of stamens and carpels into different
flowers, or even into different individuals.

4, What does it mean if a plant is
dichogamous? Of what
advantage is it to the plant?

5. Is it more likely that a flower
visited by a social or a solitary
bee will become highly
specialized toward that bee?
Why?

42.3, Many plants can clone themselves by asexual reproduction.

 

¢ In asexual reproduction, plants clone new individuals
from portions of adult roots, stems, leaves, or ovules.

* The progeny produced by asexual reproduction are
all genetically identical to the parent individual, even
when they are produced in the ovules (apomixis).

42.4 How long do plants and plant organs live?

6. Why would a plant capable of * Asexual Reproduction
sexual reproduction reproduce

asexually?

7. You have just cloned a gene
responsible for apomixis. Several
corn breeders are very interested
in your gene. Why?

 

* Plants can live for a single season or thousands of
years.

¢ For annual and biennial plants, reproduction triggers
senescence and death.

¢ Asexually reproducing plants can form clones that
cover huge areas and/or live for many thousands of
years.

* Plant organs and shoots can senesce and die while the
whole plant thrives. Organ senescence is an efficient
way to maximize the use of energy resources.

852 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

* Gamete formation

@ * Fertilization

8. Some plants flower once and
die; others flower multiple times,
reaching great heights and
diameters. What are the relative
advantages of the two strategies?

9. How and why does leaf
abscission occur?
