Fertilization

Fertilization in angiosperms is a complex, somewhat un-
usual process in which two sperm cells are utilized in a
unique process called double fertilization. Double fertil-
ization results in two key developments: (1) the fertiliza-
tion of the egg, and (2) the formation of a nutrient sub-
stance called endosperm that nourishes the embryo. Once
a pollen grain has been spread by wind, by animals, or
through self-pollination, it adheres to the sticky, sugary
substance that covers the stigma and begins to grow a
pollen tube that pierces the style (figure 42.18). The
pollen tube, nourished by the sugary substance, grows
until it reaches the ovule in the ovary. Meanwhile, the
generative cell within the pollen grain tube cell divides to
form two sperm cells.

The pollen tube eventually reaches the embryo sac in
the ovule. At the entry to the embryo sac, the tip of the
pollen tube bursts and releases the two sperm cells. Simul-

 

  
 

 

ae Pollen grain
; Stigma
Generative
tic
col Style | Carpel
Ovary Embryo
sac
Ovule Cc —>
Pollination
Antipodals
Egg cell
Synergids:
FIGURE 42.18

 

taneously, the two nuclei that flank the egg cell disinte-
grate, and one of the sperm cells fertilizes the egg cell,
forming a zygote. The other sperm cell fuses with the two
polar nuclei located at the center of the embryo sac, form-
ing the triploid (37) primary endosperm nucleus. The pri-
mary endosperm nucleus eventually develops into the en-
dosperm.

Once fertilization is complete, the embryo develops by
dividing numerous times. Meanwhile, protective tissues en-
close the embryo, resulting in the formation of the seed.
The seed, in turn, is enclosed in another structure called
the fruit. These typical angiosperm structures evolved in
response to the need for seeds to be dispersed over long
distances to ensure genetic variability.

 

In double fertilization, angiosperms utilize two sperm
cells. One fertilizes the egg, while the other helps form
a substance called endosperm that nourishes the
embryo.

 

Tube cell
Sperm cells Pollen tube

Tube cell nucleus

Growth of

 

 

pollen tube

Endosperm
(3n)

   

 

Release of sperm cells

Double fertilization

‘The formation of the pollen tube and double fertilization. When pollen lands on the stigma of a flower, the pollen tube cell grows
toward the embryo sac, forming a pollen tube. While the pollen tube is growing, the generative cell divides to form two sperm cells. When
the pollen tube reaches the embryo sac, it bursts through one of the synergids and releases the sperm cells. In a process called double
fertilization, one sperm cell nucleus fuses with the egg cell to form the diploid (2n) zygote, and the other sperm cell nucleus fuses with the

two polar nuclei to form the triploid (37) endosperm nucleus.

848 = Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction
