Plant Genomics

 

Concept Outline

43.1 Genomic organization is much more varied in
plants than in animals.
Overview of Plant Genomics. As agrarian societies
formed, people began to select for desirable traits. Until
relatively recently, plant biologists focused their research
efforts on variation in chromosomes, but work is now
shifting increasingly to the molecular level.
Organization of Plant Genomes. Plant genomes are
more complex than those of other eukaryotic organisms
due to the presence of multiple chromosome copies and
extensive amounts of DNA with repetitive sequences.
Comparative Genome Mapping and Model Systems.
RFLP and AFLP techniques are useful for mapping traits in
plant genomes. Despite the technical success in sequencing
the Arabidopsis genome and other genomes, we still don’t
know what most of these genes do and how the proteins
they encode function in physiology and development.

43.2 Advances in plant tissue culture are
revolutionizing agriculture.

Overview of Plant Tissue Culture. Because plants are
totipotent, bits of tissue can be used to regenerate whole
plants.

Types of Plant Tissue Cultures. Plant cells, tissues, and
organs can be grown in an artificial culture medium, and
some cells can be directed to generate whole plants.
Applications of Plant Tissue Culture. Plant tissue
cultures can be used for the production of plant products,
propagation of horticultural plants, and crop improvement.

43.3 Plant biotechnology now affects every aspect of
agriculture.

World Population in Relation to Advances Made in
Crop Production. It is uncertain whether advances made
in crop production by improved farming practices and crop
breeding can provide for an increasing world population.
Plant Biotechnology for Agricultural Improvement.
Plants can be genetically engineered to have altered levels
of oils and amino acids and to provide vaccines.

Methods of Plant Transformation. The genetic
engineering of plants is based upon introduction of foreign
DNA into plant cells.

 

FIGURE 43.1

Golden rice. Rice is the dietary staple of almost half the world’s
population, but it lacks vitamin A. Vitamin A deficiency leads to
vision and immunity problems. Genetically engineered rice that
produces vitamin A has now been developed. The rice is golden
because a biosynthetic pathway has been genetically modified to
produce gold-colored beta-carotene, a precursor to vitamin A.
Here, while rice is mixed in with golden rice. The intensity of
golden color indicates the amount of pro-vitamin A present.

y selective breeding favoring desired traits, people have

been genetically modifying plants since agrarian soci-
eties began. All of our key modern crops are the result of
this long effort. Today, we have even more powerful tools,
recombinant DNA technologies that are the subject of this
chapter. This chapter looks ahead to the impact of these
new technologies on the future of plants and our study of
plant biology (figure 43.1). Both the Arabidopsis and rice
genomes are essentially sequenced. Not only can we expect
to learn much about the molecular basis of plant physiology
and development from these rich databases; we will surely
gain a far deeper understanding of plant evolution.

853
