43.1

Overview of Plant Genomics

Early Approaches

While the term genetic engineering is commonly used to
describe plants and animals modified using recombinant
DNA technology, people have actually been genetic engi-
neers for thousands of years. As agrarian societies formed,
changes in the gene pool within crop species began. For ex-
ample, seed dispersal was selected against in maize and
wheat. Without the ability to disperse seed, these domesti-
cated plants are completely dependent on humans for seed
dispersal. Rice was converted from a perennial plant to an
annual plant without the seed dormancy mechanisms present
in wild rice. Parts of the plant that were of most dietary
value to humans and domesticated animals have been se-
lected for increased size. These include seeds, fruits, and
storage organs like roots in the case of carrots. All of these
changes were accomplished without knowledge of particu-
lar genes, by selecting and propagating individuals with the
desired traits.

Breeding Strategies to Enhance Yield

At the beginning of the twentieth century, a growing un-
derstanding of genetics increased the rate of crop improve-
ment. Among the most dramatic agricultural developments
was the introduction of hybrid corn. As corn breeding pro-
gressed, highly inbred lines began to have decreased yield
as deleterious recessive genes became homozygous. George
Harrison Shull found that crossing two different inbred
lines gave rise to offspring with “hybrid vigor.” The yield
increased fourfold! Hybrid corn now grows in almost all
fields in the United States. Hybrid rice developed by the
International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines has
increased yield 20%.

Breeders have now turned to specific genes to optimize
food quality (see figure 43.1). Only a small percentage of
the genes and their function have been identified, but we
start this century with technologically powerful new ways
to understand genomes.

Studying Plant Genomes

Plant genomes are more complex than other eukaryotic
genomes, and analysis reveals many evolutionary flips and
turns of the DNA sequences over time. Plants show widely
different chromosome numbers and varied ploidy levels
(figure 43.2). Overall, the size of plant genomes (both num-
ber of chromosomes and total nucleotide base-pairs) ex-
hibits the greatest variation of any kingdom in the biologi-
cal world. For example, tulips contain over 170 times as
much DNA as the small weed Arabidopsis thaliana (table
43.1). The DNA of plants, like animals, can also contain

854 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

Genomic organization is much more varied in plants than in animals.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Haploid Diploid Polyploid
FIGURE 43.2 i i i
Chromosome numbers possible in

plant genomes. Haploid: a set of

chromosomes without their pairs; for

example, the chromosome number present

 

ina gamete. Diploid: a single set of

chromosome pairs. Polyploid: multiple sets of chromosome pairs;
for example, bananas have a triple set of chromosomes and are
therefore polyploid.

Table 43.1 Genome Size of Plants

Genome Size

Common (Millions of
Scientific Name Name Base-Pairs)
Arabidopsis thaliana Arabidopsis 145
Prunus persica Peach 262
Ricinus communis Castor bean 323
Citrus sinensis Orange 367
Oryza sativa spp. javanica — Rice 424
Petunia parodii Petunia 1,221
Pisum sativum Garden pea 3,947
Avena sativa Oats 11,315
Tulipa spp. Garden tulip 24,704

Source: From Plant Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, by P. J. Lea and R.
C. Leegods, eds. Copyright © 1993 John Wiley & Sons, Limited.
Reproduced with permission.

regions of sequence repeats, sequence inversions, or trans-
posable element insertions, which further modify their ge-
netic content. Traditionally, variation in chromosome in-
versions and ploidy has been used to build up a picture of
how plant species have evolved (figure 43.3). Increasingly,
researchers are turning to studying the organization of
plant DNA sequences to obtain important information
about the evolutionary history of a plant species.

 

People have been genetically engineering plants for
centuries by selecting for desired traits. Traditionally,
biologists have examined variation among plants at the
chromosome level; today, researchers are focusing
more of their efforts at the DNA sequence level.

 
