Organization of Plant
Genomes

Low-, Medium-, and High-
Copy-Number DNA

Most seed plants contain quantities of
DNA that greatly exceed their needs
for coding and regulatory function.
Hence, for plants, a very small percent-
age of the genome may actually encode
genes involved in the production of
protein. This portion of the genome
which encodes most of the transcribed
genes is often referred to as “low-copy-
number DNA,” because the DNA se-
quences comprising these genes are
present in single or small numbers of
copies. How do plants function with so
much extra DNA inserted into the
genome? It appears that most of these
sequence alterations occur in noncoding
regions.

“Medium-copy-number DNA” is
composed largely of DNA sequences
that encode ribosomal RNA (rRNA), a
key element of the cellular machinery
that translates transcribed messenger

—— eee

Transposable
Simple tandem array

element

 

——_S SEE

Repeat/single-copy interspersion Single-copy gene

(ieee eee Ree!

Inverted repeats

 

le)

Compound tandem array

lS aE

Repeat/repeat interspersion

(a) Different arrangements of repeated and
inverted DNA sequences

(b) Transposable element excision and
reinsertion

FIGURE 43.4

Organization of repeated DNA sequences and the mechanism of transposable
elements in altering gene function. (a) Repeated DNA sequences can occur in plant
genomes in several different arrangements. The arrows represent repeated DNA.
sequences. Arrows of the same size and color represent DNA sequences which are
identical to each other. The direction of the arrowhead indicates the orientation of the
DNA sequence. (J) Transposable elements can be a source of repetitive DNA that alters
gene function. Following excision from its original location, a transposable element may
reinsert in the single-copy DNA sequence comprising a gene and alter the gene’s function.

RNA (mRNA) into protein. In plant
genomes, rRNA genes may be repeated
several hundred to several thousand
times. This is in contrast to animal cells, where only 100 to
200 rRNA genes are normally present. The extent of vari-
ability in plant genomes with respect to the number of
rRNA genes and mutations in them has provided a useful
tool for analyzing the evolutionary patterns of plant species.

Plant cells may also contain excess DNA in their
genomes in the form of highly repetitive sequences, or
“high-copy-number DNA.” At present, the function of
this high-copy-number DNA in plant genomes is un-
known. Roughly half the maize genome is composed of
such retroviral-like DNA. RNA retroviruses like HIV use
their host genomes to make DNA copies that then insert
into the host genome. Clearly, the effects of some retro-
viruses can be lethal. How maize came to tolerate such a
large amount of this foreign DNA is an evolutionary
mystery.

Sequence Replication and Inversion

High-copy-number DNA sequences in the plant genome
may be short, such as the nucleotide sequence “GAA,” or
much longer, involving up to several hundred nucleotides.
Moreover, the number of copies of an individual high-
copy repetitive DNA sequence can total from 10,000 to
100,000. There are several possibilities for how high-copy

856 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

repetitive DNA sequences may be organized within a
plant genome (figure 43.4). Several copies of a single
repetitive DNA sequence may be present together in the
same orientation, in a pattern called “simple tandem
array.” Alternatively, repetitive DNA sequences can be
dispersed among single-copy DNA in the same orienta-
tion (“repeat/single-copy interspersion”) or the opposite
orientation (“inverted repeats”). In addition, groups of
repetitive DNA sequences can also occur together in plant
genomes in a variety of possible arrangements, such as a
“compound tandem array” or a “repeat/repeat intersper-
sion.” The presence of repetitive DNA can vastly increase
the size of a plant genome, making it difficult to find and
characterize individual single-copy genes. Characterizing
single-copy genes can thus become a sort of “needle-in-
the-haystack” hunt.

A variety of mechanisms can account for the presence
of highly repetitive DNA sequences in plant genomes.
Repetitive sequences can be generated by DNA sequence
amplification in which multiple rounds of DNA replica-
tion occur for specific chromosomal regions. Unequal
crossing over of the chromosomes during meiosis or mi-
tosis (translocation) or the action of transposable ele-
ments (see next section) can also generate repetitive
sequences.
