Many flowers are constructed such
that the stamens and stigmas do not
come in contact with each other.
With such an arrangement, there is a
natural tendency for the pollen to be
transferred to the stigma of another
flower rather than to the stigma of its
own flower, thereby promoting
outcrossing.

Even when a flower’s stamens and
stigma mature at the same time, genetic
self-incompatibility, which is wide-
spread in flowering plants, increases
outcrossing. Self-incompatibility results
when the pollen and stigma recognize
each other as being genetically related
and fertilization is blocked (figure
42.17). Self-incompatibility is con-

FIGURE 42.16

 

 

(b)

Dichogamy, as illustrated by the flowers of fireweed, Epilobium angustifolium. More
than 200 years ago (in the 1790s) fireweed, which is outcrossing, was one of the first plant
species to have its process of pollination described. First, the anthers shed pollen, and then
the style elongates above the stamens while the four lobes of the stigma curl back and

become receptive. Consequently, the flowers are functionally staminate at first, becoming

pistillate about two days later. The flowers open progressively up the stem, so that the
lowest are visited first. Working up the stem, the bees encounter pollen-shedding,
staminate-phase flowers and become covered with pollen, which they then carry to the
lower, functionally pistillate flowers of another plant. Shown here are flowers in («) the
staminate phase and (b) the pistillate phase.

trolled by the S (self-incompatibility)
locus. There are many alleles at the S
locus that regulate recognition re-
sponses between the pollen and stigma.

There are two types of self-incompati-

bility. Gametophytic self-incompatibil-

ity depends on the haploid S locus of

the pollen and the diploid S locus of the stigma. If either of
the S alleles in the stigma match the pollen S allele, pollen
tube growth stops before it reaches the embryo sac. Petunias
have gametophytic self-incompatibility. In the case of sporo-
phytic self-incompatibility, such as in broccoli, both S alleles
of the pollen parent are important; if the alleles in the stigma
match with either of the pollen parent S alleles, the haploid
pollen will not germinate.

Much is being learned about the cellular basis of this
recognition and the signal transduction pathways that
block the successful growth of the pollen tube. These
pollen recognition mechanisms may have had their ori-
gins in a common ancestor of the gymnosperms. Fossils
with pollen tubes from the Carboniferous are consistent

FIGURE 42.17

Self-pollination can be genetically

controlled so self-pollen is not recognized.

(a) Gametophytic self-incompatibility is

determined by the haploid pollen genotype. (}) (
Sporophytic self-incompatibility recognizes the .
genotype of the diploid pollen parent, not just i
the haploid pollen genotype. In both cases, the

a

recognition is based on the S locus, which has

many different alleles. The subscript numbers

indicate the S allele genotype. In gametophytic i
self-incompatibility, the block comes after
pollen tube germination. In sporophytic self-
incompatibility, the pollen tube fails to
germinate.

S1S2
pollen parent

(a) Gametophytic self-incompatibility

S2

\ We.

aT

WwW"

with the hypothesis that they had highly evolved pollen-
recognition systems. These may have been systems that
recognized foreign pollen that predated self-recognition
systems.

 

Self-pollinated angiosperms are frequent where there is
a strong selective pressure to produce large numbers of
genetically uniform individuals adapted to specific,
relatively uniform habitats. Outcrossing in plants may
be promoted through dioecism, monoecism, self-
incompatibility, or the physical separation or different
maturation times of the stamens and pistils.
Outcrossing promotes genetic diversity.

 

S2S3
carpel of
pollen recipient

S1S2
pollen parent

S2S3
carpel of
pollen recipient

(b) Sporophytic setf-incompatibility

Chapter 42. Plant Reproduction 847
