Trees and shrubs generally flower repeatedly, but
there are exceptions. Bamboo lives for many seasons as a
vegetative plant, but senesces and dies after flowering.
The same is true for at least one tropical tree which
achieves great heights before flowering and senescing.
Considering the tremendous amount of energy that goes
into the growth of a tree, this particular reproductive
strategy is quite curious.

Trees and shrubs are either deciduous, with all the
leaves falling at one particular time of year and the plants
remaining bare for a period, or evergreen, with the leaves
dropping throughout the year and the plants never appear-
ing completely bare. In northern temperate regions,
conifers are the most familiar evergreens; but in tropical
and subtropical regions, most angiosperms are evergreen,
except where there is a severe seasonal drought. In these
areas, many angiosperms are deciduous, losing their leaves
during the drought and thus conserving water.

Organ Abscission

Senescence is an important developmental process that
leads to the death of an organ, shoot, or the whole plant.
Annual and biennial plants undergo whole plant senes-
cence, but individual organs on any plant can also senesce
and be shed. The process by which leaves or petals are shed
is called abscission.

One advantage to organ senescence is that nutrient sinks
can be dispensed with. For example, shaded leaves that are
no longer photosynthetically productive can be shed.
Petals, which are modified leaves, may senesce once polli-
nation occurs. Orchid flowers remain fresh for long periods
of time, even in a florist shop. However, once pollination
occurs, a hormonal change is triggered that leads to petal
senescence. This makes sense in terms of allocation of en-
ergy resources, as the petals are no longer necessary to at-
tract a pollinator. On a larger scale, deciduous plants in
temperate areas produce new leaves in the spring and then
lose them in the fall. In the tropics, however, the produc-
tion and subsequent loss of leaves in some species is corre-
lated with wet and dry seasons. Evergreen plants, such as
most conifers, usually have a complete change of leaves
every two to seven years, periodically losing some but not
all of their leaves.

Abscission involves changes that take place in an abscis-
sion zone at the base of the petiole (figure 42.21). Young
leaves produce hormones (especially cytokinins) that in-
hibit the development of specialized layers of cells in the
abscission zone. Hormonal changes take place as the leaf
ages, however, and two layers of cells become differenti-
ated. (Despite the name, abscisic acid is not involved in
this process.) A protective layer, which may be several cells
wide, develops on the stem side of the petiole base.
These cells become impregnated with suberin, which, as
you will recall, is a fatty substance that is impervious to
moisture. A separation layer develops on the side of the

   

Separation layer

Suberized cells
of protective
layer

FIGURE 42.21

Leaf abscission. The abscission zone of a leaf. Hormonal changes
in this zone cause abscission. Two layers of cells in the abscission
zone differentiate into a protective layer and a separation layer. As
pectins in the separation layer break down, wind and rain can
easily separate the leaf from the stem.

leaf blade; the cells of the separation layer sometimes di-
vide, swell, and become gelatinous. When temperatures
drop, the duration and intensity of light diminishes as the
days grow shorter, or other environmental changes
occur, enzymes break down the pectins in the middle
lamellae of the separation cells. Wind and rain can then
easily separate the leaf from the stem. Left behind is a
sealed leaf scar that is protected from bacteria and other
disease organisms.

As the abscission zone develops, the green chlorophyll
pigments present in the leaf break down, revealing the yel-
lows and oranges of other pigments, such as carotenoids,
that previously had been masked by the intense green col-
ors. At the same time, water-soluble red or blue pigments
called anthocyanins and betacyanins may also accumulate in
the vacuoles of the leaf cells—all contributing to an array of
fall colors in leaves (see figure 41.72).

 

Annual plants complete their whole growth cycle within
a single year. Biennial plants flower only once, normally
after two seasons of growth. Perennials flower
repeatedly and live for many years. Abscission occurs
when a plant sheds its organs.

 

Chapter 42. Plant Reproduction 851
