— 43.2— Advances in plant tissue culture are revolutionizing agriculture.

Overview of Plant Tissue Culture

One of the major hopes for the plant genome projects is
using newly identified genes for biotechnology, and ad-
vances in tissue culture are facilitating this. Having an
agriculturally valuable gene in hand is just the beginning.
With methods discussed in chapter 19 and below, desir-
able genes can be introduced into plants, yielding trans-
genic cells and tissues. Whole plants can than be regener-
ated using tissue culture. While animals can now be
cloned, the process is much simpler in plants. Many so-
matic (not germ-line) plant cells are totipotent, which
means they can express portions of their previously unex-
pressed genes and develop into whole plants under the
right conditions.

The successful culture of plant cells, tissues, or organs
requires utilizing the proper plant starting material, ap-
propriate nutrient medium, and timing of hormonal
treatments to maximize growth potential and drive differ-
entiation (figure 43.10). Most plant tissue cultures are
initiated from explants, or small sections of tissue re-
moved from an intact plant under sterile conditions.
After being placed on a sterile growth medium contain-
ing nutrients, vitamins, and combinations of plant growth
regulators, cells present in the explant will begin to di-
vide and proliferate. Under appropriate culture condi-
tions, plant cells can multiply and form organs (roots,
shoots, embryos, leaf primordia, and so on) and can even
regenerate a whole plant. The regeneration of a whole
plant from tissue-cultured plant cells represents an im-
portant step in the production of genetically engineered
plants. Using plant tissue cultures, genetic manipulation
can be conducted at the level of single cells in culture,
and whole plants can then be produced bearing the intro-
duced genetic trait.

Plant cells growing in culture can also be used for the
mass production of genetically identical plants (clones)
with valuable inheritable traits. For example, this ap-
proach of clonal propagation using plant tissue culture is
commonly used in the commercial production of many
ornamental plants such as chrysanthemums and ferns. As
we will describe next, different types of cultures can be
generated based on the initial type of plant tissue used for
the explant and on the composition of the growth
medium.

 

It is often possible to regenerate an entire plant from
one or a few cells. Depending on the plant tissue used
and the growth medium selected, different types of
cultures may be produced.

 

862 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

FIGURE 43.10

Culture of orchid plants. While the natural maturation of a
single orchid plant may take up to seven years, commercial
growers can produce thousands of cultured orchids in a relatively
short time. (a) The apical meristem is removed from an orchid
plant. (b) The meristematic tissue is grown in flasks containing
hormone-enhanced media, and roots and shoots begin to form. (0)
‘The plantlets are then separated and grown to maturity.
