Cell Suspension Culture

Plant cell suspension culture involves the growth of single
or small groups of plant cells in a liquid growth medium.
Cell suspension cultures are usually initiated by the trans-
fer of plant callus cells into a liquid medium containing a
combination of plant growth regulators and chemicals that
promote the disaggregation of the cells into single cells or
small clumps of cells (figure 43.12). Continued cell growth
requires that the liquid cultures be shaken at low speed to
promote aeration and chemical exchange with the
medium. Suspension cell cultures are often used in re-
search applications where access to single cells is impor-
tant. The suspension bath can provide an efficient means
for selecting out cells with desirable traits such as herbi-
cide tolerance or salt tolerance because the bath is in uni-
form contact with all the cells at once. This differs from
callus culture, where only those cells in contact with the
solid medium can be selected by chemical additions to the
medium. Suspension cultures can also provide a conve-
nient means for producing and collecting the plant chemi-
cals cells secrete. These can include important plant
metabolites, such as food products, oils, and medicinal
chemicals. In addition, plant suspension cell cultures can
often be used to produce whole plants via a process known
as somatic cell embryogenesis (figure 43.13). For some
plants, this provides a more convenient means of regener-
ating a whole plant after genetic engineering takes place at
the single-cell level. In somatic cell embryogenesis, plant

 

(2)

864 Part XI_ Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

 

FIGURE 43.12

Cell suspension culture. Plant cells can be grown as individual
cells or small groups of cells in a liquid culture medium. Liquid
suspension culture of plant cells ensures that most cells are in
contact with the growth medium.

suspension culture cells are transferred to a medium con-
taining a combination of growth regulators that drive dif-
ferentiation and organization of the cells to form individ-
ual embryos. Under a dissection microscope, these
embryos can be isolated and transferred to a new growth
medium, where they grow into individual plants.

 

’ FIGURE 43.13

Somatic cell embryogenesis. A large
number of plants can be cloned from a
single soybean seed via somatic cell
embryogenesis. (2) Immature soybean seeds
placed on culture medium. (?) Embryos
appear on the seeds after two weeks in
culture. (¢) Four embryos at different stages
of development (globular, heart, torpedo,
and plantlet). (d) Seedlings with shoots and
roots. (e) Mature soybean plants.
