   

FIGURE 5.13

Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum

endoplasmic
reticulum

0.08 jm

‘The endoplasmic reticulum. Ribosomes are associated with only one side of the rough ER; the other side is the boundary of a separate
compartment within the cell into which the ribosomes extrude newly made proteins destined for secretion. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum

has few to no bound ribosomes.

Smooth ER: Organizing Internal Activities

Regions of the ER with relatively few bound ribosomes are
referred to as smooth ER. The membranes of the smooth
ER contain many embedded enzymes, most of them active
only when associated with a membrane. Enzymes anchored
within the ER, for example, catalyze the synthesis of a vari-
ety of carbohydrates and lipids. In cells that carry out exten-
sive lipid synthesis, such as those in the testes, intestine, and
brain, smooth ER is particularly abundant. In the liver, the
enzymes of the smooth ER are involved in the detoxification
of drugs including amphetamines, morphine, codeine, and
phenobarbital.

Some vesicles form at the plasma membrane by budding
inward, a process called endocytosis. Some then move into
the cytoplasm and fuse with the smooth endoplasmic reticu-
lum. Others form secondary lysosomes or other interior
vesicles.

 

The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an extensive system
of folded membranes that divides the interior of
eukaryotic cells into compartments and channels.
Rough ER synthesizes proteins, while smooth ER
organizes the synthesis of lipids and other biosynthetic
activities.

 

   

 

Si =
sequence
Polypeptide
Ribosome

Membrane of
mRNA endoplasmic reticulum

Cytoplasm

FIGURE 5.14

Signal sequences direct proteins to their destinations in the
cell. In this example, a sequence of hydrophobic amino acids (the
signal sequence) on a secretory protein attaches them (and the
ribosomes making them) to the membrane of the ER. As the
protein is synthesized, it passes into the lumen (internal chamber)
of the ER. The signal sequence is clipped off after the leading
edge of the protein enters the lumen.

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 89
