Plant Genome Projects

The potential of having complete ge-
nomic sequences of plants is tremen-
dous and about to be realized now that
the Arabidopsis Genome Project is es-
sentially complete. This project repre-
sents a new paradigm in the way biol-
ogy is done. The international effort
brought together research teams with
the expertise and tenacity to apply new
sequencing technology to an entire
genome, rather than single genes.
Powerful databases are being con-
structed to make this information ac-
cessible to all. The completely se-
quenced Arabidopsis genome will have
far-reaching uses in agricultural
breeding and evolutionary analysis.
This information can be expected to
help plant breeders in the future be-
cause the localization of genes in one
plant species can help indicate where
that gene might also be located in an-
other species (figure 43.8). In plant
genomes, local gene order seems to be more conserved
than the nucleotide sequences of homologous genes.
Thus, the complete genomic sequence of Arabidopsis
thaliana will facilitate gene cloning from many plant
species, using information on relative genomic location as
well as similarity of sequences.

Sequencing the rice genome provides a model for a
small monocot genome. Rice was selected, in part, be-
cause its genome is 6, 10, and 40 times smaller than
maize, barley, and wheat. These grains represent a major
food source for humans. By understanding the rice
genome at the level of its DNA sequence, it should be
much easier to identify and isolate genes from grains with
larger genomes. Even though these plants diverged more
than 50 million years ago, the chromosomes of rice, corn,
barley, wheat, and other grass crops show extensive con-
served arrangements of segments (synteny) (figure 43.9).
DNA sequence analysis of cereal grains will be important
for identifying genes associated with disease resistance,
crop yield, nutritional quality, and growth capacity. It will
also be possible to construct an approximate map of the
ancestral cereal genome.

FIGURE 43.8
Future directions in the genetic engineering of vegetable oils?

Functional Genomics and Proteomics

Sequencing the Arabidopsis and rice genome represent
major technological accomplishments. A new field of
bioinformatics takes advantage of high-end computer
technology to analyze the growing gene databases, look
for relationships among genomes, and hypothesize func-
tions of genes based on sequence. Genomics (the study of
genomes) is now shifting gears and moving back to

860 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

hypothesis-driven science. Again, an international com-
munity of researchers has come together with a plan to
assign function to all of the 20,000 to 25,000 Arabidopsis
genes by 2010 (Project 2010). In many ways, the goal is
to ultimately answer the questions we have raised in
chapters 37 through 42. One of the first steps is to deter-
mine when and where these genes are expressed. Each
step beyond that will require additional enabling technol-
ogy. Research will move from genomics to proteomics
(the study of all proteins in an organism). Proteins are
much more difficult to study because of posttranslational
modification and formation of complexes of proteins.
This information will be essential in understanding cell
biology, physiology, development, and evolution. For ex-
ample, how are similar genes used in different plants to
create biochemically and morphologically distinct organ-
isms? So, in many ways, we continue to ask the same
questions that even Mendel asked, but at a much differ-
ent level of organization.

 

Restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs)
and amplified fragment length polymorphisms (AFLPs)
represent important tools for mapping genetic traits in
plant genomes. Due to its short life cycle, small size,
and small genome, the mustard relative Arabidopsis
thaliana is being used as a model plant for genetic
studies. The genome of rice is also essentially
sequenced and will be a valuable model for other
monocot cereal grains such as wheat, barley, oats, and
corn. Assigning function to these genes is the next
challenge.

 
