Anther/Pollen Culture

In flowers, the anthers are the
anatomical structures that contain the
pollen. In normal flower develop-
ment, the anthers mature and open to
allow pollen dispersal. In anther cul-
ture, anthers are excised from the
flowers of a plant and then trans-
ferred to an appropriate growth
medium. After a short period of time,
pollen cells can be manipulated to
form individual plantlets, which can
be grown in culture and used to pro-
duce mature plants. The development
of these plantlets usually proceeds
through the formation of embryos
(figure 43.15). Plants produced by an-
ther/pollen culture can be haploid be-
cause they were originally derived
from pollen cells that have undergone
meiosis. However, these plants may
be sterile and thus not useful for
breeding or genetic manipulation. On
the other hand, plants derived from
anther/pollen culture can be treated
at an early stage with chemical agents
such as colchicine, which allows chro-
mosome duplication. Chromosome
duplication results in the conversion
of sterile haploid plants into fertile ©

diploid organisms. Under these con-

ditions, plants can be produced that

are homozygous for every single trait,

even those which tend to be recessive

traits. On a cautionary note, not every cell exposed to
colchicine becomes diploid. Some have unusual ploidy
levels, and they can be screened for chromosome num-
ber. The homozygous plants are useful tools, allowing
breeders to introduce a normally recessive trait.

Plant Organ Culture

Plant organs can also be grown under culture conditions,
and this has provided a useful tool in the study of plant
organ development. For example, pollinated flowers of a
plant such as a tomato can be excised and transferred to a
culture flask containing an appropriate medium. Over
time, the ovular portion of the plant will develop into a
tomato fruit that will eventually turn red and ripen. Sec-
tions of plant roots can also be excised and transferred to
a liquid growth medium. In this medium, the roots can
proliferate extensively, forming both primary and sec-
ondary root branches (figure 43.16).

866 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

  
 

FIGURE 43.15

Anther culture. Callus formation from
maize pollen. Anthers containing pollen
can be regenerated on tissue culture
medium. The pollen in the anthers contain
a haploid set of chromosomes, which can
be doubled to form a homozygous diploid
cell. Regenerated homozygous diploid
plants are important for plant breeding
purposes. (a) Maize anthers in culture
medium. () Callus formation from pollen.
(©) Callus and shoot formation.

FIGURE 43.16
Plant organ
culture. Plant
roots growing ina
liquid culture
medium. From
small excised
sections of plant
roots, the roots
will grow and
proliferate with
extensive lateral
root formation
(branching).

 

Many plant cells are totipotent; a whole plant may be
regenerated from a single plant cell. Depending upon
the explant type, culture medium, and combinations of
plant growth regulators, it is possible to grow plant
cells, tissues, or organs in sterile cultures.

 
