Comparative Genome Mapping
and Model Systems

Knowledge of plant genomes has been growing with the
advent of new techniques to study DNA sequences, such as
gene mapping and chromosome synteny. An increased un-
derstanding of plant genomes can lead to better manipula-
tion of genetic traits such as crop yield, disease resistance,
growth abilities, nutritive qualities, or drought tolerance.
Multiple genes could encode each of these traits. By
genome mapping model plants, plant biologists can lay a
foundation for future plant breeding and for an under-
standing of plant evolution at the genetic level. One such
model system, rice, has been chosen because it has a high
level of synteny with other grains. In a genomic sense, “rice
is wheat.” This provides a strong argument for rice as a
model system. The other model system that has been se-
lected in plants is Arabidopsis. This small weed that is a
member of the mustard family has an unusually small
genome with only 20% repetitive DNA (see table 43.1)
which has made it possible to sequence the entire genome.
Getting down to the level of individual base pairs is a step-
wise process, as described below.

RFLP and AFLP as Tools to Map Genomes
and Detect Polymorphisms

The classical approach to locating genes in linear order on
chromosomes involves making crosses between plants with
known genes identified by mutations. The frequency of re-
combination is used to calculate distance (see chapter 13).
The result is a genetic or linkage map. This approach is
limited to genes with alleles that can be phenotypically
identified. Much more of the genome can be mapped using
RFLPs (restriction fragment length polymorphisms) which
need not have a macroscopic phenotype. This approach,
described in detail in chapter 19 (see figures 19.2, 19.4,
19.9, and 19.10), involves analysis of the RFLP map, or the
pattern of DNA fragments, produced when DNA is treated
with restriction enzymes that cleave at specific sites. RFLP
mapping can identify important regions of the genome at a
glance, while sequence data require sophisticated com-
puter-based searching and matching systems. A comparison
of the RFLP maps of parents and progeny can give an indi-
cation of the heritability of gene traits and of heritable loci
that are characteristic of traits. If the trait and the RFLP
co-segregate, you have a direct link between the trait and
the DNA sequence. Moreover, after full genomes are se-
quenced at the nucleotide level, the genetic identification
of RFLP markers in regions of interest will be facilitated.
Remember, RFLPs are chunks of DNA that may contain a
part of one or more genes. Currently, the most dense
RFLP map is in rice where 2000 DNA sequences have
been mapped onto 12 chromosomes.

Another tool that utilizes sequence variability is
AFLPs, or amplified fragment length polymorphisms.

858 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

 

x
a

FE TREE RE TT

S

FIGURE 43.6

AFLP fingerprint pattem from normal and
“hypernodulating” soybeans. It is still not known what
determines the nodule number in (a) a normal soybean root versus
()) a “hypernodulating” mutant. The slight genetic differences
between these plants can be evaluated by AFLP (0). The banding
pattern changes indicate what genetic markers are linked to the
“hypernodulation” mutation. Lane 1: normal soybean DNA; Lane
2: “hypernodulating” soybean DNA.

Hybridizing DNA primers with genomic DNA fragments
that have been cut with restriction enzymes, usually EcoRI
and Msel, and then subsequently amplified using the poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) generates AFLP maps. The
resulting PCR products, which represent each piece of
DNA cut by a restriction enzyme, are separated by size
