Transposable Elements

Transposable elements, described in chapter 18, are special
sequences of DNA with the ability to move from place to
place in the genome. They can excise from one site at un-
predictable times and reinsert in another site. For this rea-
son, transposable elements have been called “jumping
genes.” Transposable elements often insert into coding re-
gions or regulatory regions of a gene and so affect expres-
sion of that gene, resulting in a mutation that may or may
not be detectable (figure 43.40). Barbara McClintock won
the Nobel Prize in 1983 for her work describing transpos-
able elements in corn (see figure 18.23).

Due to their capacity to replicate independently and to
move through the genome, transposable elements can also
be involved in generating repetitive DNA sequences. This
is believed to be the case with the extensive retroviral-like
insertions in maize. Retention of the repetitive DNA se-
quence at a particular site in the genome would involve in
each instance a mutation in the transposable element itself
which removes its capacity to transpose.

Chloroplast Genome and Its Evolution

The chloroplast is a plant organelle that functions in pho-
tosynthesis, and it can independently replicate in the plant
cell. Plant chloroplasts have their own specific DNA, which
is separate from that present in the nucleus. This DNA is
maternally inherited and encodes unique chloroplast pro-
teins. Many of the proteins encoded by chloroplast DNA
are involved in photosynthesis. Chloroplasts are thought to
have originated from a photosynthetic prokaryote that be-
came part of a plant cell by endosymbiosis. In support of
this concept, research has shown that chloroplast DNA has
many prokaryote-like features. Chloroplast DNA is present
as circular loops of double-stranded DNA similar to
prokaryotic chromosomal DNA. Moreover, chloroplast
DNA contains genes for ribosomes that are very similar to
those present in prokaryotes.

The DNA in chloroplasts of all land plants has about the
same number of genes (~100), and they are present in about
the same order (figure 43.5). In contrast to the evolution of
the DNA in the plant cell nucleus, chloroplast DNA has
evolved at a more conservative pace, and therefore shows a
more interpretable evolutionary pattern when scientists
study DNA sequence similarities. Chloroplast DNA is also
not subject to modification caused by transposable ele-
ments and mutations due to recombination. Over time,
there appears to have been some genetic exchange between
the nuclear and chloroplast genomes. For example, the key
enzyme in the Calvin cycle of photosynthesis (RUBISCO)
consists of a large and small subunit. The small subunit is
encoded in the nuclear genome. The protein it encodes has
a targeting sequence that allows it to enter the chloroplast
and combine with large subunits. The evolutionary history
of the localization of these genes is a puzzle.

Large single-copy region
(-87 kb)

      
 

Typical plant chloroplast genome

Inverted repeat
(-25 kb)

Small single-copy region
(-18 kb)

FIGURE 43.5

Chloroplast genome. A schematic drawing of a typical plant
chloroplast genome indicates two regions containing single-copy
genes, one containing about 87,000 nucleotides (87 kb) and
another about 18 kb, and two symmetrical inverted repeats, each
containing about 25 kb. Chloroplast DNA does not show
recombination events that are common in the nuclear genome. It
is thus a good subject for DNA phylogenetic analysis.

A characteristic feature of the chloroplast genome is the
presence of two identical inverted repeats in the DNA se-
quence. Other DNA sequence inversions or deletions
occur rarely, but when they do occur, they provide a char-
acter or a tool to analyze evolutionary relationships be-
tween plants. For instance, a large inversion in chloroplast
DNA is found in the Asteraceae, or sunflower family, and
not in other plant families. While previous work on the
evolutionary relationships between plants has emphasized
the comparative analysis of plant anatomy or morphology,
there is increasing use of plant molecular data such as
chloroplast DNA sequences. When considered together,
morphological and molecular information can provide a
clearer understanding of the evolutionary processes that
govern biological diversity.

 

Plant nuclear genomes may contain large amounts of
DNA in comparison to other eukaryotic organisms, but
only a small amount of this DNA represents functional
genes. Excess DNA in plant genomes can result from
increased chromosome copy number (polyploidy), and
DNA sequence repeats. Chloroplast genomes evolve
more slowly than nuclear genomes and can provide
important evolutionary information.

 

Chapter 43. Plant Genomics 857
