Arabidopsis
OA genome

SS Wa
So

>

 

 

1. Target DNA is amplified by PCR.

 

DNA

Robotic
quill

   
      

DNA
microarray

 

 

 

2. DNA\is printed onto
a microscope slide.

 

 

 

Flower-specific mRNA

=> > sample 1)
Reverse transcriptase
Il Fluorescent nucleotide

r eames
Leat-specific mRNA

x SE Garmple 2)

Reverse transcriptase

cDNA probe

[i Different fluorescent nucleotide

a

‘cDNA probe

 

3. Samples of mRNA are obtained, for instance from
two different tissues. Probes for each sample are
prepared using a different fluorescent nucleotide for
each sample.

 

 

 

FIGURE 43.7

  
   
  

Probe 1
P| i.
Mix
Hybridize
hE
Probe 2

  
 

Weak

signal from

probe 2 Steng
Similar from
signals from : probe 1
both probes |(_) x

stong © 3 owe
signal from fon
probe 2 eee ribet

 

4, The two probes are mixed and
hybridized with the microarray.
Fluorescent signals on the
microarray are analyzed.

 

 

 

Microarrays. Microarrays are created by robotically placing DNA onto a microscope slide. The microarray can then be probed with RNA
from tissues of interest to identify expressed DNA. The microarray with hybridized probes is analyzed and often displayed as a false-color

image. If a gene is frequently expressed in one of the samples, the fluorescent signal will be strong (red or green) where the gene is located
on the microarray. Ifa gene is rarely expressed in one of the samples, the signal will be weak (pink or light green). A yellow color indicates

genes that are expressed at similar levels in each sample.

via gel electrophoresis. The band sizes on an AFLP gel
tend to show more polymorphisms than those found with
RFLP mapping because the entire genome is visible on
the gel (figure 43.6). Both RFLPs and AFLPs (among
many other tools for genome analysis) can provide mark-
ers of traits which are inherited from parents to progeny
through crosses.

DNA Microarrays

How can DNA sequences be made available to researchers,
other than as databases of electronic information? DNA mi-
croarrays are a way to link sequences with the study of gene

function and make DNA sequences available to many. Also
called biochips or “genes on chips,” these convenient assays
for the presence of a particular version of a gene were dis-
cussed in chapter 19. To prepare a particular DNA microar-
ray, fragments of DNA are deposited on a microscope slide
by a robot at indexed locations. Up to 10,000 spots can be
displayed over an area of only 3.24 cm? (figure 43.7). The
primary applications of microarrays are to determine which
genes are expressed developmentally in certain tissues or in
response to environmental factors. RNA from these tissues
can be isolated and used as a probe for these microarrays.
Only those sequences that are expressed in the tissues will
be present to hybridize to the spot on the microarray.

Chapter 43 Plant Genomics 859
