Chapter 45

Summary

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

43.1 Genomic organization is much more varied in plants than in animals.

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

¢ Plant genomes are very large in comparison to other

1. Describe mechanisms for the

* Scientists on Science:

 

 

: : we ve Plant Bi hnology
eukaryotes, mainly due to a high amount of repetitive _generation of highly repetitive ye ant Biotechnology
DNA. ° DNA in plants.

* Plant genomes can be compared with one another by iloriatiaaated

{ ; ° .Y Arabidopsis thaliana make it

mapping the locations of certain genes or gene traits fal del

in various plants. RFLPs and AFLPs can be used to set asa moue syerem in

In varlous plants. f genetic studies and for the

map plant DNA. sequencing of its entire genome?
¢ Arabidopsis thaliana has a small genome, for a plant. Why is rice useful as a model

This complete genome is essentially sequenced, so all__ system for the analysis of the

genes and their positions are known. genome of a monocot plant?

* The molecular maps of the genomes of rice and other 3: wey will microarrays be
grains demonstrate remarkable similarity. useful in Runetronal genomics:

. . so 4. What t f questi an bi

* Functional genomics and proteomics will allow us to ked i" yE ° hes nome canoe

derstand and utilize the information in fully se- asked now that the Arabidepsis
unders ly and rice genomes are essentially
quenced plant genomes. sequenced?

43.2 Advances in plant tissue culture are revolutionizing agriculture.

* With the addition of appropriate combinations of 5. Describe how whole plants
plant growth regulators (auxin, cytokinin), plant cells can be regenerated from tissue-
in culture ean be directed to form organs, embryos, cured plane cel wing ether
or whole plants. organogenesis or somatic ce

P : embryogenesis. Which approach

* Anther cultures can produce haploid plants or plants requires the use of suspension
that are homozygous for all traits. cell cultures?

¢ Plant tissue culture has a number of practical 6. How are plant protoplasts
applications, including the industrial production of generated, and what is protoplast
plant chemicals, clonal propagation of horticultural fusion? How can plant
plants, and the generation of disease-free plants. protoplasts be used to generate

-G hof pl LL k ded hybrid plants that would not

rowth of plant cells in tissue culture over extende Gecur in naenre?
time results in an increase in genetic variation called
somaclonal variation. This variation can extend
beyond the traits present in the gene pool and can
generate novel genetic variations in breeding studies.

43.3 Plant biotechnology now affects every aspect of agriculture.

* Genetic engineering and biotechnology can be 7. Describe how the particle gun * Student Research:
utilized to improve the quality of food crops, increase and electroporation can be used 74 Plant Crop Protection

disease resistance, and improve the tolerance of crops
to environmental stress.

¢ Akey aspect of plant genetic engincering is the
introduction of foreign DNA into plant cells. This
can be achieved using a particle gun or
electroporation.

872 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

to introduce foreign DNA into
plant cells. Which approach
requires the use of plant
protoplasts? Why?

8. How can a plant be
“engineered” to produce an
edible vaccine ?
