The Noncoelomate
Animals

 

Concept Outline

44.1 Animals are multicellular heterotrophs without
cell walls.

Some General Features of Animals. Animals lack cell
walls and move more rapidly and in more complex ways
than other organisms. The animal kingdom is divided into
animals without symmetry and tissues, and animals with
symmetry and tissues.

Five Key Transitions in Body Plan. Over the course of
animal evolution, the animal body plan has undergone
many changes, five of them significant.

44.2 The simplest animals are not bilaterally
symmetrical.
Parazoa. Sponges are the most primitive animals, without
either tissues or, for the most part, symmetry.

Eumetazoa: The Radiata. Cnidarians and ctenophorans
have distinct tissues and radial symmetry.

44.3 Acoelomates are solid worms that lack a body
cavity.
Eumetazoa: The Bilaterian Acoelomates. Flatworms

are the simplest bilaterally symmetrical animals; they lack a
body cavity, but possess true organs.

44.4 Pseudocoelomates have a simple body cavity.

‘The Pseudocoelomates. Nematodes and rotifers possess
a simple body cavity.

44.5 The coming revolution in animal taxonomy will
likely alter traditional phylogenies.
Reevaluating How the Animal Body Plan Evolved. The

use of molecular data will most likely generate changes to
traditional animal phylogenies.

 

A noncoelomate: a marine flatworm. Some of the earliest
invertebrates to evolve, marine flatworms possess internal organs
but lack a true cavity called a coelom.

 

W: will now explore the great diversity of animals, the
result of a long evolutionary history. Animals, con-
stituting millions of species, are among the most abundant
living things. Found in every conceivable habitat, they be-
wilder us with their diversity. We will start with the sim-
plest members of the animal kingdom—sponges, jellyfish,
and simple worms. These animals lack a body cavity called
a coelom, and are thus called noncoclomates (figure 44.1).
The major organization of the animal body first evolved in
these animals, a basic body plan upon which all the rest of
animal evolution has depended. In chapters 45 through 48,
we will consider the more complex animals. Despite their
great diversity

 

you will see that all animals have much in
common.

875
