The Golgi Apparatus: Delivery
System of the Cell

At various locations within the endomembrane system,
flattened stacks of membranes called Golgi bodies occur,
often interconnected with one another. These structures
are named for Camillo Golgi, the nineteenth-century
Italian physician who first called attention to them. The
numbers of Golgi bodies a cell contains ranges from 1 or
a few in protists, to 20 or more in animal cells and several
hundred in plant cells. They are especially abundant in
glandular cells, which manufacture and secrete sub-
stances. Collectively the Golgi bodies are referred to as
the Golgi apparatus (figure 5.15).

The Golgi apparatus functions in the collection, packag-
ing, and distribution of molecules synthesized at one place
in the cell and utilized at another location in the cell. A
Golgi body has a front and a back, with distinctly different
membrane compositions at the opposite ends. The front, or
receiving end, is called the cis face, and is usually located
near ER. Materials move to the cis face in transport vesicles
that bud off of the ER. These vesicles fuse with the cis face,
emptying their contents into the interior, or lumen, of the
Golgi apparatus. These ER-synthesized molecules then pass
through the channels of the Golgi apparatus until they
reach the back, or discharging end, called the trans face,
where they are discharged in secretory vesicles (figure 5.16).

Proteins and lipids manufactured on the rough and
smooth ER membranes are transported into the Golgi ap-

   

FIGURE 5.15

Secretory vesicles

paratus and modified as they pass through it. The most
common alteration is the addition or modification of short
sugar chains, forming a g/ycoprotein when sugars are com-
plexed to a protein and a glycolipid when sugars are bound
toa lipid. In many instances, enzymes in the Golgi appara-
tus modify existing glycoproteins and glycolipids made in
the ER by cleaving a sugar from their sugar chain or modi-
fying one or more of the sugars.

The newly formed or altered glycoproteins and glycol-
ipids collect at the ends of the Golgi bodies, in flattened
stacked membrane folds called cisternae (Latin,
“collecting vessels”). Periodically, the membranes of the
cisternae push together, pinching off small, membrane-
bounded secretory vesicles containing the glycoprotein
and glycolipid molecules. These vesicles then move to
other locations in the cell, distributing the newly
synthesized molecules to their appropriate destinations.
Liposomes are synthetically manufactured vesicles that
contain any variety of desirable substances (such as
drugs), and can be injected into the body. Because the
membrane of liposomes is similar to plasma and organellar
membranes, these liposomes serve as an effective and
natural delivery system to cells and may prove to be of
great therapeutic value.

 

The Golgi apparatus is the delivery system of the
eukaryotic cell. It collects, packages, modifies, and
distributes molecules that are synthesized at one
location within the cell and used at another.

 

 

0.57 um

The Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is a smooth, concave membranous structure located near the middle of the cell. It receives
material for processing on one surface and sends the material packaged in vesicles off the other. The substance in a vesicle could be for
export out of the cell or for distribution to another region within the same cell.

90 = Part I Biology of the Cell
