| 43.3 Plant biotechnology now affects every aspect of agriculture.

Plant biotechnology provides an efficient means to pro-
duce an array of novel products and tools for use by our
global society. Agricultural biotechnology has the poten-
tial to increase farming revenue, lower the cost of raw ma-
terials, and improve environmental quality. Plant genetic
engineering is becoming a key tool for improving crop
production.

World Population in Relation to
Advances Made in Crop Production

Due in a large part to scientific advances in crop breeding
and farming techniques, world food production has dou-
bled since 1960. Moreover, productivity of agricultural
land and water usage has tripled over this time period.
While major genetic improvements have been made in
crops through crop breeding, this can be a slow process.
Furthermore, most crops grown in the United States pro-
duce less than 50% of their genetic potential. These short-
falls in yield are due in large part to the inability of crops to
tolerate or adapt to environmental stresses (salt, water, and
temperature), pests, and disease (figure 43.18).

FIGURE 43.18
Corn crop
productivity well
below its genetic
potential due to
drought stress. Corn
production can be
limited by water
deficiencies due to
drought during the
growing season in dry
climates.

868 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

The world now farms an area the size of South America,
but without the scientific advances of the past 30 years,
farmland equaling the entire western hemisphere would be
required to feed the world. Nevertheless, the world popula-
tion is expected to double to 12 billion by the first half of
this century, and it is not clear whether current levels of
food production can keep pace with this rate of population
growth. Many believe the exploitation of conventional crop
breeding programs may have reached their limit. The ques-
tion is how best to feed billions of additional people with-
out destroying much of the planet in the process. In this re-
spect, the disappearance of tropical rain forests, wetlands,
and other vital habitats will accelerate unless agriculture
becomes more productive and less taxing to the environ-
ment. Advances in our understanding of plant reproduction
from the molecular to the ecosystems levels are providing
tools to further protect natural environments by preventing
the spread of modified genes to wild populations.

 

Although improved farming practices and crop breeding
have increased crop yields, it is uncertain whether these
approaches can keep pace with the food demands of an
ever-increasing world population.

 

 
