Plant Biotechnology
for Agricultural Improvement

It seems certain that plant genetic engineering will play a
major role in resolving the problem of feeding an increas-
ing world population. The nutritional quality of crop plants
is being improved by increasing the levels of nutrients they
contain, such as beta-carotene and vitamins A, C, and E,
which may protect people from health problems such as
cancer and heart disease. Biotechnology is now being em-
ployed to improve the quality of seed grains, increase pro-
tein levels in forage crops, and transform plants to improve
their resistance to disease, insects, herbicides, and viruses.
Other stresses on plants, such as heat or salt, can be im-
proved by engineering higher tolerance levels.

Compared with approaches that rely on plant breed-
ing, genetic engineering can compress the time frame re-
quired for the development of improved crop varieties.
Moreover, in genetic engineering, genetic barriers, such
as pollen compatibility with the pistil, no longer limit the
introduction of advantageous traits from diverse species
into crop plants. Once a useful trait has been identified at
the level of individual genes and their DNA sequences,
the incorporation of this trait into a crop plant requires
only the introduction of the DNA bearing these genes
into the crop plant genome. The process of incorporating
foreign DNA into an existing plant genome is called
plant transformation. At present, there are several ap-
proaches for plant transformation; the use of Agrobac-
terium tumefaciens in this process was described in chapter
19. This approach works best if the plant being trans-
formed is a dicot. However, many food crops, such as the
cereal grains (rice, wheat, corn, barley, oats, and so on)
are monocots. Two additional plant transformation
methods that can be used with both dicots and monocots
are discussed in the next section.

Useful Traits That Can Be Introduced into Plants

Although plant transformation represents a relatively new
technology, extensive efforts are underway to utilize this
approach to develop plants and food products with benefi-
cial characteristics. We discussed a variety of biotechnolog-
ical applications for crop improvement in chapter 19. Fur-
ther applications of this approach involve modifications of
nutritional quality of foods, phytoremediation, production
of plastics, and using plants as “edible vaccines.”

Improved Nutritional Quality of Food Crops. Approx-
imately 75% of the world’s production of oils and fats
come from plant sources. For medical and dietary reasons,
there is a trend away from the use of animal fats and toward
the use of high-quality vegetable oils. Genetic engineering
has allowed researchers to modify seed oil biochemistry to
produce “designer oils” for edible and nonedible products.
One technique modifies canola oil to replace cocoa butter

as a source of saturated fatty acids; others modify the en-
zyme ACP desaturase for the creation of monounsaturated
fatty acids in transgenic plants. High-lauric acid canola has
been planted in several countries and used in both foods
and soaps.

Attempts are also underway to modify the amino acid
contents of various plant seeds to present a more complete
nutritional diet to the consumer. A high-lysine corn seed is
being developed; this would cut down on the need for ly-
sine supplements that are currently added to livestock feed.
Biotechnology has the potential to make plant foods
healthier and more nutritious for human consumption.
Fruits and vegetables, such as tomatoes, may be engineered
to contain increased levels of vitamins A and C and beta-
carotene, which, when included in the human diet, may
help protect against chronic diseases.

Phytoremediation. Cleaning up environmental toxins to
reclaim polluted land is an ongoing challenge. Genetically
modified plants offer an enticing solution. Work is pro-
gressing on plants that accumulate heavy metals at high
concentrations. These plants can then be harvested. Be-
cause most of their biomass is water, the dried plants allow
for the collection of the metals in a small area. Organic
compounds that pose hazards to human health have the po-
tential to be taken up by plants and broken down into
harmless components. Modified biochemical pathways are
being used to break down toxic substances. Modified
poplars, for example, have been engineered to break down

Plants Bearing Vaccines for Human Diseases. An-
other very interesting application of plant genetic engi-
neering includes the introduction of “vaccine genes” into
edible plants. Here, genes encoding the antigen (for ex-
ample, a viral coat protein) for a particular human
pathogen is introduced into the genome of an edible plant
such as a banana, tomato, or apple via plant transforma-
tion. This antigen protein would then be present in the
cells of the edible plant, and a human individual that con-
sumed the plant would develop antibodies against the
pathogenic organism. Currently, researchers are trying to
develop such edible vaccines for a coat protein of hepatitis
B, an enterotoxin B of E. coli, and a viral capsid protein of
the Norwalk virus. The measles gene has been introduced
into tobacco as a model system and is now being intro-
duced into lettuce and rice. This is a terrific advance for
tropical areas where it is difficult to keep the traditional
vaccine cold (remember that proteins degrade rapidly as
the temperature increases).

 

Genetic engineering of crop plants has allowed
researchers to alter the oil content, amino acid
composition, and vitamin content of food crops.
Genetic engineering may also allow the production of
food crops bearing “edible vaccines.”

 

Chapter 43. Plant Genomics 869
