| 44.1 Animals are multicellular heterotrophs without cell walls.

Some General Features of Animals

Animals are the eaters or consumers of the earth. They are
heterotrophs and depend directly or indirectly on plants,
photosynthetic protists (algae), or autotrophic bacteria for
nourishment. Animals are able to move from place to place
in search of food. In most, ingestion of food is followed by
digestion in an internal cavity.

Multicellular Heterotrophs. All animals are multicellu-
lar heterotrophs. The unicellular heterotrophic organisms
called Protozoa, which were at one time regarded as simple
animals, are now considered to be members of the kingdom
Protista, the large and diverse group we discussed in chap-
ter 35.

Diverse in Form. Almost all animals (99%) are inverte-
brates, lacking a backbone. Of the estimated 10 million liv-
ing animal species, only 42,500 have a backbone and are re-
ferred to as vertebrates. Animals are very diverse in form,
ranging in size from ones too small to see with the naked
eye to enormous whales and giant squids. The animal king-
dom includes about 35 phyla, most of which occur in the
sea. Far fewer phyla occur in fresh water and fewer still
occur on land. Members of three phyla, Arthropoda (spi-
ders and insects), Mollusca (snails), and Chordata (verte-
brates), dominate animal life on land.

No Cell Walls. Animal cells are distinct among multicel-
lular organisms because they lack rigid cell walls and are
usually quite flexible. The cells of all animals but sponges
are organized into structural and functional units called tis-
sues, collections of cells that have joined together and are
specialized to perform a specific function; muscles and
nerves are tissues types, for example.

Active Movement. The ability of animals to move more
rapidly and in more complex ways than members of other
kingdoms is perhaps their most striking characteristic and
one that is directly related to the flexibility of their cells
and the evolution of nerve and muscle tissues. A remark-
able form of movement unique to animals is flying, an abil-
ity that is well developed among both insects and verte-
brates. Among vertebrates, birds, bats, and pterosaurs
(now-extinct flying reptiles) were or are all strong fliers.
The only terrestrial vertebrate group never to have had fly-
ing representatives is amphibians.

Sexual Reproduction. Most animals reproduce sexually.
Animal eggs, which are nonmotile, are much larger than
the small, usually flagellated sperm. In animals, cells
formed in meiosis function directly as gametes. The hap-
loid cells do not divide by mitosis first, as they do in plants
and fungi, but rather fuse directly with each other to form

876 Part XII Animal Diversity

the zygote. Consequently, with a few exceptions, there is
no counterpart among animals to the alternation of haploid
(gametophyte) and diploid (sporophyte) generations char-
acteristic of plants (see chapter 32).

Embryonic Development. Most animals have a similar
pattern of embryonic development. The zygote first under-
goes a series of mitotic divisions, called cleavage, and be-
comes a solid ball of cells, the morula, then a hollow ball of
cells, the blastula. In most animals, the blastula folds in-
ward at one point to form a hollow sac with an opening at
one end called the blastopore. An embryo at this stage is
called a gastrula. The subsequent growth and movement
of the cells of the gastrula produce the digestive system,
also called the gut or intestine. The details of embryonic
development differ widely from one phylum of animals to
another and often provide important clues to the evolu-
tionary relationships among them.

 

The Classification of Animals

Two subkingdoms are generally recognized within the
kingdom Animalia: Parazoa—animals that for the most part
lack a definite symmetry and possess neither tissues nor or-
gans, mostly comprised of the sponges, phylum Porifera;
and Eumetazoa—animals that have a definite shape and
symmetry and, in most cases, tissues organized into organs
and organ systems. Although very different in structure,
both types evolved from a common ancestral form (figure
44.2) and possess the most fundamental animal traits.

All cumetazoans form distinct embryonic layers during
development that differentiate into the tissues of the adult
animal. Eumetazoans of the subgroup Radiata (having ra-
dial symmetry) have two layers, an outer ectoderm and an
inner endoderm, and thus are called diploblastic. All
other eumetazoans, the Bilateria (having bilateral symme-
try), are triploblastic and produce a third layer, the meso-
derm, between the ectoderm and endoderm. No such lay-
ers are present in sponges.

The major phyla of animals are listed in table 44.1. The
simplest invertebrates make up about 14 phyla. In this
chapter, we will discuss 8 of these 14 phyla and focus in de-
tail on 4 major phyla: phylum Porifera (sponges), which
lacks any tissue organization; phylum Cnidaria (radially
symmetrical jellyfish, hydroids, sea anemones, and corals);
phylum Platyhelminthes (bilaterally symmetrical flat-
worms); and phylum Nematoda (nematodes), a phylum that
includes both free-living and parasitic roundworms.

 

Animals are complex multicellular organisms typically
characterized by high mobility and heterotrophy. Most
animals also possess internal tissues and organs and
reproduce sexually.

 
