Applications of Plant
Tissue Culture

In addition to the applications already
described, plant tissue cultures have a
variety of uses both in agriculture and
in industry.

Suspension Cultures as
Biological Factories

An important industrial application of
plant tissue culture involves the use of
plant cells as biological factories.
Large-scale suspension cultures can be
grown to produce antimicrobial com-
pounds, antitumor alkaloids, vitamins,
insecticides, and food flavors. Plant
roots can also be grown in liquid cul-
ture, creating a mesh of roots that can
produce a number of useful plant com-
pounds.

Horticultural Uses

Plants with valuable traits can be mass
propagated through tissue-culture
cloning. In this application of plant tis-
sue culture, hundreds or even thou-
sands of genetically identical plants can
be produced by vegetative asexual
propagation from one plant source.
This has been extensively used in the
flower industry where genetically iden-
tical plants can be produced from a su-
perior parent plant. Propagation of (©)

plant tissue in the sterile environment

of the growth medium can also help in

the production disease-free plants, such as those cultured
from the meristematic (apical dome) tissue untouched by
viruses or other diseases because it is new growth. This ap-
proach has been particularly useful in the culture of dis-
ease-free orchids and raspberries.

Somaclonal Variation

Plant tissue culture also has a problematic side effect that
can be used as an asset under certain conditions. During
periods of extended growth of plant cells in callus or sus-
pension cell culture, various parts of the plant genome may
become more or less “active” due to a release of control
over gene expression. Transposable elements may also be-
come more active, and chromosomal rearrangements may
occur. Sometimes you end up with unusual numbers of
chromosomes. This altered control provides a new source
of genetic diversity that can result in novel traits which

 

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 43.17
Somaclonal variation.
Regeneration of plants
from tissue culture can
produce plants that are
not similar to their
parents due to
chromosomal alterations.
This variability can be
used to select plants with
altered traits. These
maize plants show
evidence of somaclonal
variation. (2) Yellow leaf
stripe. (b) Dwarf maize.
(¢ Yellow leaf tip.

were not even present in the original plant material used as
the explant to start the cultures (figure 43.17). This in-
creased genetic diversity following extended time in tissue
culture is called somaclonal variation. It can be problem-
atic if the desired goal is the propagation or production of
identical plant clones. However, somaclonal variation, in-
duced by intentionally growing plant cells in tissue over a
longer time period, can be very useful to generate novel
plants with traits not currently present in a given gene
pool. These traits can be identified either at the tissue cul-
ture stage (for example, disease resistance or heat tolerance)
or following the regeneration of whole plants by either
organogenesis or embryogenesis (plant size, photosynthetic
rates, and so forth).

 

Plant cell, tissue, and organ cultures have important
applications in agriculture and industry.

 

Chapter 43 Plant Genomics 867
