Methods of Plant Transformation
Plant Transformation Using the Particle Gun

Using a “gun” to blast plant cells does not seem like a suit-
able method for introducing foreign DNA into a plant
genome. However, it works, and many whole plants have
been regenerated after foreign DNA is shot through the
cell wall and then integrated into the plant genome. The
partide gun utilizes microscopic gold particles coated with
the foreign DNA, shooting these particles into plant cells
at high velocity. Acceleration of the particles to a sufficient
velocity to pass through the plant cell wall can be achieved
by a burst of high-pressure helium gas or an electrical dis-
charge (figure 43.192). Only a few cells actually receive the
foreign DNA and survive this treatment. These cells are
identified with the help of a selectable marker also present
on the foreign DNA. The selectable marker allows only
those cells receiving the foreign DNA to survive on a par-
ticular growth medium (figure 43.20). The selectable
markers include genes for resistance to a herbicide or an-
tibiotic. Plant cells which survive growth in the selection
medium are then tested for the presence of the foreign
gene(s) of interest.

Plant Transformation Using Electroporation

Foreign DNA can also be “shocked” into cells that lack a
cell wall, such as the plant protoplasts described earlier. A
pulse of high-voltage electricity in a solution containing
plant protoplasts and DNA briefly opens up small pores in
the protoplasts’ plasma membranes, allowing the foreign
DNA to enter the cell (figure 43.190). Ideally, the DNA in-
corporates into one of the plant’s chromosomes. Following
electroporation, the protoplasts are transferred to a growth
medium for cell wall regeneration, cell division, and, even-
tually, the regeneration of whole plants. As with the use of
the particle gun, a selectable marker is typically present in
the foreign DNA, and protoplasts containing foreign DNA
are selected based upon their ability to survive and prolifer-
ate in a growth medium containing the selection treatment
(antibiotic or herbicide). Once regenerated from electropo-
rated protoplasts, whole plants can then be evaluated for
the presence of the beneficial trait.

 

Plant biotechnology may play an important role in the
further improvement of crop plants. The particle gun
and electroporation are useful methods for introducing
foreign DNA into plants.

 

870 Part XI Plant Growth and Reproduction

HV(+)

Discharge chamber

!

DNA coated gold particles on film

.

Retaining screen

 

Target cells/tissue

   

 

Transformed
cell

Voltage
applied

(b)

FIGURE 43.19

Methods for plant transformation. (a) The particle gun is one
method for introducing foreign DNA into plant cells. Here an
electrical discharge propels DNA-coated gold particles into plant
cells or tissue. A retaining screen reduces cellular damage
associated with bombardment by only allowing the DNA-coated
particles to pass and retaining fragments of the mounting film. (b)
Foreign DNA can also be introduced into plant protoplasts by
electroporation. A brief pulse of electricity generates pores in the
plasma membrane, allowing DNA to enter the cells.
