 

 

The body of a sponge
is lined with cells called

PHYLUM PORIFERA: Multicellularity

 

Sponges are multicellular,
containing many different cell
types, such as amoebocytes

Between the outer wall and the body
cavity of the sponge body are amoeboid
cells called amoebocytes that secrete hard

 

and choanocytes.

Osculum

 

mineral needles called spicules and tough

 

choanocytes and is
perforated by many tiny
pores through which
water enters.

   

 

 

 

 

Flagellum

 

The beating flagella of the many choanocytes
draw water in through the pores, through the
sponge, and eventually out through the

 

 

 

Amoebocyte

 

 

protein fibers called spongin. These structures
strengthen and protect the sponge.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

osculum. Collar + Each choanocyte is exactly
™ like a type of unicellular
" protist called a
Choanocyte choanoflagellate. It
Nucleus | seems certain that these
protists are the ancestors
, of the sponges, and
When a choanocyte beats its flagellum, t
water is drawn down through openings in Se Ee as
its collar, where food particles become
trapped. The particles are then devoured
by endocytosis.
FIGURE 44.7

The body of a sponge is multicellular. The first evolutionary advance seen in animals is complex multicellularity, in which individuals

are composed of many highly specialized kinds of cells.

Reproduction in Sponges. Some sponges will re-form
themselves once they have passed through a silk mesh.
Thus, as you might suspect, sponges frequently repro-
duce by simply breaking into fragments. If a sponge
breaks up, the resulting fragments usually are able to re-
constitute whole new individuals. Sexual reproduction is
also exhibited by sponges, with some mature individuals
producing eggs and sperm. Larval sponges may undergo
their initial stages of development within the parent.
They have numerous external, flagellated cells and are
free-swimming. After a short planktonic stage, they settle

down on a suitable substrate, where they begin their
transformation into adults.

 

Sponges probably represent the most primitive animals,
possessing multicellularity but neither tissue-level
development nor body symmetry. Their cellular
organization hints at the evolutionary ties between the
unicellular protists and the multicellular animals.
Sponges are unique in the animal kingdom in
possessing choanocytes, special flagellated cells whose
beating drives water through the body cavity.

 

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals 885

 
