44.2. The simplest animals are not bilaterally symmetrical.

Parazoa

The sponges are Parazoans, animals
that lack tissues and organs and a defi-
nite symmetry. However, sponges,
like all animals, have true, complex
multicellularity, unlike their protistan
ancestors. The body of a sponge con-
tains several distinctly different types
of cells whose activities are loosely co-

 

ordinated with one another. As we
will see, the coordination between cell
types in the cumetazoans increases
and becomes quite complex.

The Sponges

There are perhaps 5000 species of
marine sponges, phylum Porifera,
and about 150 species that live in
fresh water. In the sea, sponges are
abundant at all depths. Although
some sponges are tiny, no more than
a few millimeters across, some, like
the loggerhead sponges, may reach 2
meters or more in diameter. A few
small ones are radially symmetrical,
but most members of this phylum
completely lack symmetry. Many
sponges are colonial. Some have a
low and encrusting form, while oth-
ers may be erect and lobed, some-
times in complex patterns. Although
larval sponges are free-swimming,
adults are sessile, or anchored in
place to submerged objects.
Sponges, like all animals, are
composed of multiple cell types (see
figure 44.7), but there is relatively
little coordination among sponge
cells. A sponge seems to be little

FIGURE 44.6

are ringed with yellow.
more than a mass of cells embedded 8 x

in a gelatinous matrix, but these

cells recognize one another with a

high degree of fidelity and are specialized for different
functions of the body.

The basic structure of a sponge can best be understood
by examining the form of a young individual. A small,
anatomically simple sponge first attaches to a substrate
and then grows into a vaselike shape. The walls of the
“vase” have three functional layers. First, facing into the
internal cavity are specialized flagellated cells called
choanocytes, or collar cells. These cells line either the
entire body cavity or, in many large and more complex

884 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

 

sponges, specialized chambers. Sec-
ond, the bodies of sponges are
bounded by an outer epithelial layer
consisting of flattened cells some-
what like those that make up the ep-
ithelia, or outer layers, of other ani-
mal phyla. Some portions of this
layer contract when touched or ex-
posed to appropriate chemical stim-
uli, and this contraction may cause
some of the pores to close. Third,
between these two layers, sponges
consist mainly of a gelatinous, pro-
tein-rich matrix called the mesohyl,
within which various types of amoe-
boid cells occur. In addition, many
kinds of sponges have minute nee-
dles of calcium carbonate or silica
known as spicules, or fibers of a
tough protein called spongin, or
both, within this matrix. Spicules
and spongin strengthen the bodies of
the sponges in which they occur. A
spongin skeleton is the model for the
bathtub sponge, once the skeleton of
a real animal, but now largely known
from its cellulose and plastic mimics.

Sponges feed in a unique way.
The beating of flagella that line the
inside of the sponge draws water in
through numerous small pores; the
name of the phylum, Porifera, refers
to this system of pores. Plankton and
other small organisms are filtered
from the water, which flows through
passageways and eventually is forced
out through an osculum, a special-
ized, larger pore (figure 44.6).

Aplysina longissima. This beautiful, bright
blue and yellow elongated sponge is found
on deep regions of coral reefs. The oscula

Choanocytes. Each choanocyte
closely resembles a protist with a sin-
gle flagellum (figure 44.7), a similarity
that reflects its evolutionary deriva-
tion. The beating of the flagella of the
many choanocytes that line the body cavity draws water in
through the pores and through the sponge, thus bringing
in food and oxygen and expelling wastes. Each choanocyte
flagellum beats independently, and the pressure they create
collectively in the cavity forces water out of the osculum. In
some sponges, the inner wall of the body cavity is highly
convoluted, increasing the surface area and, therefore, the
number of flagella that can drive the water. In such a
sponge, 1 cubic centimeter of sponge can propel more than
20 liters of water a day.
