4. The Evolution of Protostome and
Deuterostome Development

Two outwardly dissimilar large phyla, Echinodermata
(starfish) and Chordata (vertebrates), together with two
smaller phyla, have a series of key embryological features
different from those shared by the other animal phyla. Be-
cause it is extremely unlikely that these features evolved
more than once, it is believed that these four phyla share a
common ancestry. They are the members of a group called
the deuterostomes. Members of the other coclomate ani-
mal phyla are called protostomes. Deuterostomes evolved
from protostomes more than 630 million years ago.

Deuterostomes, like protostomes, are coclomates. They
differ fundamentally from protostomes, however, in the
way in which the embryo grows. Early in embryonic
growth, when the embryo is a hollow ball of cells, a por-
tion invaginates inward to form an opening called the
blastopore. The blastopore of a protostome becomes the
animal’s mouth, and the anus develops at the other end. In
a deuterostome, by contrast, the blastopore becomes the
animal’s anus, and the mouth develops at the other end
(figure 44.5).

Deuterostomes differ in many other aspects of embryo
growth, including the plane in which the cells divide. Per-
haps most importantly, the cells that make up an embry-
onic protostome each contain a different portion of the
regulatory signals present in the egg, so no one cell of the
embryo (or adult) can develop into a complete organism. In
marked contrast, any of the cells of a deuterostome can de-
velop into a complete organism.

5. The Evolution of Segmentation

The fifth key transition in the animal body plan involved
the subdivision of the body into segments. Just as it is effi-
cient for workers to construct a tunnel from a series of

  
     
  
 

Ectoderm

Invagination in
early embryo

Blastopore

(a) Protostomes

FIGURE 44.5

       

identical prefabricated parts, so segmented animals are “as-
sembled” from a succession of identical segments. During
the animal’s early development, these segments become
most obvious in the mesoderm but later are reflected in the
ectoderm and endoderm as well. Two advantages result
from early embryonic segmentation:

1. In annelids and other highly segmented animals, each
segment may go on to develop a more or less com-
plete set of adult organ systems. Damage to any one
segment need not be fatal to the individual because
the other segments duplicate that segment’s func-
tions.

2. Locomotion is far more effective when individual
segments can move independently because the animal
as a whole has more flexibility of movement. Because
the separations isolate each segment into an individ-
ual skeletal unit, each is able to contract or expand
autonomously in response to changes in hydrostatic
pressure. Therefore, a long body can move in ways
that are often quite complex.

Segmentation, also referred to as metamerism, underlies
the organization of all advanced animal body plans. In
some adult arthropods, the segments are fused, but seg-
mentation is usually apparent in their embryological devel-
opment. In vertebrates, the backbone and muscular areas
are segmented, although segmentation is often disguised in
the adult form. True segmentation is found in only three
phyla: the annelids, the arthropods, and the chordates, al-
though this trend is evident in many phyla.

 

Five key transitions in body design are responsible for
most of the differences we see among the major animal
phyla: the evolution of (1) tissues, (2) bilateral
symmetry, (3) a body cavity, (4) protostome and
deuterostome development, and (5) segmentation.

 

Mouth

Invagination in
early embryo

Blastopore

Anus.

(b) Deuterostomes

The fate of the blastopore. (a) In protostomes, the blastopore becomes the animal’s mouth. (}) In deuterostomes, the blastopore

becomes the animal’s anus.

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals 883
