Five Key Transitions in Body Plan
1. Evolution of Tissues

The simplest animals, the Parazoa, lack both defined tis-
sues and organs. Characterized by the sponges, these ani-
mals exist as aggregates of cells with minimal intercellular
coordination. All other animals, the Eumetazoa, have dis-
tinct tissues with highly specialized cells. The evolution of
tissues is the first key transition in the animal body plan.

2. Evolution of Bilateral Symmetry

Sponges also lack any definite symmetry, growing asym-
metrically as irregular masses. Virtually all other animals
have a definite shape and symmetry that can be defined
along an imaginary axis drawn through the animal’s body.
Animals with symmetry belong to either the Radiata, ani-
mals with radial symmetry, or the Bilateria, animals with
bilateral symmetry.

Radial Symmetry. Symmetrical bodies first evolved in
marine animals belonging to two phyla: Cnidaria (jellyfish,
sea anemones, and corals) and Ctenophora (comb jellies).
The bodies of members of these two phyla, the Radiata, ex-
hibit radial symmetry, a body design in which the parts of
the body are arranged around a central axis in such a way
that any plane passing through the central axis divides the
organism into halves that are approximate mirror images

(figure 44.32).

Bilateral Symmetry. The bodies of all other animals, the
Bilateria, are marked by a fundamental bilateral symme-
try, a body design in which the body has a right and a left
half that are mirror images of each other (figure 44.30). A
bilaterally symmetrical body plan has a top and a bottom,
better known respectively as the dorsal and ventral portions
of the body. It also has a front, or anterior end, and a back,
or posterior end. In some higher animals like echinoderms
(starfish), the adults are radially symmetrical, but even in
them the larvae are bilaterally symmetrical.

Bilateral symmetry constitutes the second major evolu-
tionary advance in the animal body plan. This unique form
of organization allows parts of the body to evolve in differ-
ent ways, permitting different organs to be located in dif-
ferent parts of the body. Also, bilaterally symmetrical ani-
mals move from place to place more efficiently than
radially symmetrical ones, which, in general, lead a sessile
or passively floating existence. Due to their increased mo-
bility, bilaterally symmetrical animals are efficient in seek-
ing food, locating mates, and avoiding predators.

During the early evolution of bilaterally symmetrical an-
imals, structures that were important to the organism in
monitoring its environment, and thereby capturing prey or
avoiding enemies, came to be grouped at the anterior end.
Other functions tended to be located farther back in the
body. The number and complexity of sense organs are

 

 

(b)

FIGURE 44.3

A comparison of radial and bilateral symmetry. (2) Radially
symmetrical animals, such as this sea anemone, can be bisected
into equal halves in any two-dimensional plane. () Bilaterally
symmetrical animals, such as this squirrel, can only be bisected
into equal halves in one plane (the sagittal plane).

much greater in bilaterally symmetrical animals than they
are in radially symmetrical ones.

Much of the nervous system in bilaterally symmetrical
animals is in the form of major longitudinal nerve cords. In
a very early evolutionary advance, nerve cells became
grouped around the anterior end of the body. These nerve
cells probably first functioned mainly to transmit impulses
from the anterior sense organs to the rest of the nervous
system. This trend ultimately led to the evolution of a defi-
nite head and brain area, a process called cephalization, as
well as to the increasing dominance and specialization of
these organs in the more advanced animal phyla.

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals 881
