3. Evolution of a Body Cavity

A third key transition in the evolution
of the animal body plan was the evolu-
tion of the body cavity. The evolution
of efficient organ systems within the
animal body was not possible until a
body cavity evolved for supporting or-
gans, distributing materials, and foster-
ing complex developmental interac-
tions.

The presence of a body cavity allows
the digestive tract to be larger and
longer. This longer passage allows for
storage of undigested food, longer ex-
posure to enzymes for more complete
digestion, and even storage and final
processing of food remnants. Such an
arrangement allows an animal to eat a
great deal when it is safe to do so and
then to hide during the digestive process, thus limiting the
animal’s exposure to predators. The tube within the body
cavity architecture is also more flexible, thus allowing the
animal greater freedom to move.

An internal body cavity also provides space within which
the gonads (ovaries and testes) can expand, allowing the ac-
cumulation of large numbers of eggs and sperm. Such stor-
age capacity allows the diverse modifications of breeding
strategy that characterize the more advanced phyla of ani-
mals. Furthermore, large numbers of gametes can be stored
and released when the conditions are as favorable as possi-
ble for the survival of the young animals.

Acoelomate

FIGURE 44.4

Kinds of Body Cavities. Three basic kinds of body plans
evolved in the Bilateria. Acoelomates have no body cavity.
Pseudocoelomates have a body cavity called the pseudo-
coel located between the mesoderm and endoderm. A third
way of organizing the body is one in which the fluid-filled
body cavity develops not between endoderm and meso-
derm, but rather entirely within the mesoderm. Such a
body cavity is called a coelom, and animals that possess
such a cavity are called coelomates. In coclomates, the gut
is suspended, along with other organ systems of the animal,
within the coelom; the coclom, in turn, is surrounded by a
layer of epithelial cells entirely derived from the mesoderm.
The portion of the epithelium that lines the outer wall of
the coelom is called the parietal peritoneum, and the por-
tion that covers the internal organs suspended within the
cavity is called the visceral peritoneum (figure 44.4).

The development of the coelom poses a problem—cir-
culation—solved in pseudocoelomates by churning the
fluid within the body cavity. In coclomates, the gut is
again surrounded by tissue that presents a barrier to dif-
fusion, just as it was in solid worms. This problem is
solved among coelomates by the development of a circu-
latory system, a network of vessels that carries fluids to
parts of the body. The circulating fluid, or blood, carries

 

882 Part XIT_ Animal Diversity

    

Endoderm

   
   

Visceral

peritoneum

Ectoderm

Mesoderm Coelomic
cavity

Endoderm

Pseudocoel Parietal

peritoneum

Pseudocoelomate Coelomate

Three body plans for bilaterally symmetrical animals.

nutrients and oxygen to the tissues and removes wastes
and carbon dioxide. Blood is usually pushed through the
circulatory system by contraction of one or more muscu-
lar hearts. In an open circulatory system, the blood
passes from vessels into sinuses, mixes with body fluid,
and then reenters the vessels later in another location. In
a closed circulatory system, the blood is physically sep-
arated from other body fluids and can be separately con-
trolled. Also, blood moves through a closed circulatory
system faster and more efficiently than it does through an
open system.

The evolutionary relationship among coclomates,
pseudocoelomates, and acoelomates is not clear. Acoclo-
mates, for example, could have given rise to coclomates,
but scientists also cannot rule out the possibility that
acoelomates were derived from coclomates. The different
phyla of pseudocoelomates form two groups that do not
appear to be closely related.

 

Advantages of a Coelom. What is the functional dif-
ference between a pseudocoel and a coclom? The answer
has to do with the nature of animal embryonic develop-
ment. In animals, development of specialized tissues in-
volves a process called primary induction in which one
of the three primary tissues (endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm) interacts with another. The interaction re-
quires physical contact. A major advantage of the coelo-
mate body plan is that it allows contact between meso-
derm and endoderm, so that primary induction can occur
during development. For example, contact between
mesoderm and endoderm permits localized portions of
the digestive tract to develop into complex, highly spe-
cialized regions like the stomach. In pseudocoelomates,
mesoderm and endoderm are separated by the body cav-
ity, limiting developmental interactions between these
tissues that ultimately limits tissue specialization and
development.
