Eumetazoa: The
Radiata

The subkingdom Eumetazoa contains
animals that evolved the first key
transition in the animal body plan:
distinct tissues. Two distinct cell layers
form in the embryos of these animals:
an outer ectoderm and an inner endo-
derm. These embryonic tissues give
rise to the basic body plan, differenti-
ating into the many tissues of the
adult body. Typically, the outer cov-
ering of the body (called the epider-
mis) and the nervous system develop
from the ectoderm, and the layer of
digestive tissue (called the gastroder-
mis) develops from the endoderm. A
layer of gelatinous material, called the
mesoglea, lies between the epidermis
and gastrodermis and contains the
muscles in most eumetazoans.

Eumetazoans also evolved true
body symmetry and are divided into
two major groups. The Radiata in-
cludes two phyla of radially symmet-
rical organisms, Cnidaria (pro-
nounced ni-DAH-ree-ah), the
cnidarians—hydroids, jellyfish, sea
anemones, and — corals—and
Ctenophora (pronounced tea~-NO-fo-
rah), the comb jellies, or ctenophores.
All other eumetazoans are in the Bila-
teria and exhibit a fundamental bilat-
eral symmetry.

The Cnidarians

Cnidarians are nearly all marine, al-
though a few live in fresh water.
These fascinating and simply con-
structed animals are basically gelati-
nous in composition. They differ
markedly from the sponges in organi-
zation; their bodies are made up of

 
   
     
 

Cnidarians

Gastrovascular cavity,
Epidermis

Mesoglea. ~~
Gastrodermis

Medusa

Tentacles:

Mouth

Gastrovascular

Polyp cavity

FIGURE 44.8

‘Two body forms of cnidarians, the
medusa and the polyp. These two phases
alternate in the life cycles of many
cnidarians, but a number—including the
corals and sea anemones, for example—
exist only as polyps. Both forms have two
fundamental layers of cells, separated by a
jellylike layer called the mesoglea.

calcareous (made up of calcium car-
bonate) external or internal skeleton,
or both. Only a few polyps are free-
floating. In contrast, most medusae
are free-floating and are often um-
brella-shaped. Their mouths usually
point downward, and the tentacles
hang down around them. Medusae,
particularly those of the class
Scyphozoa, are commonly known as
jellyfish because their mesoglea is
thick and jellylike.

Many cnidarians occur only as
polyps, while others exist only as
medusae; still others alternate be-
tween these two phases during their
life cycles. Both phases consist of
diploid individuals. Polyps may re-
produce asexually by budding; if they
do, they may produce either new
polyps or medusae. Medusae repro-

duce sexually. In most cnidarians, fer-
tilized eggs give rise to free-swim-
ming, multicellular, ciliated larvae
known as planulae. Planulae are com-
mon in the plankton at times and may
be dispersed widely in the currents.

A major evolutionary innovation in
cnidarians, compared with sponges, is
the internal extracellular digestion of
food (figure 44.9). Digestion takes
place within a gut cavity, rather than
only within individual cells. Digestive
enzymes are released from cells lining

the walls of the cavity and partially
break down food. Cells lining the gut
subsequently engulf food fragments
by phagocytosis.

The extracellular fragmentation
that precedes phagocytosis and intra-
cellular digestion allows cnidarians to
digest animals larger than individual
cells, an important improvement
over the strictly intracellular diges-
tion of sponges.

distinct tissues, although they have not evolved true organs.
These animals are carnivores. For the most part, they do not
actively move from place to place, but rather capture their
prey (which includes fishes, crustaceans, and many other
kinds of animals) with the tentacles that ring their mouths.
Cnidarians may have two basic body forms, polyps and
medusae (figure 44.8). Polyps are cylindrical and are usu-
ally found attached to a firm substrate. They may be soli-
tary or colonial. In a polyp, the mouth faces away from the
substrate on which the animal is growing, and, therefore,
often faces upward. Many polyps build up a chitinous or

886 Part XII Animal Diversity

Nets of nerve cells coordinate contraction of cnidarian
muscles, apparently with little central control. Cnidarians
have no blood vessels, respiratory system, or excretory
organs.

On their tentacles and sometimes on their body surface,
cnidarians bear specialized cells called cnidocytes. The name
of the phylum Cnidaria refers to these cells, which are highly
distinctive and occur in no other group of organisms. Within
each cnidocyte is a nematocyst, a small but powerful “har-
poon.” Each nematocyst features a coiled, threadlike tube.
Lining the inner wall of the tube is a series of barbed spines.
