oan

Feeding
polyp

   

 
 
   
 
 
    

Medusa bud Sip

fa Nay)
Reproductive >

polyp

FIGURE 44.10
The life cycle of Obelia, a marine
colonial hydroid. Polyps reproduce by
asexually budding, forming colonies. They
may also give rise to medusae, which
reproduce sexually via gametes. These
gametes fuse, producing zygotes that
develop into planulae, which, in turn, settle
down to produce polyps.

Mature
colony

Classes of Cnidarians

There are four classes of enidarians: Hydrozoa (hydroids),
Scyphozoa (jellyfish), Cubozoa (box jellyfish), and Antho-

zoa (anemones and corals).

Class Hydrozoa: The Hydroids. Most of the approxi-
mately 2700 species of hydroids (class Hydrozoa) have both
polyp and medusa stages in their life cycle (figure 44.10).
Most of these animals are marine and colonial, such as
Obelia and the already mentioned, very unusual Por-
tuguese man-of-war. Some of the marine hydroids are bio-
luminescent.

A well-known hydroid is the abundant freshwater genus
Hydra, which is exceptional in that it has no medusa stage
and exists as a solitary polyp. Each polyp sits on a basal
disk, which it can use to glide around, aided by mucous se-
cretions. It can also move by somersaulting, bending over
and attaching itself to the substrate by its tentacles, and
then looping over to a new location. If the polyp detaches
itself from the substrate, it can float to the surface.

Class Scyphozoa: The Jellyfish. The approximately 200
species of jellyfish (class Scyphozoa) are transparent or
translucent marine organisms, some of a striking orange,
blue, or pink color (figure 44.11). These animals spend
most of their time floating near the surface of the sea. In all
of them, the medusa stage is dominant—much larger and
more complex than the polyps. The medusae are bell-

888 Part XII Animal Diversity

rm

 

Medusae — i
Testis

* Sexual

  

 

 

Free-swimming
planula larva

Settles down to
start new colony

Young colony and
asexual budding

 

FIGURE 44.11
Class Scyphozoa. Jellyfish, Aurelia aurita.

shaped, with hanging tentacles around their margins. The
polyp stage is small, inconspicuous, and simple in structure.

The outer layer, or epithelium, of a jellyfish contains a
number of specialized epitheliomuscular cells, each of
which can contract individually. Together, the cells form a
muscular ring around the margin of the bell that pulses
rhythmically and propels the animal through the water. Jel-
lyfish have separate male and female individuals. After fer-
tilization, planulae form, which then attach and develop
into polyps. The polyps can reproduce asexually as well as
budding off medusae. In some jellyfish that live in the open
ocean, the polyp stage is suppressed, and planulae develop
directly into medusae.
