 

The Pseudocoelomates

All bilaterians except solid worms
possess an internal body cavity, the
third key transition in the animal
body plan. Seven phyla are character-
ized by their possession of a pseudo-
coel (see figure 44.4). Their evolu-
tionary relationships remain unclear,
with the possibility that the pseudo-
coclomate condition arose indepen-
dently many times. The pseudocoel
serves as a hydrostatic skeleton—one
that gains its rigidity from being filled
with fluid under pressure. The ani-
mals’ muscles can work against this
“skeleton,” thus making the move-
ment of pseudococlomates far more
efficient than that of the acoelomates.

Nematodes

Pseudocoelomates lack a defined
circulatory system; this role is per-
formed by the fluids that move within
the pseudocoel. Most pseudocoelo-
mates have a complete, one-way di-
gestive tract that acts like an assembly
line. Food is first broken down, then
absorbed, and then treated and
stored.

Phylum Nematoda:

The Roundworms

Nematodes, celworms, and other
roundworms constitute a large phy-
lum, Nematoda, with some 12,000
recognized species. Scientists estimate

FIGURE 44.19

 

mates have a simple body cavity.

nematodes move, their bodies whip
about from side to side.

Near the mouth of a nematode, at
its anterior end, are usually 16 raised,
hairlike, sensory organs. The mouth is
often equipped with piercing organs
called stylets. Food passes through
the mouth as a result of the sucking
action of a muscular chamber called
the pharynx. After passing through a
short corridor into the pharynx, food
continues through the other portions
of the digestive tract, where it is bro-
ken down and then digested. Some of
the water with which the food has
been mixed is reabsorbed near the end
of the digestive tract, and material that
has not been digested is eliminated
through the anus (figure 44.20).

Nematodes completely lack flagella
or cilia, even on sperm cells. Repro-

duction in nematodes is sexual, with
sexes usually separate. Their develop-
ment is simple, and the adults consist of
very few cells. For this reason, nema-
todes have become extremely important
subjects for genetic and developmental
studies (see chapter 17). The 1-mil-
limeter-long Caenorhabditis elegans ma-
tures in only three days, its body is
transparent, and it has only 959 cells. It
is the only animal whose complete de-
velopmental cellular anatomy is known.

About 50 species of nematodes, in-
cluding several that are rather com-
mon in the United States, regularly

that the actual number might ap-
proach 100 times that many. Members

Trichinella nematode encysted in pork.
‘The serious disease trichinosis can result
from eating undercooked pork or bear meat

parasitize human beings. The most se-
rious common nematode-caused dis-

of this phylum are found everywhere.
Nematodes are abundant and diverse
in marine and freshwater habitats, and
many members of this phylum are parasites of animals
(figure 44.19) and plants. Many nematodes are micro-
scopic and live in soil. It has been estimated that a spade-
ful of fertile soil may contain, on the average, a million
nematodes.

Nematodes are bilaterally symmetrical, unsegmented
worms. They are covered by a flexible, thick cuticle,
which is molted as they grow. Their muscles constitute a
layer beneath the epidermis and extend along the length
of the worm, rather than encircling its body. These lon-
gitudinal muscles pull both against the cuticle and the
pseudocoel, which forms a hydrostatic skeleton. When

containing such cysts.

894 = Part XII Animal Diversity

ease in temperate regions is trichi-

nosis, caused by worms of the genus

Trichinella. These worms live in the
small intestine of pigs, where fertilized female worms
burrow into the intestinal wall. Once it has penetrated
these tissues, each female produces about 1500 live
young. The young enter the lymph channels and travel to
muscle tissue throughout the body, where they mature
and form highly resistant, calcified cysts. Infection in
human beings or other animals arises from eating under-
cooked or raw pork in which the cysts of Trichinella are
present. If the worms are abundant, a fatal infection can
result, but such infections are rare; only about 20 deaths
in the United States have been attributed to trichinosis
during the past decade.
