| 44.3 Acoelomates are solid worms that lack a body cavity.

Eumetazoa: The
Bilaterian Acoelomates

The Bilateria are characterized by
the second key transition in the ani-
mal body plan, bilateral symmetry,
which allowed animals to achieve
high levels of specialization within
parts of their bodies. The simplest
bilaterians are the acoelomates; they
lack any internal cavity other than
the digestive tract. As discussed ear-
lier, all bilaterians have three em-
bryonic layers during development:
ectoderm, endoderm, and meso-
derm. We will focus our discussion
of the acoelomates on the largest
phylum of the group, the flatworms.

Flatworms

Phylum Platyhelminthes: The

Flatworms

Phylum Platyhelminthes consists of some 20,000 species.
These ribbon-shaped, soft-bodied animals are flattened
dorsoventrally, from top to bottom. Flatworms are among
the simplest of bilaterally symmetrical animals, but they do
have a definite head at the anterior end and they do possess
organs. Their bodies are solid: the only internal space con-
sists of the digestive cavity (figure 44.15).

Flatworms range in size from a millimeter or less to
many meters long, as in some tapeworms. Most species of
flatworms are parasitic, occurring within the bodies of

 
    

 
 

Opening
to pharynx

many other kinds of animals (figure
44.16). Other flatworms are free-liv-
ing, occurring in a wide variety of
marine and freshwater habitats, as
well as moist places on land. Free-
living flatworms are carnivores and
scavengers; they eat various small an-
imals and bits of organic debris.
They move from place to place by
means of ciliated epithelial cells,
which are particularly concentrated
on their ventral surfaces.

Those flatworms that have a diges-
tive cavity have an incomplete gut,
one with only one opening. As a re-
sult, they cannot feed, digest, and
eliminate undigested particles of food
simultaneously, and thus, flatworms
cannot feed continuously, as more ad-
vanced animals can. Muscular con-
tractions in the upper end of the gut

cause a strong sucking force allowing flatworms to ingest
their food and tear it into small bits. The gut is branched
and extends throughout the body, functioning in both di-
gestion and transport of food. Cells that line the gut engulf
most of the food particles by phagocytosis and digest
them; but, as in the cnidarians, some of these particles are
partly digested extracellularly. Tapeworms, which are par-
asitic flatworms, lack digestive systems. They absorb their
food directly through their body walls.

Intestinal diverticulum

Intestine

=

  

Circular muscles

   
 
 

Intestine

Longitudinal muscles

Parenchymal muscle

Oviduct

Nerve cord

Sperm duct

FIGURE 44.15
Architecture of a solid worm. This organism is Dugesia, the familiar

freshwater “planaria” of many biology laboratories.

890 = Part XII Animal Diversity
