Class Turbellaria: Turbellarians.
Only one of the three classes of flat-
worms, the turbellarians (class
Turbellaria) are free-living. One of
the most familiar is the freshwater
genus Dugesia, the common planaria
used in biology laboratory exercises.
Other members of this class are
widespread and often abundant in
lakes, ponds, and the sea. Some also muscle et
occur in moist places on land. »

&
Metacercarial ¥\
cysts in fish

Class Trematoda: The Flukes.
Two classes of parasitic flatworms
live within the bodies of other ani-
mals: flukes (class Trematoda) and SL
tapeworms (class Cestoda). Both

groups of worms have epithelial lay-
ers resistant to the digestive enzymes

 

and immune defenses produced by Cercaria
their hosts—an important feature in
their parasitic way of life. However,
they lack certain features of the free-
living flatworms, such as cilia in the
FIGURE 44.17

adult stage, eyespots, and other sen-
sory organs that lack adaptive signif-
icance for an organism that lives
within the body of another animal.

Flukes take in food through their mouth, just like their
free-living relatives. There are more than 10,000 named
species, ranging in length from less than 1 millimeter to
more than 8 centimeters. Flukes attach themselves within
the bodies of their hosts by means of suckers, anchors, or
hooks. Some have a life cycle that involves only one host,
usually a fish. Most have life cycles involving two or more
hosts. Their larvae almost always occur in snails, and there
may be other intermediate hosts. The final host of these
flukes is almost always a vertebrate.

To human beings, one of the most important flat-
worms is the human liver fluke, Clonorchis sinensis. Tt lives
in the bile passages of the liver of humans, cats, dogs, and
pigs. It is especially common in Asia. The worms are 1 to
2 centimeters long and have a complex life cycle. Al-
though they are hermaphroditic, cross-fertilization usu-
ally occurs between different individuals. Eggs, each con-
taining a complete, ciliated first-stage larva, or
miracidium, are passed in the feces (figure 44.17). If they
reach water, they may be ingested by a snail. Within the
snail an egg transforms into a sporocyst—a baglike struc-
ture with embryonic germ cells. Within the sporocysts are
produced rediae, which are elongated, nonciliated larvae.
These larvae continue growing within the snail, giving
rise to several individuals of the tadpole-like next larval
stage, cercariae.

Cercariae escape into the water, where they swim about
freely. If they encounter a fish of the family Cyprinidae—

892 Part XII Animal Diversity

Raw, infected fish
is consumed by

 

   
 

Adult fluke

_ Egg containing
miracidium

"\ Miracidium hatches
© after being eaten
: :

by snail

Redia

 

~ Sporocyst

Life cycle of the human liver fluke, Clonorchis sinensis.

the family that includes carp and goldfish—they bore into
the muscles or under the scales, lose their tails, and trans-
form into metacercariae within cysts in the muscle tissue.
Tf a human being or other mammal eats raw infected fish,
the cysts dissolve in the intestine, and the young flukes mi-
grate to the bile duct, where they mature. An individual
fluke may live for 15 to 30 years in the liver. In humans, a
heavy infestation of liver flukes may cause cirrhosis of the
liver and death.

Other very important flukes are the blood flukes of
genus Schistosoma. They afflict about 1 in 20 of the world’s
population, more than 200 million people throughout trop-
ical Asia, Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East.
Three species of Schistosoma cause the disease called schis-
tosomiasis, or bilharzia. Some 800,000 people die each year
from this disease.

Recently, there has been a great deal of effort to control
schistosomiasis. The worms protect themselves in part
from the body’s immune system by coating themselves with
a variety of the host’s own antigens that effectively render
the worm immunologically invisible (see chapter 37). De-
spite this difficulty, the search is on for a vaccine that
would cause the host to develop antibodies to one of the
antigens of the young worms before they protect them-
selves with host antigens. This vaccine would prevent hu-
mans from infection. The disease can be cured with drugs
after infection.
