Class Cubozoa: The Box Jellyfish.
Until recently the cubozoa were con-
sidered an order of Scyphozoa. As
their name implies, they are box-
shaped medusa (the polyp stage is in-
conspicuous and in many cases not
known). Most are only a few cm in
height, although some are 25 cm tall.
A tentacle or group of tentacles is
found at each corner of the box (figure
44.12). Box jellies are strong swim-
mers and voracious predators of fish.
Stings of some species can be fatal to
humans.

Class Anthozoa: The Sea Anemones
and Corals. By far the largest class of
cnidarians is Anthozoa, the “flower
animals” (from the Greek anthos,
meaning “flower”). The approxi-
mately 6200 species of this group are
solitary or colonial marine animals.
They include stonelike corals, soft-
bodied sea anemones, and other
groups known by such fanciful names
as sea pens, sea pansies, sea fans, and
sea whips (figure 44.13). All of these
names reflect a plantlike body topped
by a tuft or crown of hollow tentacles.
Like other cnidarians, anthozoans use
these tentacles in feeding. Nearly all
members of this class that live in shal-
low waters harbor symbiotic algae,
which supplement the nutrition of
their hosts through photosynthesis.
Fertilized eggs of anthozoans usually
develop into planulae that settle and
develop into polyps; no medusae are
formed.

Sea anemones are a large group of
soft-bodied anthozoans that live in
coastal waters all over the world and
are especially abundant in the tropics.
When touched, most sea anemones re-
tract their tentacles into their bodies
and fold up. Sea anemones are highly
muscular and relatively complex organ-
isms, with greatly divided internal cavi-
ties. These animals range from a few
millimeters to about 10 centimeters in
diameter and are perhaps twice that
high.

Corals are another major group of
anthozoans. Many of them secrete
tough outer skeletons, or exoskele-
tons, of calcium carbonate and are
thus stony in texture. Others, includ-

 

 

FIGURE 44.12
Class Cubozoa. Box jelly, Chironex fleckeri.

 

FIGURE 44.13
Class Anthozoa. The sessile soft-bodied
sea anemone.

 

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals

ing the gorgonians, or soft corals, do
not secrete exoskeletons. Some of the
hard corals help form coral reefs,
which are shallow-water limestone
ridges that occur in warm seas. Al-
though the waters where coral reefs
develop are often nutrient-poor, the
coral animals are able to grow actively
because of the abundant algae found
within them.

The Ctenophorans (Comb
Jellies)

The members of this small phylum
range from spherical to ribbonlike and
are known as comb jellies or sea wal-
nuts. Traditionally, the roughly 90 ma-
rine species of ctenophores (phylum
Ctenophora) were considered closely
related to the cnidarians. However,
ctenophores are structurally more com-
plex than cnidarians. They have anal
pores, so that water and other sub-
stances pass completely through the an-
imal. Comb jellies, abundant in the
open ocean, are transparent and usually
only a few centimeters long. The mem-
bers of one group have two long, re-
tractable tentacles that they use to cap-
ture their prey.

Ctenophores propel themselves
through water with eight comblike
plates of fused cilia that beat in a coor-
dinated fashion (figure 44.14). They are
the largest animals that use cilia for lo-
comotion. Many ctenophores are biolu-
minescent, giving off bright flashes of
light particularly evident in the open
ocean at night.

 

Cnidarians and ctenophores have
tissues and radial symmetry.
Cnidarians have a specialized kind
of cell called a cnidocyte.
Ctenophores propel themselves
through the water by means of
eight comblike plates of fused cilia.

 

FIGURE 44.14
A comb jelly (phylum Ctenophora).
Note the comblike plates along the ridges
of the base.

889
