Class Cestoda: The Tapeworms. Class Cestoda is the
third class of flatworms; like flukes, they live as parasites
within the bodies of other animals. In contrast to flukes,
tapeworms simply hang on to the inner walls of their hosts
by means of specialized terminal attachment organs and ab-
sorb food through their skins. Tapeworms lack digestive
cavities as well as digestive enzymes. They are extremely
specialized in relation to their parasitic way of life. Most
species of tapeworms occur in the intestines of vertebrates,
about a dozen of them regularly in humans.

The long, flat bodies of tapeworms are divided into
three zones: the scolex, or attachment organ; the unseg-
mented neck; and a series of repetitive segments, the
proglottids (see figure 44.16). The scolex usually bears
several suckers and may also have hooks. Each proglottid is
a complete hermaphroditic unit, containing both male and
female reproductive organs. Proglottids are formed contin-
uously in an actively growing zone at the base of the neck,
with maturing ones moving farther back as new ones are
formed in front of them. Ultimately the proglottids near
the end of the body form mature eggs. As these eggs are
fertilized, the zygotes in the very last segments begin to dif-
ferentiate, and these segments fill with embryos, break off,
and leave their host with the host’s feces. Embryos, each
surrounded by a shell, emerge from the proglottid through
a pore or the ruptured body wall. They are deposited on
leaves, in water, or in other places where they may be
picked up by another animal.

The beef tapeworm Tenia saginata occurs as a juvenile
in the intermuscular tissue of cattle but as an adult in the
intestines of human beings. A mature adult beef tapeworm
may reach a length of 10 meters or more. These worms at-
tach themselves to the intestinal wall of their host by a
scolex with four suckers. The segments that are shed from
the end of the worm pass from the human in the feces and

 

FIGURE 44.18

Aribbon worm, Lineus (phylum
Nemertea). This is the simplest animal
with a complete digestive system.

may crawl onto vegetation. The segments ultimately rup-
ture and scatter the embryos. Embryos may remain viable
for up to five months. If they are ingested by cattle, they
burrow through the wall of the intestine and ultimately
reach muscle tissues through the blood or lymph vessels.
About 1% of the cattle in the United States are infected,
and some 20% of the beef consumed is not federally in-
spected. When infected beef is eaten rare, infection of hu-
mans by these tapeworms is likely. As a result, the beef
tapeworm is a frequent parasite of humans.

Phylum Nemertea: The Ribbon Worms

The phylogenetic relationship of phylum Nemertea (figure
44.18) to other free-living flatworms is unclear. Ne-
merteans are often called ribbon worms or proboscis
worms. These aquatic worms have the body plan of a flat-
worm, but also possess a fluid-filled sac that may be a prim-
itive coclom. This sac serves as a hydraulic power source
for their proboscis, a long muscular tube that can be thrust
out quickly from a sheath to capture prey. Shaped like a
thread or a ribbon, ribbon worms are mostly marine and
consist of about 900 species. Ribbon worms are large, often
10 to 20 centimeters and sometimes many meters in length.
They are the simplest animals that possess a complete di-
gestive system, one that has two separate openings, a
mouth and an anus. Ribbon worms also exhibit a circula-
tory system in which blood flows in vessels. Many impor-
tant evolutionary trends that become fully developed in
more advanced animals make their first appearance in the
Nemertea.

 

The acoelomates, typified by flatworms, are the most
primitive bilaterally symmetrical animals and the
simplest animals in which organs occur.

 

 

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals 893
