 

 

Hydra and other jellyfish are radially
symmetrical, with parts arranged around a
central axis like petals of a daisy.

 

 

 

   

Cross-section

 

Hydra and jellyfish are

PHYLUM CNIDARIA: Tissues and radial symmetry

 

 

The cells of cnidarians are organized into tissues.
A maior innovation of hydra and jellyfish is extracellular
digestion of food—that is, digestion within a gut cavity.

 

 

 

Tentacles and body have stinging
cells (cnidocytes) that contain small
but very powerful harpoons called

 

 

 

nematocysts.
Tentacles
Gastrodermis The harpoon is propelled by osmotic
Meeces pressure and is one of the fastest and
most powerful processes in nature.
Sensory cell Epidermis

 

Stinging cell (cnidocyte)
with nematocyst

 

 

 

 

   
  

Discharged

oo nematocyst

SB

Undischarged
nematocyst

  
    

Trigger Filament

 

camivores that capture their
prey with tentacles that ring
their mouth.

 

 

 

 

The barb explodes out of the
stinging cell at a high velocity and
can even penetrate the hard shell
ofa crustacean.

 

 

Hydra use nematocysts to
spear prey and then draw the
wounded prey back to the hydra.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 44.9

Eumetazoans all have tissues and symmetry. The cells of a cnidarian like this Hydra are organized into specialized tissues. The interior
gut cavity is specialized for extracellular digestion—that is, digestion within a gut cavity rather than within individual cells. Cnidarians are

also radially symmetrical.

Cnidarians use the threadlike tube to spear their prey and
then draw the harpooned prey back with the tentacle contain-
ing the cnidocyte. Nematocysts may also serve a defensive
purpose. To propel the harpoon, the cnidocyte uses water
pressure. Before firing, the cnidocyte builds up a very high in-
ternal osmotic pressure. This is done by using active transport
to build a high concentration of ions inside, while keeping its
wall impermeable to water. Within the undischarged nemato-
cyst, osmotic pressure reaches about 140 atmospheres.

When a flagellum-like trigger on the cnidocyte is stim-
ulated to discharge, its walls become permeable to water,
which rushes inside and violently pushes out the barbed
filament. Nematocyst discharge is one of the fastest cellu-
lar processes in nature. The nematocyst is pushed out-
ward so explosively that the barb can penetrate even the
hard shell of a crab. A toxic protein often produced a
stinging sensation, causing some cnidarians to be called
“stinging nettles.”

Chapter 44 The Noncoelomate Animals 887

 
