 

Solid worms are
bilaterally symmetrical
acoelomates. Their
bodies are composed
of solid layers of tissues
surrounding a central
gut. The body of many
flatworms is soft and
flattened, like a piece of
tape or ribbon.

 

Each proglottid segment
contains reproductive organs.
When segments of a worm
pass out of humans in feces,
embryos may be ingested by
cattle or another human,
transmitting the parasite

to anew host. Embryos of
the tapeworms are released
through a single genital pore
‘on each proglottid segment. /

 

 

 

Genital
pore

 

Proglottid

     
 

PHYLUM PLATYHELMINTHES: Bilateral symmetry

 

Tapeworms are parasites that
attach by their heads to the
intestinal wall of a host
organism. The body of a
mature tapeworm may reach
10 meters in length—longer
than a truck.

Scolex attached
to intestinal wall

 

 

 

: Repeated proglottid
poe

segments

 

Most solid worms
have a highly branched
gut that brings food

near all tissues for
absorption directly
across the body wall.
Tapeworms are a special
case in that they have
solid bodies that lack a
digestive cavity.

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 44.16

‘The evolution of bilateral symmetry. Acoelomate solid worms like this beef tapeworm, Taenia saginata, are bilaterally symmetrical. In
addition, all bilaterians have three embryonic layers and exhibit cephalization.

Unlike cnidarians, flatworms have an excretory system,
which consists of a network of fine tubules (little tubes) that
runs throughout the body. Cilia line the hollow centers of
bulblike flame cells located on the side branches of the
tubules (see figure 58.9). Cilia in the flame cells move water
and excretory substances into the tubules and then to exit
pores located between the epidermal cells. Flame cells were
named because of the flickering movements of the tuft of
cilia within them. They primarily regulate the water bal-
ance of the organism. The excretory function of flame cells
appears to be a secondary one. A large proportion of the
metabolic wastes excreted by flatworms diffuses directly
into the gut and is eliminated through the mouth.

Like sponges, cnidarians, and ctenophorans, flatworms
lack circulatory systems for the transport of oxygen and
food molecules. Consequently, all flatworm cells must be
within diffusion distance of oxygen and food. Flatworms
have thin bodies and highly branched digestive cavities that
make such a relationship possible.

The nervous system of flatworms is very simple. Like
cnidarians, some primitive flatworms have only a nerve

net. However, most members of this phylum have longi-
tudinal nerve cords that constitute a simple central ner-
vous system.

Free-living members of this phylum have eyespots on
their heads. These are inverted, pigmented cups containing
light-sensitive cells connected to the nervous system. These
eyespots enable the worms to distinguish light from dark;
worms move away from strong light.

The reproductive systems of flatworms are complex.
Most flatworms are hermaphroditic, with each individual
containing both male and female sexual structures. In many
of them, fertilization is internal. When they mate, each
partner deposits sperm in the copulatory sac of the other.
The sperm travel along special tubes to reach the eggs. In
most free-living flatworms, fertilized eggs are laid in co-
coons strung in ribbons and hatch into miniature adults. In
some parasitic flatworms, there is a complex succession of
distinct larval forms. Flatworms are also capable of asexual
regeneration. In some genera, when a single individual is
divided into two or more parts, each part can regenerate an
entirely new flatworm.

Chapter 44. The Noncoelomate Animals 891
