Vesicles: Enzyme
Storehouses

Lysosomes: Intracellular
Digestion Centers

Lysosomes, membrane-bounded diges-
tive vesicles, are also components of the
endomembrane system that arise from
the Golgi apparatus. They contain high
levels of degrading enzymes, which cat-
alyze the rapid breakdown of proteins,
nucleic acids, lipids, and carbohydrates.
Throughout the lives of eukaryotic cells,

lysosomal enzymes break down old or- an

ganelles, recycling their component mol- ae

ecules and making room for newly
formed organelles. For example, mito- | ptracetlular
chondria are replaced in some tissues fluid
every 10 days.

The digestive enzymes in lysosomes
function best in an acidic environment.
Lysosomes actively engaged in digestion
keep their battery of hydrolytic enzymes
(enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of
molecules) fully active by pumping protons into their inte-
riors and thereby maintaining a low internal pH. Lyso-
somes that are not functioning actively do not maintain an
acidic internal pH and are called primary lysosomes. When a
primary lysosome fuses with a food vesicle or other or-
ganelle, its pH falls and its arsenal of hydrolytic enzymes is
activated; it is then called a secondary lysosome.

In addition to breaking down organelles and other struc-
tures within cells, lysosomes also eliminate other cells that
the cell has engulfed in a process called phagocytosis, a spe-
cific type of endocytosis (see chapter 6). When a white
blood cell, for example, phagocytizes a passing pathogen,
lysosomes fuse with the resulting “food vesicle,” releasing
their enzymes into the vesicle and degrading the material
within (figure 5.17).

 

FIGURE 5.17

Microbodies

Eukaryotic cells contain a variety of enzyme-bearing,
membrane-enclosed vesicles called microbodies. Micro-
bodies are found in the cells of plants, animals, fungi, and
protists. The distribution of enzymes into microbodies is
one of the principal ways in which eukaryotic cells orga-
nize their metabolism.

While lysosomes bud from the endomembrane system,
microbodies grow by incorporating lipids and protein,
then dividing. Plant cells have a special type of microbody
called a glyoxysome that contains enzymes that convert
fats into carbohydrates. Another type of microbody, a
peroxisome, contains enzymes that catalyze the removal
of electrons and associated hydrogen atoms (figure 5.18).

92 Part II Biology of the Cell

 

 

Lysosomes. Lysosomes contain hydrolytic enzymes that digest particles or cells taken
into the cell by phagocytosis and break down old organelles.

FIGURE 5.18

A peroxisome.
Peroxisomes are
spherical organelles
that may contain a
large diamond-shaped
crystal composed of
protein. Peroxisomes
contain digestive and
detoxifying enzymes
that produce hydrogen
peroxide as a by-
product.

0.21 um

If these oxidative enzymes were not isolated within micro-
bodies, they would tend to short-circuit the metabolism of
the cytoplasm, which often involves adding hydrogen atoms
to oxygen. The name peroxisome refers to the hydrogen
peroxide produced as a by-product of the activities of the
oxidative enzymes in the microbody. Hydrogen peroxide is
dangerous to cells because of its violent chemical reactivity.
However, peroxisomes also contain the enzyme catalase,
which breaks down hydrogen peroxide into harmless
water and oxygen.

 

Lysosomes and peroxisomes are vesicles that contain
digestive and detoxifying enzymes. The isolation of
these enzymes in vesicles protects the rest of the cell
from inappropriate digestive activity.

 
