 

Mouth

Genital pore
Excretory pore

 

Roundworms are bilaterally
symmetrical, cylindrical, unsegmented
worms. Most nematodes are very
small, less than a millimeter long—
hundreds of thousands may live in a

handful of fertile soil. Dene

 

Pseudocoel

Oviduct

 

‘An adult nematode consists of very
few cells. Caenorhabditis elegans has
exactly 959 cells and is the only animal
whose complete cellular anatomy is
known.

Cuticle

 

 

 

 

   
 
 

PHYLUM NEMATODA: Body cavity

    
 

Anus

 

The pseudocoel of a nematode
separates the endodermlined gut from
the rest of the body. The digestive tract
is one-way: food enters the mouth at
one end of the worm and leaves
through the anus at the other end.

 

 

Nematodes have excretory ducts that
ae permit them to conserve water and live
on land. Other roundworms possess
excretory cells called flame cells.

 

 

Excretory duct

 

Uterus | The nematode's body is covered

with a flexible, thick cuticle that is shed
Ovary as the worm grows. Muscles extend
along the length of the body rather

than encircling it, which allows the
worm to flex its body to move through
the soil.

Nerve cord

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 44.20

‘The evolution of a simple body cavity. The major innovation in body design in roundworms (phylum Nematoda) is a body cavity
between the gut and the body wall. This cavity is the pseudocoel. It allows chemicals to circulate throughout the body and prevents organs

from being deformed by muscle movements.

Phylum Rotifera: Rotifers

Phylum Rotifera includes common, small, bilaterally sym-
metrical, basically aquatic animals that have a crown of
cilia at their heads. Rotifers are pseudocoelomates but are
very unlike nematodes. They have several features that
suggest their ancestors may have resembled flatworms.
There are about 2000 species of this phylum. While a few
rotifers live in soil or in the capillary water in cushions of
mosses, most occur in fresh water, and they are common
everywhere. Very few rotifers are marine. Most rotifers
are between 50 and 500 micrometers in length, smaller
than many protists.

Rotifers have a well-developed food-processing appara-
tus. A conspicuous organ on the tip of the head called the
corona gathers food. It is composed of a circle of cilia
which sweeps their food into their mouths, as well as
being used for locomotion. Rotifers are often called
“wheel animals” because the cilia, when they are beating
together, resemble the movement of spokes radiating
from a wheel.

A Relatively New Phylum: Cycliophora

In December 1995, two Danish biologists reported the dis-
covery of a strange new kind of creature, smaller than a pe-
riod on a printed page. The tiny organism had a striking
circular mouth surrounded by a ring of fine, hairlike cilia
and has so unusual a life cycle that they assigned it to an
entirely new phylum, Cycliophora (Greek for “carrying a
small wheel”). There are only about 35 known animal
phyla, so finding a new one is extremely rare! When the
lobster to which it is attached starts to molt, the tiny sym-
biont begins a bizarre form of sexual reproduction. Dwarf
males emerge, with nothing but brains and reproductive
organs. Each dwarf male seeks out another female sym-
biont on the molting lobster and fertilizes its eggs, generat-
ing free-swimming individuals that can seek out another
lobster and renew the life cycle.

 

The pseudocoelomates, including nematodes and
rotifers, all have fluid-filled pseudocoels.

 

Chapter 44. The Noncoelomate Animals 895
