1.5 The coming revolution in animal taxonomy will likely alter traditional

phylogenies.

Reevaluating How the Animal Body
Plan Evolved

The great diversity see in the body plan of animals is diffi-
cult to fit into any one taxonomic scheme. Biologists have
traditionally inferred the general relationships among the
35 animal phyla by examining what seemed to be funda-
mental characters—segmentation, possession of a coclom,
and so on. The general idea has been that such characters
are most likely to be conserved during a group’s evolution.
Animal phyla that share a fundamental character are more
likely to be closely related to each other than to other phyla
that do not exhibit the character. The phylogeny presented
in figure 44.2 is a good example of the sort of taxonomy
this approach has generated.

However, not every animal can be easily accommodated
by this approach. Take, for example, the myzostomids (fig-
ure 44.21), an enigmatic and anatomically bizarre group of
marine animals that are parasites or symbionts of echino-
derms. Myzostomid fossils are found associated with echin-
oderms since the Ordovician, so the myzostomid-echino-
derm relationship is a very ancient one. Their long history
of obligate association has led to the loss or simplification
of many myzostomid body elements, leaving them, for ex-
ample, with no body cavity (they are acoclomates) and only
incomplete segmentation.

This character loss has led to considerable disagreement
among taxonomists. However, while taxonomists have dis-
agreed about the details, all have generally allied myzosto-
mids is some fashion with the annelids, sometimes within
the polychaetes, sometimes as a separate phylum closely al-
lied to the annelids.

Recently, this view has been challenged. New taxonomi-
cal comparisons using molecular data have come to very
different conclusions. Researchers examined two compo-
nents of the protein synthesis machinery, the small riboso-
mal subunit rRNA gene, and an elongation factor gene
(called 1 alpha). The phylogeny they obtain does not place
the myzostomids in with the annelids. Indeed, they find
that the myzostomids have no close links to the annelids at
all. Instead, surprisingly, they are more closely allied with
the flatworms!

This result hints strongly that the key morphological
characters that biologists have traditionally used to con-
struct animal phylogenies—segmentation, coeloms,
jointed appendages, and the like—are not the conservative
characters we had supposed. Among the myzostomids
these features appear to have been gained and lost again
during the course of their evolution. If this unconservative
evolutionary pattern should prove general, our view of the
evolution of the animal body plan, and how the various an-
imal phyla relate to one another, will soon be in need of
major revision.

896 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

 

FIGURE 44.21

A taxonomic puzzle. Myzostoma martenseni has no body cavity
and incomplete segmentation. Animals such as this present a
classification challenge, causing taxonomists to reconsider
traditional animal phylogenies based on fundamental characters.

Molecular Phylogenies

The last decade has seen a wealth of new molecular se-
quence data on the various animal groups. The animal phy-
logenies that these data suggest are often significantly at
odds with the traditional phylogeny used in this text and
presented in figure 44.2. One such phylogeny, developed
from ribosomal RNA studies, is presented in figure 44.22.
It is only a rough outline; in the future more data should
allow us to resolve relationships within groupings. Still, it is
clear that major groups are related in very different ways in
the molecular phylogeny than in the more traditional one.

At present, molecular phylogenetic analysis of the ani-
mal kingdom is in its infancy. Molecular phylogenies devel-
oped from different molecules often tend to suggest differ-
ent evolutionary relationships. However, the childhood of
this approach is likely to be short. Over the next few years,
a mountain of additional molecular data can be anticipated.
As more data are brought to bear, we can hope that the
confusion will lessen, and that a consensus phylogeny will
emerge. When and if this happens, it is likely to be very
different from the traditional view.

 

The use of molecular data to construct phylogenies is
likely to significantly alter our understanding of
relationships among the animal phyla.

 
