 

 
   

ao

oe North Pacific

dé Ocean
S Phillippine
dypisanes

 

‘Rio de Janeiro

  

 
   

 

Cape Horn “Tierra del Fuego

  
 
  
    

   

a
Montevideo Cape of
Buenos Aires Good Hope
Port Desire
Falkland South Atlantic
Straits of Magellan Islands ‘Onan

Equator

Friendly
Islands

    

‘Australia
Sydney

  

Bourbon Island

      
  
      
  
  

    
  

King George's
Sound

 

 

FIGURE 1.6

The five-year voyage of H.M.S. Beagle. Most of the time was spent exploring the coasts and coastal islands of South America,
such as the Galspagos Islands. Darwin’s studies of the animals of the Gal4pagos Islands played a key role in his eventual

development of the theory of evolution by means of natural selection.

FIGURE 1.7

Cross section of the
Beagle. A 10-gun brig of
242 tons, only 90 feet in

 

length, the Beagle had a
crew of 74 people! After he
first saw the ship, Darwin
wrote to his college
professor Henslow: “The
absolute want of room is an
evil that nothing can
surmount.”

as naturalist on a five-year navigational mapping expedition
around the coasts of South America (figure 1.6), aboard
H.MS. Beagle (figure 1.7). During this long voyage, Darwin
had the chance to study a wide variety of plants and animals
on continents and islands and in distant seas. He was able to
explore the biological richness of the tropical forests, exam-
ine the extraordinary fossils of huge extinct mammals in
Patagonia at the southern tip of South America, and observe
the remarkable series of related but distinct forms of life on
the Galdpagos Islands, off the west coast of South America.
Such an opportunity clearly played an important role in the
development of his thoughts about the nature of life on
earth.

When Darwin returned from the voyage at the age of 27,
he began a long period of study and contemplation. During
the next 10 years, he published important books on several

 

 

different subjects, including the formation of oceanic islands
from coral reefs and the geology of South America. He also
devoted eight years of study to barnacles, a group of small
marine animals with shells that inhabit rocks and pilings,
eventually writing a four-volume work on their classification
and natural history. In 1842, Darwin and his family moved
out of London to a country home at Down, in the county of
Kent. In these pleasant surroundings, Darwin lived, studied,
and wrote for the next 40 years.

 

Darwin was the first to propose natural selection as an
explanation for the mechanism of evolution that
produced the diversity of life on earth. His hypothesis
grew from his observations on a five-year voyage around
the world.

 

Chapter 1 ‘The Science of Biology 11
