| 45.1 Mollusks were among the first coelomates.

Coelomates 7 As a group, mollusks are an impor-

ON ea tant source of food for humans. Oys-
The evolution of the coelom was a sig- —— ters, clams, scallops, mussels, octopuses,
nificant advance in the structure of the and squids are among the culinary deli-
animal body. Coclomates have a new [g cacies that belong to this large phylum.
body design that repositions the fluid g Mollusks are also of economic signifi-
and allows the development of com- = cance to us in many other ways. For ex-

plex tissues and organs. This new body
plan also made it possible for animals
to evolve a wide variety of different
body architectures and to grow to
much larger sizes than acoelomate ani-
mals. Among the earliest groups of
coelomates were the mollusks and the
annelids.

Mollusks

Mollusks (phylum Mollusca) are an ex-
tremely diverse animal phylum, second
only to the arthropods, with over
110,000 described species. Mollusks
include snails, slugs, clams, scallops,
oysters, cuttlefish, octopuses, and
many other familiar animals (figure
45.2). The durable shells of some mol-
lusks are often beautiful and elegant;
they have long been favorite objects
for professional scientists and amateurs
alike to collect, preserve, and study.
Chitons and nudibranchs are less fa-
miliar marine mollusks. Mollusks are
characterized by a coelom, and while
there is extraordinary diversity in this
phylum, many of the basic compo-
nents of the mollusk body plan can be
seen in figure 45.3.

Mollusks evolved in the oceans, and
most groups have remained there. Ma-
rine mollusks are widespread and
often abundant. Some groups of mol-
lusks have invaded freshwater and terrestrial habitats, in-
cluding the snails and slugs that live in your garden. Ter-
restrial mollusks are often abundant in places that are at
least seasonally moist. Some of these places, such as the
crevices of desert rocks, may appear very dry, but even
these habitats have at least a temporary supply of water at
certain times. There are so many terrestrial mollusks that
only the arthropods have more species adapted to a ter-
restrial way of life. The 35,000 species of terrestrial mol-
lusks far outnumber the roughly 20,000 species of terres-
trial vertebrates.

FIGURE 45.2

it a wide berth!

900 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

A mollusk. The blue-ringed octopus is one
of the few mollusks dangerous to humans.
Strikingly beautiful, it is equipped with a
sharp beak and poison glands—divers give

ample, pearls are produced in oysters,
and the material called mother-of-
pearl, often used in jewelry and other
decorative objects, is produced in the
shells of a number of different mol-
lusks, but most notably in the snail
called abalone. Mollusks are not wholly
beneficial to humans, however. Bivalve
mollusks called shipworms burrow
through wood submerged in the sea,
damaging boats, docks, and pilings.
The zebra mussel has recently invaded
North American ecosystems from Eu-
rope via the ballast water of cargo ships
from Europe, wreaking havoc in many
aquatic ecosystems. Slugs and terres-
trial snails often cause extensive dam-
age to garden flowers, vegetables, and
crops. Other mollusks serve as hosts to
the intermediate stages of many serious
parasites, including several nematodes
and flatworms, which we discussed in
chapter 44.

Mollusks range in size from almost
microscopic to huge, although most
measure a few centimeters in their
largest dimension. Some, however, are
minute, while others reach formidable
sizes. The giant squid, which is occa-
sionally cast ashore but has rarely been
observed in its natural environment,
may grow up to 21 meters long!
Weighing up to 250 kilograms, the
giant squid is the largest invertebrate
and, along with the giant clam (figure 45.4), the heaviest.
Millions of giant squid probably inhabit the deep regions of
the ocean, even though they are seldom caught. Another
large mollusk is the bivalve Tridacna maxima, the giant
clam, which may be as long as 1.5 meters and may weigh as
much as 270 kilograms.

 

Mollusks are the second-largest phylum of animals in
terms of named species; mollusks exhibit a variety of
body forms and live in many different environments.

 
