The mantle secretes the shells and ligament and envelops
the internal organs within the pair of shells. The mantle is
frequently drawn out to form two siphons, one for an in-
coming and one for an outgoing stream of water. The
siphons often function as snorkels to allow bivalves to filter
water through their body while remaining almost com-
pletely buried in sediments. A complex folded gill lies on
each side of the visceral mass. These gills consist of pairs of
filaments that contain many blood vessels. Rhythmic beat-
ing of cilia on the gills creates a pattern of water circula-
tion. Most bivalves are sessile filter-feeders. They extract
small organisms from the water that passes through their
mantle cavity.

Bivalves do not have distinct heads or radulas, differing
from gastropods in this respect (see figure 45.5). However,
most have a wedge-shaped foot that may be adapted, in dif-
ferent species, for creeping, burrowing, cleansing the ani-
mal, or anchoring it in its burrow. Some species of clams
can dig into sand or mud very rapidly by means of muscular
contractions of their foot.

Bivalves disperse from place to place largely as larvae.
While most adults are adapted to a burrowing way of life,
some genera of scallops can move swiftly through the water
by using their large adductor muscles to clap their shells to-
gether. These muscles are what we usually eat as “scallops.”
The edge of a scallop’s body is lined with tentacle-like pro-
jections tipped with complex eyes.

There are about 10,000 species of bivalves. Most species
are marine, although many also live in fresh water. Over
500 species of pearly freshwater mussels, or naiads, occur in
the rivers and lakes of North America.

 

Class Cephalopoda: The Octopuses, Squids, and
Nautilus

The more than 600 species of the class Cephalopoda—oc-
topuses, squids, and nautilus—are the most intelligent of
the invertebrates. They are active marine predators that
swim, often swiftly, and compete successfully with fish.
The foot has evolved into a series of tentacles equipped
with suction cups, adhesive structures, or hooks that seize
prey efficiently. Squids have 10 tentacles (figure 45.10); oc-
topuses, as indicated by their name, have eight; and the
nautilus, about 80 to 90. Once the tentacles have snared the
prey, it is bitten with strong, beaklike paired jaws and
pulled into the mouth by the tonguelike action of the
radula.

Cephalopods have highly developed nervous systems,
and their brains are unique among mollusks. Their eyes are
very elaborate, and have a structure much like that of verte-
brate eyes, although they evolved separately (see chapter
55). Many cephalopods exhibit complex patterns of behav-
ior and a high level of intelligence; octopuses can be easily
trained to distinguish among classes of objects. Most mem-
bers of this class have closed circulatory systems and are the
only mollusks that do.

 

FIGURE 45.9
A bivalve. The file shell, Lina scabra, opened, showing tentacles.

 

FIGURE 45.10

A cephalopod. Squids are active predators, competing effectively
with fish for prey.

Although they evolved from shelled ancestors, living
cephalopods, except for the few species of nautilus, lack an
external shell. Like other mollusks, cephalopods take water
into the mantle cavity and expel it through a siphon.
Cephalopods have modified this system into a means of jet
propulsion. When threatened, they eject water violently
and shoot themselves through the water.

Most octopus and squid are capable of changing color to
suit their background or display messages to one another.
They accomplish this feat through the use of their chro-
matophores, pouches of pigments embedded in the epithe-
lium.

 

Gastropods typically live in a hard shell. Bivalves have
hinged shells but do not have a distinct head area.
Cephalopods possess well-developed brains and are the
most intelligent invertebrates.

 

Chapter 45 Mollusks and Annelids 905
