Ribosomes: Sites of Protein
Synthesis

Although the DNA in a cell’s nucleus encodes the amino
acid sequence of each protein in the cell, the proteins are
not assembled there. A simple experiment demonstrates
this: if a brief pulse of radioactive amino acid is administered
to a cell, the radioactivity shows up associated with newly
made protein, not in the nucleus, but in the cytoplasm.
When investigators first carried out these experiments, they
found that protein synthesis was associated with large RNA-
protein complexes they called ribosomes.

Ribosomes are made up of several molecules of a special
form of RNA called ribosomal RNA, or rRNA, bound within
a complex of several dozen different proteins. Ribosomes are
among the most complex molecular assemblies found in cells.
Each ribosome is composed of two subunits (figure 5.19).
The subunits join to form a functional ribosome only when
they attach to another kind of RNA, called messenger RNA
(mRNA) in the cytoplasm. To make proteins, the ribosome
attaches to the mRNA, which is a transcribed copy of a
portion of DNA, and uses the information to direct the
synthesis of a protein.

Bacterial ribosomes are smaller than eukaryotic ribo-
somes. Also, a bacterial cell typically has only a few thou-
sand ribosomes, while a metabolically active eukaryotic cell,
such as a human liver cell, contains several million. Proteins
that function in the cytoplasm are made by free ribosomes
suspended there, while proteins bound within membranes
or destined for export from the cell are assembled by ribo-
somes bound to rough ER.

The Nucleolus Manufactures Ribosomal
Subunits

When cells are synthesizing a large number of proteins,
they must first make a large number of ribosomes. To facili-
tate this, many hundreds of copies of the portion of the
DNA encoding the rRNA are clustered together on the
chromosome. By transcribing RNA molecules from this
cluster, the cell rapidly generates large numbers of the mol-
ecules needed to produce ribosomes.

At any given moment, many rRNA molecules dangle
from the chromosome at the sites of these clusters of genes
that encode rRNA. Proteins associate with the dangling
rRNA molecules. These areas where ribosomes are being
assembled are easily visible within the nucleus as one or
more dark-staining regions, called nucleoli (singular, nucle-
olus; figure 5.20). Nucleoli can be seen under the light mi-
croscope even when the chromosomes are extended, unlike
the rest of the chromosomes, which are visible only when
condensed.

 

Ribosomes are the sites of protein synthesis in the
cytoplasm.

 

Large
subunit

       

Small fh
subunit

Ribosome

FIGURE 5.19

A ribosome. Ribosomes consist of a large and a small subunit
composed of rRNA and protein. The individual subunits are
synthesized in the nucleolus and then move through the nuclear
pores to the cytoplasm, where they assemble. Ribosomes serve as
sites of protein synthesis.

 

FIGURE 5.20

The nucleolus. This is the interior of a rat liver cell, magnified
about 6000 times. A single large nucleus occupies the center of
the micrograph. The electron-dense area in the lower left of the
nucleus is the nucleolus, the area where the major components
of the ribosomes are produced. Partly formed ribosomes can be
seen around the nucleolus.

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 93
