 

Segmented Animals

A key transition in the animal body
plan was segmentation, the building of a
body from a series of similar segments.
The first segmented animals to evolve
were most likely annelid worms, phy-
lum Annelida (figure 45.11). One ad-
vantage of having a body built from re-
peated units (segments) is that the
development and function of these
units can be more precisely controlled,
at the level of individual segments or
groups of segments. For example, dif-
ferent segments may possess different
combinations of organs or perform dif-
ferent functions relating to reproduc-
tion, feeding, locomotion, respiration,
or excretion.

Annelids

Two-thirds of all annelids live in the sea (about 8000
species), and most of the rest, some 3100 species, are
earthworms. Annelids are characterized by three principal
features:

1. Repeated segments. The body of an annelid worm
is composed of a series of ring-like segments running
the length of the body, looking like a stack of donuts
or roll of coins (figure 45.12). Internally, the seg-
ments are divided from one another by partitions
called septa, just as bulkheads separate the segments
of a submarine. In each of the cylindrical segments,
the excretory and locomotor organs are repeated.
The fluid within the coelom of each segment creates
a hydrostatic (liquid-supported) skeleton that gives
the segment rigidity, like an inflated balloon. Muscles
within each segment push against the fluid in the
coclom. Because each segment is separate, each can
expand or contract independently. This lets the worm
move in complex ways.

2. Specialized segments. The anterior (front) seg-
ments of annelids have become modified to contain
specialized sensory organs. Some are sensitive to
light, and elaborate eyes with lenses and retinas
have evolved in some annelids. A well-developed
cerebral ganglion, or brain, is contained in one an-
terior segment.

3. Connections. Although partitions separate the seg-
ments, materials and information do pass between
segments. Annelids have a closed circulatory system
that carries blood from one segment to another. A

 

906 Part XII Animal Diversity

re the first segmented animals.

 

3
2
<
FIGURE 45.11
A polychaete annelid. Nereis virens is a
wide-ranging, predatory, marine polychaete
worm equipped with feathery parapodia for
movement and respiration, as well as jaws
for hunting. You may have purchased Nereis
as fishing bait!
ventral nerve cord connects the nerve centers or gan-
glia in each segment with one another and the brain.
These neural connections are critical features that
allow the worm to function and behave as a unified
and coordinated organism.
Body Plan of the Annelids

The basic annelid body plan is a tube within a tube, with
the internal digestive tract—a tube running from mouth to
anus—suspended within the coclom. The tube that makes
up the digestive tract has several portions—the pharynx,
esophagus, crop, gizzard, and intestine—that are special-
ized for different functions.

Annelids make use of their hydrostatic skeleton for lo-
comotion. To move, annelids contract circular muscles
running around each segment. Doing so squeezes the
segment, causing the coelomic fluid to squirt outwards,
like a tube of toothpaste. Because the fluid is trapped in
the segment by the septa, instead of escaping like tooth-
paste, the fluid causes the segment to elongate and get
much thinner. By then contracting longitudinal muscles
that run along the length of the worm, the segment is re-
turned to its original shape. In most annelid groups, each
segment typically possesses setae, bristles of chitin that
help anchor the worms during locomotion. By extending
the setae in some segments so that they anchor in the
substrate and retracting them in other segments, the
worm can squirt its body, section by section, in either
direction.
