Mollusks and
Annelids

 

Concept Outline

45.1 Mollusks were among the first coelomates.

Coelomates. Next to the arthropods, mollusks comprise
the second most diverse phylum and include snails, clams,
and octopuses. There are more terrestrial mollusk species
than terrestrial vertebrates!

Body Plan of the Mollusks. ‘The mollusk body plan is
characterized by three distinct sections, a unique rasping
tongue, and distinctive free-swimming larvae also found in
annelid worms.

The Classes of Mollusks. ‘The three major classes of
mollusks are the gastropods (snails and slugs), the bivalves
(oysters and clams), and the cephalopods (octopuses and
squids). While they seem very different at first glance, on
closer inspection, they all have the same basic mollusk body
plan.

45.2 Annelids were the first segmented animals.

Segmented Animals. Annelids are segmented coelomate
worms, most of which live in the sea. The annelid body is
composed of numerous similar segments.

Classes of Annelids. The three major classes of annelids
are the polychaetes (marine worms), the oligochaetes
(earthworms and related freshwater worms), and the
hirudines (leeches).

45.3 Lophophorates appear to be a transitional group.

Lophophorates. The three phyla of lophophorates share
a unique ciliated feeding structure, but differ in many other
ways.

 

FIGURE 45.1

An annelid, the Christmas-tree worm, Spirobranchus
giganteus. Mollusks and annelids inhabit both terrestrial and
aquatic habitats. They are large and successful groups, with some
of their most spectacular members represented in marine
environments.

Ithough acoelomates and pseudocoelomates have proven

very successful, a third way of organizing the animal
body has also evolved, one that occurs in the bulk of the ani-
mal kingdom. We will begin our discussion of the coclomate
animals with mollusks, which include such animals as clams,
snails, slugs, and octopuses. Annelids (figure 45.1), such as
earthworms, leeches, and seaworms, are also coclomates, but
in addition, were the earliest group of animals to evolve seg-
mented bodies. The lophophorates, a group of marine ani-
mals united by a distinctive feeding structure called the
lophophore, have features intermediate between those of pro-
tostomes and deuterostomes and will also be discussed in this
chapter. The remaining groups of coelomate animals will be
discussed in chapters 46, 47, and 48.

899
