 

PHYLUM MOLLUSCA: Coelom

 

The mantle is a heavy fold of tissue Snails have a three-chambered heart
wrapped around the mollusk body like a and an open circulation system. The
cape. The cavity between the mantle and coelom is confined to a small cavity
the body contains gills, which capture around the heart.

 

oxygen from the water passing through

the mantle cavity. In some mollusks, like

snails, the mantle secretes a hard Fe eee eee

outer shell. animals to develop an efficient

excretory system. Tubular structures
called nephridia gather wastes

Gonad Heart from the coelom and discharge

Coelom them into the mantle cavity.

 

 

 

 

Intestine

 

 

  
  
 
   

Stomach

 

Digestive
gland

 

 

Radula Nerve collar Foot Retractor muscles
Many mollusks are carnivores. They locate Snails creep along the ground on a

prey using chemosensory structures. Within muscular foot. Squid can shoot through
the mouth of a snail are horny jaws and a the water by squeezing water out of the
unique rasping tongue called a radula. mantle cavity, ina kind of jet propulsion.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 45.3
Evolution of the coelom. A generalized mollusk body plan is shown above. The body cavity of a mollusk is a coelom, which is completely
enclosed within the mesoderm. This allows physical contact between the mesoderm and the endoderm, permitting interactions that lead to
development of highly specialized organs such as a stomach.

FIGURE 45.4
Giant clam. Second only to the

arthropods in number of described species,
members of the phylum Mollusca occupy
almost every habitat on earth. This giant
clam, Tridacna maxima, has a green color
that is caused by the presence of symbiotic
dinoflagellates (zooxanthellae). Through
photosynthesis, the dinoflagellates
probably contribute most of the food
supply of the clam, although it remains a
filter feeder like most bivalves. Some
individual giant clams may be nearly 1.5
meters long and weigh up to 270
kilograms.

 

Chapter 45 Mollusks and Annelids 901
