Body Plan of the Mollusks

In their basic body plan (figure 45.5), mollusks have dis-
tinct bilateral symmetry. Their digestive, excretory, and
reproductive organs are concentrated in a visceral mass,
and a muscular foot is their primary mechanism of loco-
motion. They may also have a differentiated head at the
anterior end of the body. Folds (often two) arise from the
dorsal body wall and enclose a cavity between themselves
and the visceral mass; these folds constitute the mantle. In
some mollusks the mantle cavity acts as a lung; in others it
contains gills. Gills are specialized portions of the mantle
that usually consist of a system of filamentous projections
rich in blood vessels. These projections greatly increase
the surface area available for gas exchange and, therefore,
the animal’s overall respiratory potential. Mollusk gills are
very efficient, and many gilled mollusks extract 50% or
more of the dissolved oxygen from the water that passes
through the mantle cavity. Finally, in most members of
this phylum, the outer surface of the mantle also secretes a
protective shell.

A mollusk shell consists of a horny outer layer, rich in
protein, which protects the two underlying calcium-rich
layers from erosion. The middle layer consists of densely
packed crystals of calcium carbonate. The inner layer is
pearly and increases in thickness throughout the animal’s
life. When it reaches a sufficient thickness, this layer is
used as mother-of-pearl. Pearls themselves are formed
when a foreign object, like a grain of sand, becomes lodged
between the mantle and the inner shell layer of bivalve
mollusks (two-shelled), including clams and oysters. The
mantle coats the foreign object with layer upon layer of
shell material to reduce irritation caused by the object.
The shell of mollusks serves primarily for protection.
Many species can withdraw for protection into their shell
if they have one.

Tentacles Mantle Gill Gut

 

   

Foot

Cephalopods

Gastropods

Radula
FIGURE 45.5
Body plans among the mollusks.

902 Part XII Animal Diversity

Shell Shell _ Gut

 

In aquatic mollusks, a continuous stream of water passes
into and out of the mantle cavity, drawn by the cilia on the
gills. This water brings in oxygen and, in the case of the bi-
valves, also brings in food; it also carries out waste materi-
als. When the gametes are being produced, they are fre-
quently carried out in the same stream.

The foot of a mollusk is muscular and may be adapted
for locomotion, attachment, food capture (in squids and oc-
topuses), or various combinations of these functions. Some
mollusks secrete mucus, forming a path that they glide
along on their foot. In cephalopods—squids and octo-
puses—the foot is divided into arms, also called tentacles.
In some pelagic forms, mollusks that are perpetually free-
swimming, the foot is modified into wing-like projections
or thin fins.

One of the most characteristic features of all the mol-
lusks except the bivalves is the radula, a rasping, tongue-
like organ used for feeding. The radula consists primarily
of dozens to thousands of microscopic, chitinous teeth
arranged in rows (figure 45.6). Gastropods (snails and
their relatives) use their radula to scrape algae and other
food materials off their substrates and then to convey this
food to the digestive tract. Other gastropods are active
predators, some using a modified radula to drill through
the shells of prey and extract the food. The small holes
often seen in oyster shells are produced by gastropods
that have bored holes to kill the oyster and extract its
body for food.

The circulatory system of all mollusks except
cephalopods consists of a heart and an open system in
which blood circulates freely. The mollusk heart usually
has three chambers, two that collect aerated blood from the
gills, while the third pumps it to the other body tissues. In
mollusks, the coclom takes the form of a small cavity
around the heart.

  
  
  
  
 
 
   

Gill
Mantle cavity

Mantle

Mantle

Mantle cavity

Gill

Hypothetical Ancestor
