The Classes of Mollusks

There are seven classes of mollusks. We will examine four
classes of mollusks as representatives of the phylum: (1)
Polyplacophora—chitons; (2) Gastropoda—snails, slugs,
limpets, and their relatives; (3) Bivalvia—clams, oysters,
scallops, and their relatives; and (4) Cephalopoda—squids,
octopuses, cuttlefishes, and nautilus. By studying living
mollusks and the fossil record, some scientists have de-
duced that the ancestral mollusk was probably a dorsoven-
trally flattened, unsegmented, wormlike animal that glided
on its ventral surface. This animal may also have had a
chitinous cuticle and overlapping calcareous scales. Other
scientists believe that mollusks arose from segmented an-
cestors and became unsegmented secondarily.

Class Polyplacophora: The Chitons

Chitons are marine mollusks that have oval bodies with
eight overlapping calcareous plates. Underneath the plates,
the body is not segmented. Chitons creep along using a
broad, flat foot surrounded by a groove or mantle cavity in
which the gills are arranged. Most chitons are grazing her-
bivores that live in shallow marine habitats, but some live at
depths of more than 7000 meters.

Class Gastropoda: The Snails and Slugs

The class Gastropoda contains about 40,000 described
species of snails, slugs, and similar animals. This class is
primarily a marine group, but it also contains many fresh-
water and terrestrial mollusks (figure 45.8). Most gas-
tropods have a shell, but some, like slugs and nudibranchs,
have lost their shells through the course of evolution. Gas-
tropods generally creep along on a foot, which may be
modified for swimming.

The heads of most gastropods have a pair of tentacles
with eyes at the ends. These tentacles have been lost in
some of the more advanced forms of the class. Within the
mouth cavity of many members of this class are horny jaws
anda radula.

During embryological development, gastropods undergo
torsion. Torsion is the process by which the mantle cavity
and anus are moved from a posterior location to the front
of the body, where the mouth is located. Torsion is
brought about by a disproportionate growth of the lateral
muscles; that is, one side of the larva grows much more
rapidly than the other. A 120-degree rotation of the vis-
ceral mass brings the mantle cavity above the head and
twists many internal structures. In some groups of gas-
tropods, varying degrees of detorsion have taken place. The
coiling, or spiral winding, of the shell is a separate process.
This process has led to the loss of the right gill and right
nephridium in most gastropods. Thus, the visceral mass of
gastropods has become bilaterally asymmetrical during the
course of evolution.

904 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 45.8
A gastropod mollusk. The terrestrial snail, Allogona townsendiana.

Gastropods display extremely varied feeding habits.
Some are predatory, others scrape algae off rocks (or
aquarium glass), and others are scavengers. Many are herbi-
vores, and some terrestrial ones are serious garden and
agricultural pests. The radula of oyster drills is used to bore
holes in the shells of other mollusks, through which the
contents of the prey can be removed. In cone shells, the
radula has been modified into a kind of poisonous harpoon,
which is shot with great speed into the prey.

Sea slugs, or nudibranchs, are active predators; a few
species of nudibranchs have the extraordinary ability to ex-
tract the nematocysts from the cnidarian polyps they eat
and transfer them through their digestive tract to the sur-
face of their gills intact and use them for their own protec-
tion. Nudibranchs are interesting in that they get their
name from their gills, which instead of being enclosed
within the mantle cavity are exposed along the dorsal sur-
face (nudi, “naked”; branch; “gill”).

In terrestrial gastropods, the empty mantle cavity, which
was occupied by gills in their aquatic ancestors, is extremely
rich in blood vessels and serves as a lung, in effect. This
structure evolved in animals living in environments with
plentiful oxygen; it absorbs oxygen from the air much more
effectively than a gill could, but is not as effective under
water.

Class Bivalvia: The Bivalves

Members of the class Bivalvia include the clams, scallops,
mussels, and oysters. Bivalves have two lateral (left and
right) shells (valves) hinged together dorsally (figure 45.9).
A ligament hinges the shells together and causes them to
gape open. Pulling against this ligament are one or two
large adductor muscles that can draw the shells together.
