Nitrogenous wastes are removed
from the mollusk by one or two tubu-
lar structures called nephridia. A typi-
cal nephridium has an open funnel, the
nephrostome, which is lined with
cilia. A coiled tubule runs from the
nephrostome into a bladder, which in
turn connects to an excretory pore.
Wastes are gathered by the nephridia
from the coelom and discharged into
the mantle cavity. The wastes are then
expelled from the mantle cavity by the
continuous pumping of the gills. Sug-
ars, salts, water, and other materials are @)
reabsorbed by the walls of the
nephridia and returned to the animal’s
body as needed to achieve an appropri-
ate osmotic balance.

In animals with a closed circulatory
system, such as annelids, cephalopod
mollusks, and vertebrates, the coiled
tubule of a nephridium is surrounded
by a network of capillaries. Wastes are
extracted from the circulatory system
through these capillaries and are trans-
ferred into the nephridium, then sub-
sequently discharged. Salts, water, and
other associated materials may also be
reabsorbed from the tubule of the
nephridium back into the capillaries.
For this reason, the excretory systems
of these coelomates are much more ef-

FIGURE 45.6

ficient than the flame cells of the
acoclomates, which pick up substances
only from the body fluids. Mollusks
were one of the earliest evolutionary ©

lines to develop an efficient excretory FIGURE 45.7
system. Other than chordates, coelo-
mates with closed circulation have sim-
ilar excretory systems.

Reproduction in Mollusks

Most mollusks have distinct male and female individuals, al-
though a few bivalves and many gastropods are hermaphro-
ditic. Even in hermaphroditic mollusks, cross-fertilization is
most common. Remarkably, some sea slugs and oysters are
able to change from one sex to the other several times dur-
ing a single season.

Most aquatic mollusks engage in external fertilization.
The males and females release their gametes into the water,
where they mix and fertilization occurs. Gastropods more
often have internal fertilization, however, with the male in-
serting sperm directly into the female’s body. Internal fer-
tilization is one of the key adaptations that allowed gas-
tropods to colonize the land.

 

(b)

Structure of the radula in a snail. (2) The radula consists of chitin and is covered with
rows of teeth. (/) Enlargement of the rasping teeth on a radula.

 

(b)

Stages in the molluscan life cycle. (a) The trochophore larva of a mollusk. Similar larvae,
as you will see, are characteristic of some annelid worms as well as a few other phyla.
(@ Veliger stage of a mollusk.

Many marine mollusks have free-swimming larvae called
trochophores (figure 45.74), which closely resemble the lar-
val stage of many marine annelids. Trochophores swim by
means of a row of cilia that encircles the middle of their
body. In most marine snails and in bivalves, a second free-
swimming stage, the veliger, follows the trochophore stage.
This veliger stage, has the beginnings of a foot, shell, and
mantle (figure 45.70). Trochophores and veligers drift widely
in the ocean currents, dispersing mollusks to new areas.

 

Mollusks were among the earliest animals to evolve an
efficient excretory system. The mantle of mollusks not
only secretes their protective shell, but also forms a
cavity that is essential to respiration.

 

Chapter 45 Mollusks and Annelids 903
