| 45.3 Lophophorates appear to be a transitional group.

Lophophorates

Three phyla of marine animals—Phoronida, Ectoprocta,
and Brachiopoda—are characterized by a lophophore, a
circular or U-shaped ridge around the mouth bearing one
or two rows of ciliated, hollow tentacles. Because of this
unusual feature, they are thought to be related to one an-
other. The lophophore presumably arose in a common an-
cestor. The coelomic cavity of lophophorates extends into
the lophophore and its tentacles. The lophophore functions
as a surface for gas exchange and as a food-collection
organ. Lophophorates use the cilia of their lophophore to
capture the organic detritus and plankton on which they
feed. Lophophorates are attached to their substrate or
move slowly.

Lophophorates share some features with mollusks, an-
nelids and arthropods (all protostomes) and share others
with deuterostomes. Cleavage in lophophorates is mostly
radial, as in deuterostomes. The formation of the coclom
varies; some lophophorates resemble protostomes in this
respect, others deuterostomes. In the Phoronida, the
mouth forms from the blastopore, while in the other two
phyla, it forms from the end of the embryo opposite the
blastopore. Molecular evidence shows that the ribosomes
of all lophophorates are decidedly protostome-like, lending
strength to placing them within the protostome phyla. De-
spite the differences among the three phyla, the unique
structure of the lophophore seems to indicate that the
members share a common ancestor. Their relationships
continue to present a fascinating puzzle.

Phylum Phoronida: The Phoronids

Phoronids (phylum Phoronida) superficially resemble
common polychaete tube worms seen on dock pilings but
have many important differences. Each phoronid secretes
a chitinous tube and lives out its life within it (figure
45.16). They also extend tentacles to feed and quickly
withdraw them when disturbed, but the resemblance to
the tube worm ends there. Instead of a straight tube-
within-a-tube body plan, phoronids have a U-shaped gut.
Only about 10 phoronid species are known, ranging in
length from a few millimeters to 30 centimeters. Some
species lie buried in sand, others are attached to rocks ei-
ther singly or in groups. Phoronids develop as proto-
stomes, with radial cleavage and the anus developing sec-
ondarily.

Phylum Ectoprocta: The Bryozoans

Ectoprocts (phylum Ectoprocta) look like tiny, short ver-
sions of phoronids (figure 45.17). They are small—usually

910 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

Tentacles of

Lophophore
lophophore -

   

 

 

 

FIGURE 45.16

Phoronids (phylum Phoronida). A phoronid, such as Phoronis,
lives in a chitinous tube that the animal secretes to form the outer
wall of its body. The lophophore consists of two parallel,
horseshoe-shaped ridges of tentacles and can be withdrawn into
the tube when the animal is disturbed.

less than 0.5 millimeter long—and live in colonies that look
like patches of moss on the surfaces of rocks, seaweed, or
other submerged objects (in fact, their common name bry-
ozoans translates from Greek as “moss-animals”). The
name Ectoprocta refers to the location of the anus (proct),
which is external to the lophophore. The 4000 species in-
clude both marine and freshwater forms—the only nonma-
rine lophophorates. Individual ectoprocts secrete a tiny
chitinous chamber called a zoecium that attaches to rocks
and other members of the colony. Individuals communicate
chemically through pores between chambers. Ectoprocts
develop as deuterostomes, with the mouth developing sec-
ondarily; cleavage is radial.
