Arthropods

Concept Outline

46.1 The evolution of jointed appendages has made
arthropods very successful.

Jointed Appendages and an Exoskeleton. Arthropods
probably evolved from annelids, and with their jointed
appendages and an exoskeleton, have successfully invaded
practically every habitat on earth.

Classification of Arthropods. Arthropods have been
traditionally divided into three groups based on
morphological characters. However, recent research
suggests a restructuring of arthropod classification is
needed.

General Characteristics of Arthropods. Arthropods
have segmented bodies, a chitinous exoskeleton, and often
have compound eyes. They have open circulatory systems.
In some groups, a series of tubes carry oxygen to the
organs, and unique tubules eliminate waste.

46.2 The chelicerates all have fangs or pincers.

Class Arachnida: The Arachnids. Spiders and scorpions
are predators, while most mites are herbivores.

Class Merostomata: Horseshoe Crabs. Among the
most ancient of living animals, horseshoe crabs are thought
to have evolved from trilobites.

Class Pycnogonida: The Sea Spiders. ‘The spiders that
are common in marine habitats differ greatly from
terrestrial spiders.

46.3 Crustaceans have branched appendages.

Crustaceans. Crustaceans are unique among living
arthropods because virtually all of their appendages are
branched.

46.4 Insects are the most diverse of all animal groups.

Classes Chilopoda and Diplopoda: The Centipedes and
Millipedes. Centipedes and millipedes are highly
segmented, with legs on each segment.

Class Insecta: The Insects. Insects are the largest group
of organisms on earth. They are the only invertebrate
animals that have wings and can fly.

Insect Life Histories. Insects undergo simple or
complete metamorphosis.

 

FIGURE 46.1

An arthropod. One of the major arthropod groups is represented
here by Polistes, the common paper wasp (class Insecta).

lhe evolution of segmentation among annelids marked

the first major innovation in body structure among
coelomates. An even more profound innovation was the de-
velopment of jointed appendages in arthropods, a phylum
that almost certainly evolved from an annelid ancestor.
Arthropod bodies are segmented like those of annelids, but
the individual segments often exist only during early devel-
opment and fuse into functional groups as adults. In
arthropods like the wasp above (figure 46.1), jointed ap-
pendages include legs, antennae, and a complex array of
mouthparts. The functional flexibility provided by such a
broad array of appendages has made arthropods the most
successful of animal groups.

913
