consist of irregular mounds at the opening of a burrow. In
this way, earthworms aerate and enrich the soil. A worm
can eat its own weight in soil every day.

In view of the underground lifestyle that earthworms
have evolved, it is not surprising that they have no eyes.
However, earthworms do have numerous light-, chemo-,
and touch-sensitive cells, mostly concentrated in segments
near each end of the body—those regions most likely to en-
counter light or other stimuli. Earthworms have fewer
setae than polychaetes and no parapodia or head region.

Earthworms are hermaphroditic, another way in which
they differ from most polychaetes. When they mate (figure
45.14), their anterior ends point in opposite directions, and
their ventral surfaces touch. The clitellum is a thickened
band on an earthworm’s body; the mucus it secretes holds
the worms together during copulation. Sperm cells are re-
leased from pores in specialized segments of one partner
into the sperm receptacles of the other, the process going
in both directions simultaneously.

Two or three days after the worms separate, the clitel-
lum of each worm secretes a mucous cocoon, surrounded
by a protective layer of chitin. As this sheath passes over
the female pores of the body—a process that takes place as
the worm moves—it receives eggs. As it subsequently
passes along the body, it incorporates the sperm that were
deposited during copulation. Fertilization of the eggs takes
place within the cocoon. When the cocoon finally passes
over the end of the worm, its ends pinch together. Within
the cocoon, the fertilized eggs develop directly into young
worms similar to adults.

Class Hirudinea: The Leeches

Leeches (class Hirudinea) occur mostly in fresh water, al-
though a few are marine and some tropical leeches occupy
terrestrial habitats. Most leeches are 2 to 6 centimeters
long, but one tropical species reaches up to 30 centimeters.
Leeches are usually flattened dorsoventrally, like flat-
worms. They are hermaphroditic, and develop a clitellum
during the breeding season; cross-fertilization is obligatory
as they are unable to self-fertilize.

A leech’s coelom is reduced and continuous throughout
the body, not divided into individual segments as in the
polychaetes and oligochaetes. Leeches have evolved suckers
at one or both ends of the body. Those that have suckers at
both ends move by attaching first one and then the other
end to the substrate, looping along. Many species are also
capable of swimming. Except for one species, leeches have
no setae.

Some leeches have evolved the ability to suck blood
from animals. Many freshwater leeches live as external par-
asites. They remain on their hosts for long periods and
suck their blood from time to time.

The best-known leech is the medicinal leech, Hirudo
medicinalis (figure 45.15). Individuals of Hirudo are 10 to 12
centimeters long and have bladelike, chitinous jaws that

 

FIGURE 45.14
Earthworms mating. The anterior ends are pointing in opposite
directions.

 

a

FIGURE 45.15

Hirudo medicinalis, the medicinal leech, is seen here feeding on a
human arm. Leeches uses chitinous, bladelike jaws to make an
incision to access blood and secrete an anticoagulant to keep the
blood from clotting. Both the anticoagulant and the leech itself
have made important contributions to modern medicine.

rasp through the skin of the victim. The leech secretes an
anticoagulant into the wound to prevent the blood from
clotting as it flows out, and its powerful sucking muscles
pump the blood out quickly once the hole has been opened.
Leeches were used in medicine for hundreds of years to
suck blood out of patients whose diseases were mistakenly
believed to be caused by an excess of blood. Today, Euro-
pean pharmaceutical companies still raise and sell leeches,
but they are used to remove excess blood after certain surg-
eries. Following the surgery, blood may accumulate be-
cause veins may function improperly and fail to circulate
the blood. The accumulating blood “turns off” the arterial
supply of fresh blood, and the tissue often dies. When
leeches remove the excess blood, new capillaries form in
about a week, and the tissues remain healthy.

 

Segmented annelids evolved in the sea. Earthworms are
their descendents, as are parasitic leeches.

 

Chapter 45 Mollusks and Annelids 909
