Organelles That
Contain DNA

Among the most interesting cell
organelles are those in addition
to the nucleus that contain
DNA.

  
   

Mitochondria: The Cell’s
Chemical Furnaces

Mitochondria (singular, mito-
chondrion) are typically tubular
or sausage-shaped organelles
about the size of bacteria and (a)
found in all types of eukaryotic

cells (figure 5.21). Mitochondria are bounded by two
membranes: a smooth outer membrane and an inner one
folded into numerous contiguous layers called cristae
(singular, crista). The cristae partition the mitochondrion
into two compartments: a matrix, lying inside the inner
membrane; and an outer compartment, or intermem-
brane space, lying between the two mitochondrial mem-
branes. On the surface of the inner membrane, and also
embedded within it, are proteins that carry out oxidative
metabolism, the oxygen-requiring process by which en-
ergy in macromolecules is stored in ATP.

Mitochondria have their own DNA; this DNA contains
several genes that produce proteins essential to the mito-
chondrion’s role in oxidative metabolism. All of these genes
are copied into RNA and used to make proteins within the
mitochondrion. In this process, the mitochondria employ
small RNA molecules and ribosomal components that the
mitochondrial DNA also encodes. However, most of the
genes that produce the enzymes used in oxidative metabo-
lism are located in the nucleus.

A eukaryotic cell does not produce brand new mito-
chondria each time the cell divides. Instead, the mito-
chondria themselves divide in two, doubling in number,
and these are partitioned between the new cells. Most of
the components required for mitochondrial division are
encoded by genes in the nucleus and translated into pro-
teins by cytoplasmic ribosomes. Mitochondrial replica-
tion is, therefore, impossible without nuclear participa-
tion, and mitochondria thus cannot be grown in a
cell-free culture.

Chloroplasts: Where Photosynthesis Takes Place

Plants and other eukaryotic organisms that carry out
photosynthesis typically contain from one to several
hundred chloroplasts. Chloroplasts bestow an obvious
advantage on the organisms that possess them: they can
manufacture their own food. Chloroplasts contain the
photosynthetic pigment chlorophyll that gives most
plants their green color.

94 ~~ Part II Biology of the Cell

Intermembrane
space

Outer membrane

 
   
   
  

Inner membrane

 

Matrix

   

Crista

 

FIGURE 5.21

Mitochondria. (2) The inner membrane of a mitochondrion is
shaped into folds called cristae, which greatly increase the surface
area for oxidative metabolism. (6) Mitochondria in cross-section
and cut lengthwise (70,000x).

The chloroplast body is enclosed, like the mitochon-
drion, within two membranes that resemble those of mito-
chondria (figure 5.22). However, chloroplasts are larger
and more complex than mitochondria. In addition to the
outer and inner membranes, which lie in close association
with each other, chloroplasts have a closed compartment of
stacked membranes called grana (singular, granum), which
lic internal to the inner membrane. A chloroplast may con-
tain a hundred or more grana, and each granum may con-
tain from a few to several dozen disk-shaped structures
called thylakoids. On the surface of the thylakoids are the
light-capturing photosynthetic pigments, to be discussed in
depth in chapter 10. Surrounding the thylakoid is a fluid
matrix called the stroma.

Like mitochondria, chloroplasts contain DNA, but
many of the genes that specify chloroplast components are
also located in the nucleus. Some of the elements used in
the photosynthetic process, including the specific protein
components necessary to accomplish the reaction, are syn-
thesized entirely within the chloroplast.
