 

 

Each segment contains
a set of excretory
organs and a nerve center.

 

 

 

Dorsal

Esophagus
ar blood

blood
vessel

 

Segments are connected by the circulatory
and nervous systems. A series of hearts

at the anterior (front) end pump the blood.
‘well-developed brain located in an anterior
segment coordinates the activities of all
segments.

 

 

 

 

  
 
     

PHYLUM ANNELIDA: Segmentation

Clitellum

|

Segments

Intestine

Longitudinal
muscle

 

Earthworms crawl by
anchoring bristles called
setae to the ground and
pulling against them.
Polychaete annelids have
a flattened body and swim
or crawl by flexing it.

 

 

 

Circular
muscle

Nephridium

 

Each segment has a coelom. Muscles squeeze
the fluid of the coelom, making each segment
rigid, like an inflated balloon. Because each
segment can contract independently, a worm
can crawl by lengthening some segments
while shortening others.

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 45.12

The evolution of segmentation. Marine polychaetes and earthworms (phylum Annelida) were most likely the first organisms to evolve a
body plan based on partly repeated body segments. Segments are separated internally from each other by septa.

Unlike the arthropods and most mollusks, most annelids
have a closed circulatory system. Annelids exchange oxygen
and carbon dioxide with the environment through their body
surfaces; most lack gills or lungs. However, much of their
oxygen supply reaches the different parts of their bodies
through their blood vessels. Some of these vessels at the ante-
rior end of the worm body are enlarged and heavily muscular,
serving as hearts that pump the blood. Earthworms have five
pulsating blood vessels on each side that serve as hearts, help-
ing to pump blood from the main dorsal vessel, which is their
major pumping structure, to the main ventral vessel.

The excretory system of annelids consists of ciliated,
funnel-shaped nephridia generally similar to those of mol-
lusks. These nephridia—each segment has a pair—collect
waste products and transport them out of the body through
the coelom by way of specialized excretory tubes.

 

Annelids are a diverse group of coelomate animals
characterized by serial segmentation. Each segment in
the annelid body has its own circulatory, excretory,
neural elements, and setae.

 

Chapter 45 Mollusks and Annelids 907
