Classes of Annelids

The roughly 12,000 described species of annelids occur in
many different habitats. They range in length from as lit-
tle as 0.5 millimeter to the more than 3-meter length of
some polychaetes and giant Australian earthworms. There
are three classes of annelids: (1) Polychaeta, which are
free-living, almost entirely marine bristleworms, comprising
some 8000 species; (2) Oligochaeta, terrestrial earthworms
and related marine and freshwater worms, with some 3100
species; and (3) Hirudinea, leeches, mainly freshwater
predators or bloodsuckers, with about 500 species. The an-
nelids are believed to have evolved in the sea, with poly-
chaetes being the most primitive class. Oligochaetes seem to
have evolved from polychaetes, perhaps by way of brackish
water to estuaries and then to streams. Leeches share with
oligochaetes an organ called a clitellum, which secretes a
cocoon specialized to receive the eggs. It is generally agreed
that leeches evolved from oligochaetes, specializing in their
bloodsucking lifestyle as external parasites.

Class Polychaeta: The Polychaetes

Polychaetes (class Polychaeta) include clamworms, plume
worms, scaleworms, lugworms, twin-fan worms, sea mice,
peacock worms, and many others. These worms are often
surprisingly beautiful, with unusual forms and sometimes
iridescent colors (figure 45.13; sce also figure 45.1). Poly-
chaetes are often a crucial part of marine food chains, as
they are extremely abundant in certain habitats.

Some polychaetes live in tubes or permanent burrows of
hardened mud, sand, mucuslike secretions, or calcium car-
bonate. These sedentary polychaetes are primarily filter
feeders, projecting a set of feathery tentacles from the tubes
in which they live that sweep the water for food. Other
polychaetes are active swimmers, crawlers, or burrowers.
Many are active predators.

Polychaetes have a well-developed head with specialized
sense organs; they differ from other annelids in this re-
spect. Their bodies are often highly organized into distinct
regions formed by groups of segments related in function
and structure. Their sense organs include eyes, which range
from simple eyespots to quite large and conspicuous stalked
eyes.

Another distinctive characteristic of polychaetes is the
paired, fleshy, paddlelike flaps, called parapodia, on most
of their segments. These parapodia, which bear bristlelike
setae, are used in swimming, burrowing, or crawling. They
also play an important role in gas exchange because they
greatly increase the surface area of the body. Some poly-
chaetes that live in burrows or tubes may have parapodia
featuring hooks to help anchor the worm. Slow crawling is
carried out by means of the parapodia. Rapid crawling and
swimming is by undulating the body. In addition, the poly-
chaete epidermis often includes ciliated cells which aid in
respiration and food procurement.

908 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 45.13
A polychaete. The shiny bristleworm, Oenone fulgida.

The sexes of polychaetes are usually separate, and fertil-
ization is often external, occurring in the water and away
from both parents. Unlike other annelids, polychaetes usu-
ally lack permanent gonads, the sex organs that produce
gametes. They produce their gametes directly from germ
cells in the lining of the coelom or in their septa. Fertiliza-
tion results in the production of ciliated, mobile trochophore
Jarvae similar to the larvae of mollusks. The trochophores
develop for long periods in the plankton before beginning
to add segments and thus changing to a juvenile form that
more closely resembles the adult form.

Class Oligochaeta:
The Earthworms

The body of an earthworm (class Oligochaeta) consists of
100 to 175 similar segments, with a mouth on the first and
an anus on the last. Earthworms seem to eat their way
through the soil because they suck in organic and other
material by expanding their strong pharynx. Everything
that they ingest passes through their long, straight digestive
tracts. One region of this tract, the gizzard, grinds up the
organic material with the help of soil particles.

The material that passes through an earthworm is de-
posited outside of its burrow in the form of castings that
