 

 

The jointed appendages of insects

are all connected to the central body
region, the thorax. There are three pairs
of legs attached there and, most often,
two pairs of wings (some insects like

flies have retained only one wing pair).

The wings are sheets of chitin and protein.

 

 

 

 

PHYLUM ARTHROPODA: Jointed appendages and exoskeleton

   
 

 

Insects eliminate wastes by collecting
circulatory fluid osmotically in Malpighian
tubules that extend from the gut into the
blood and then reabsorbing the fluid, but
not the wastes.

 

 

 

Air sac

Malpighian
tubules

 

Insects have
complex sensory
organs located on
the head, including

 

Arthropods have been
the most successful
ofall animals. Two-thirds
ofall named species

on earth are arthropods.

 

 

 

 

Insects breathe through small tubes
called tracheae that pass throughout the
body and are connected to the outside
by special openings called spiracles.

a single pair of
antennae and
compound eyes
composed of many
independent visual
units.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 46.3

‘The evolution of jointed appendages and an exoskeleton. Insects and other arthropods (phylum Arthropoda) have a coelom,
segmented bodies, and jointed appendages. The three body regions of an insect (head, thorax, and abdomen) are each actually composed of
a number of segments that fuse during development. All arthropods have a strong exoskeleton made of chitin. One class, the insects, has

evolved wings that permit them to fly rapidly through the air.

lions of dollars of damage to crops, before and after har-
vest. They are by far the most important herbivores in all
terrestrial ecosystems and are a valuable food source as
well. Virtually every kind of plant is eaten by one or
more species of insect. Diseases spread by insects cause
enormous financial damage each year and strike every

kind of domesticated animal and plant, as well as human
beings.

 

Arthropods are segmented protostomes with jointed
appendages. Arthropods are the most successful of all
animal groups.

 

Chapter 46 Arthropods 915
