Classification of the Arthropods

Arthropods are among the oldest of animals, first appearing
in the Precambrian over 600 million years ago. Ranging in
size from enormous to microscopic, all arthropods share a
common heritage of segmented bodies and jointed ap-
pendages, a powerful combination for generating novel
evolutionary forms. Arthropods are the most diverse of all
the animal phyla, with more species than all other animal
phyla combined, most of them insects.

Origin of the Arthropods

Taxonomists have long held that there is a close relation-
ship between the annelids and the arthropods, the two
great segmented phyla. Velvet worms (phylum Ony-
chophora), known from the Burgess Shale (where upside-
down fossils were called Hallucigenia) and many other early
Cambrian deposits, have many features in common with
both annelids and arthropods. Some recent molecular stud-
ies have supported the close relationship between annelids
and arthropods, others have not.

Traditional Classification

Members of the phylum Arthropoda have been tradition-
ally divided into three subphyla, based largely on morpho-
logical characters.

1. Trilobites (the extinct trilobites). Trilobites, com-
mon in the seas 250 million years ago, were the first
animals whose eyes were capable of a high degree of
resolution.

2. Chelicerates (spiders, horseshoe crabs, sea spiders).
These arthropods lack jaws. The foremost ap-
pendages of their bodies are mouthparts called che-
licerae (figure 46.42) that function in feeding, usually
pincers or fangs .

3. Mandibulates (crustaceans, insects, centipedes, milli-
pedes). These arthropods have biting jaws, called
mandibles (figure 46.4%). In mandibulates, the most
anterior appendages are one or more pairs of sensory
antennae, and the next appendages are the mandibles.
Among the mandibulates, insects have traditionally
been set apart from the crustaceans, grouped instead
with the myriapods (centipedes and millipedes) in a
taxon called Tracheata. This phylogeny, still widely
employed, dates back to benchmark work by the
great comparative biologist Robert Snodgrass in the
1930s. He pointed out that insects, centipedes, and
millipedes are united by several seemingly powerful
attributes:

A tracheal respiratory system. Trachea are small,
branched air ducts that transmit oxygen from
openings in the exoskeleton to every cell of the

body.

916 Part XII Animal Diversity

Antenna

 

(a) Chelicerate (b) Mandibulate

FIGURE 46.4

Chelicerates and mandibulates. In the chelicerates, such as a
spider (a), the chelicerae are the foremost appendages of the body.
In contrast, the foremost appendages in the mandibulates, such as
an ant (), are the antennae, followed by the mandibles.

   

Endopodite

Crayfish maxilliped
(biramous)

Insect appendage
(uniramous)

FIGURE 46.5
Mandibulate appendages. A biramous leg in a crustacean
(crayfish) and a uniramous leg in an insect.

Use of Malpighian tubules for excretion. Malpighian
tubules are slender projections from the digestive
tract which collect and filter body fluids, emptying
wastes into the hindgut.

Uniramous (single-branched) legs. All crustacean ap-
pendages are basically biramous, or “two-
branched” (figure 46.5), although some of these
appendages have become single-branched by re-
duction in the course of their evolution. Insects, by
contrast, have uniramous, or single-branched,
mandibles and other appendages.

Doubts about the Traditional Approach

Recent research is casting doubt on the wisdom of this
taxonomic decision. The problem is that the key morpho-
logical traits used to define the Tracheata are not as pow-
erful taxonomically as had been assumed. Taxonomists
have traditionally assumed a character like branching ap-
