46.3 Crustaceans have branched appendages.

Crustaceans

The crustaceans (subphylum Crustacea) are a large group
of primarily aquatic organisms, consisting of some 35,000
species of crabs, shrimps, lobsters, crayfish, barnacles,
water fleas, pillbugs, and related groups (table 46.1). Most
crustaceans have two pairs of antennae, three types of
chewing appendages, and various numbers of pairs of legs.
All crustacean appendages, with the possible exception of
the first pair of antennae, are basically biramous. In some
crustaceans, appendages appear to have only a single
branch; in those cases, one of the branches has been lost
during the course of evolutionary specialization. The
nauplius larva stage through which all crustaceans pass
(figure 46.18) provides evidence that all members of this
diverse group are descended from a common ancestor.
The nauplius hatches with three pairs of appendages and
metamorphoses through several stages before reaching
maturity. In many groups, this nauplius stage is passed in
the egg, and development of the hatchling to the adult
form is direct.

Crustaceans differ from insects but resemble cen-
tipedes and millipedes in that they have appendages on
their abdomen as well as on their thorax. They are the
only arthropods with two pairs of antennae. Their
mandibles likely originated from a pair of limbs that took
on a chewing function during the course of evolution, a
process that apparently occurred independently in the
common ancestor of the terrestrial mandibulates. Many
crustaceans have compound eyes. In addition, they have
delicate tactile hairs that project from the cuticle all over
the body. Larger crustaceans have feathery gills near the
bases of their legs. In smaller members of this class, gas
exchange takes place directly through the thinner areas of
the cuticle or the entire body. Most crustaceans have sep-
arate sexes. Many different kinds of specialized copulation
occur among the crustaceans, and the members of some
orders carry their eggs with them, cither singly or in egg
pouches, until they hatch.

Decapod Crustaceans

Large, primarily marine crustaceans such as shrimps, lob-
sters, and crabs, along with their freshwater relatives, the
crayfish, are collectively called decapod crustaceans (figure
46.19). The term decapod means “ten-footed.” In these ani-
mals, the exoskeleton is usually reinforced with calcium
carbonate. Most of their body segments are fused into a
cephalothorax covered by a dorsal shield, or carapace,
which arises from the head. The crushing pincers common
in many decapod crustaceans are used in obtaining food,
for example, by crushing mollusk shells.

924 Part XII Animal Diversity

Table 46.1 Tradional Classification of the Phylum
‘Arthropoda

Subphylum Characteristics Members

 

The chelicerates:

spiders,

horseshoe crabs,
mites

The crustaceans:

lobsters, crabs,
shrimp, isopods,
barnacles

Chilopods

(entipedes),
diplopods
(millipedes), and

insects

Chelicerata Mouthparts are chelicerae

Crustacea Mouthparts are mandibles;

biramous appendages

Uniramia — Mouthparts are mandibles;

uniramous appendages

 

FIGURE 46.18

Although crustaceans are diverse, they have fundamentally
similar larvae. The nauplius larva of a crustacean is an important
unifying feature found in all members of this group.

In lobsters and crayfish, appendages called swimmerets
occur in lines along the ventral surface of the abdomen and
are used in reproduction and swimming. In addition, flat-
tened appendages known as uropods form a kind of com-
pound “paddle” at the end of the abdomen. These animals
may also have a telson, or tail spine. By snapping its ab-
domen, the animal propels itself through the water rapidly
and forcefully. Crabs differ from lobsters and crayfish in
proportion; their carapace is much larger and broader and
the abdomen is tucked under it.
