General Characteristics of
Arthropods

Arthropod bodies are segmented like annelids, a phylum to
which at least some arthropods are clearly related. Mem-
bers of some classes of arthropods have many body seg-
ments. In others, the segments have become fused together
into functional groups, or tagmata (singular, tagma), such
as the head and thorax of an insect (figure 46.7). This fus-
ing process, known as tagmatization, is of central impor-
tance in the evolution of arthropods. In most arthropods,
the original segments can be distinguished during larval de-
velopment. All arthropods have a distinct head, sometimes
fused with the thorax to form a tagma called the
cephalothorax.

Exoskeleton.

The bodies of all arthropods are covered by an exoskeleton,
or cuticle, that contains chitin. This tough outer covering,
against which the muscles work, is secreted by the epider-
mis and fused with it. The exoskeleton remains fairly flexi-
ble at specific points, allowing the exoskeleton to bend and
appendages to move. The exoskeleton protects arthropods
from water loss and helps to protect them from predators,
parasites, and injury.

Molting. Arthropods periodically undergo ecdysis, or
molting, the shedding of the outer cuticular layer. When
they outgrow their exoskeleton, they form a new one un-
derneath. This process is controlled by hormones. When
the new exoskeleton is complete, it becomes separated from
the old one by fluid. This fluid dissolves the chitin and pro-
tein and, if it is present, calcium carbonate, from the old
exoskeleton. The fluid increases in volume until, finally,
the original exoskeleton cracks open, usually along the

Corneal lens

  
  

Ommatidium

Optic nerve

@
FIGURE 46.8

| | 7

=

Pigment Cross a

cells cm
ommatidium

 
  

Cephalothorax
(fused head and
» thorax)

   

    
 

Abdomen

(a) Scorpion

(b) Honeybee

FIGURE 46.7
Arthropod evolution from many to few body segments. The
(@ scorpion and the (#) honeybee are arthropods with different
numbers of body segments.

back, and is shed. The arthropod emerges, clothed in a
new, pale, and still somewhat soft exoskeleton. The arthro-
pod then “puffs itself up,” ultimately expanding to full size.
The blood circulation to all parts of the body aids them in
this expansion, and many insects and spiders take in air to
assist them. The expanded exoskeleton subsequently hard-
ens. While the exoskeleton is soft, the animal is especially
vulnerable. At this stage, arthropods often hide under
stones, leaves, or branches.

Compound Eye

Another important structure in many arthropods is the
compound eye (figure 46.82). Compound eyes are com-
posed of many independent visual units, often thousands
of them, called ommatidia. Each ommatidium is covered
with a lens and linked to a complex of eight retinular cells

Crystalline core

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

‘The compound eye. (2) The compound eyes found in insects are complex structures. (b) Three ocelli are visible between the compound

eyes of the robberfly (order Diptera).
918 Part XII Animal Diversity
