Order Araneae: The Spiders

There are about 35,000 named
species of spiders (order Araneae).
These animals play a major role in
virtually all terrestrial ecosystems.
They are particularly important as
predators of insects and other small
animals. Spiders hunt their prey or
catch it in silk webs of remarkable di-
versity. The silk is formed from a
fluid protein that is forced out of
spinnerets on the posterior portion of
the spider’s abdomen. The webs and
habits of spiders are often distinctive.
Some spiders can spin gossamer floats
that allow them to drift away in the
breeze to a new site.

Many kinds of spiders, like the familiar wolf spiders and
tarantulas, do not spin webs but instead hunt their prey ac-
tively. Others, called trap-door spiders, construct silk-lined
burrows with lids, seizing their prey as it passes by. One
species of spider, Argyroneta aquatica, lives in fresh water,
spending most of its time below the surface. Its body is sur-
rounded by a bubble of air, while its legs, which are used
both for underwater walking and for swimming, are not.
Several other kinds of spiders walk about freely on the sur-
face of water.

Spiders have poison glands leading through their che-
licerae, which are pointed and used to bite and paralyze
prey. Some members of this order, such as the black widow
and brown recluse (figure 46.13), have bites that are poiso-
nous to humans and other large mammals.

FIGURE 46.13

Order Acari: Mites and Ticks

The order Acari, the mites and ticks, is the largest in terms
of number of species and the most diverse of the arachnids.
Although only about 30,000 species of mites and ticks have
been named, scientists that study the group estimate that
there may be a million or more members of this order in
existence.

Most mites are small, less than 1 millimeter long, but
adults of different species range from 100 nanometers to 2
centimeters. In most mites, the cephalothorax and ab-
domen are fused into an unsegmented ovoid body. Respira-
tion occurs either by means of tracheae or directly through
the exoskeleton. Many mites pass through several distinct
stages during their life cycle. In most, an inactive eight-
legged prelarva gives rise to an active six-legged larva,
which in turn produces a succession of three eight-legged
stages and, finally, the adult males and females.

Mites and ticks are diverse in structure and habitat.
They are found in virtually every terrestrial, freshwater,
and marine habitat known and feed on fungi, plants, and
animals. They act as predators and as internal and external
parasites of both invertebrates and vertebrates.

922 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

 

Two common poisonous spiders. (2) The black widow spider, Latrodectus mactans.
(b) The brown recluse spider, Loxosceles reclusa. Both species are common throughout
temperate and subtropical North America, but bites are rare in humans.

 

FIGURE 46.14

Ticks (order Acari). Ticks (the large one is engorged) on the
hide of a tapir in Peru. Many ticks spread diseases in humans and
other vertebrates.

Many mites produce irritating bites and diseases in hu-
mans. Mites live in the hair follicles and wax glands of your
forehead and nose, but usually cause no symptoms.

Ticks are blood-feeding ectoparasites, parasites that
occur on the surface of their host (figure 46.14). They are
larger than most other mites and cause discomfort by suck-
ing the blood of humans and other animals. Ticks can carry
many diseases, including some caused by viruses, bacteria,
and protozoa. The spotted fevers (Rocky Mountain spotted
fever is a familiar example) are caused by bacteria carried
by ticks. Lyme disease is apparently caused by spirochaetes
transmitted by ticks. Red-water fever, or Texas fever, is an
important tick-borne protozoan disease of cattle, horses,
sheep, and dogs.

 

Scorpions, spiders, and mites are all arachnids, the
largest class of chelicerates.

 
