; The chelicerates all have fangs or pincers.
igs or p'

Class Arachnida:
The Arachnids

Chelicerates (subphylum Chelicerata) are a distinct evolu-
tionary line of arthropods in which the most anterior ap-
pendages have been modified into chelicerae, which often
function as fangs or pincers. By far the largest of the three
classes of chelicerates is the largely terrestrial Arachnida,
with some 57,000 named species; it includes spiders, ticks,
mites, scorpions, and daddy longlegs. Arachnids have a pair
of chelicerae, a pair of pedipalps, and four pairs of walking
legs. The chelicerae are the foremost appendages; they
consist of a stout basal portion and a movable fang often
connected to a poison gland.

The next pair of appendages, pedipalps, resemble legs
but have one less segment and are not used for locomotion.
In male spiders, they are specialized copulatory organs. In
scorpions, the pedipalps are large pincers.

Most arachnids are carnivorous. The main exception is
mites, which are largely herbivorous. Most arachnids can
ingest only preliquified food, which they often digest ex-
ternally by secreting enzymes into their prey. They can
then suck up the digested material with their muscular,
pumping pharynx. Arachnids are primarily, but not exclu-
sively, terrestrial. Some 4000 known species of mites and
one species of spider live in fresh water, and a few mites
live in the sea. Arachnids breathe by means of tracheae,
book lungs, or both.

Order Opiliones: The Daddy Longlegs

A familiar group of arachnids consists of the daddy long-
legs, or harvestmen (order Opiliones). Members of this
order are easily recognized by their oval, compact bodies
and extremely long, slender legs (figure 46.11). They
respire by means of a primary pair of tracheae and are un-
usual among the arachnids in that they engage in direct
copulation. The males have a penis, and the females an
ovipositor, or egg-laying organ which deposits their eggs
in cracks and crevices. Most daddy longlegs are predators
of insects and other arachnids, but some live on plant juices
and many scavenge dead animal matter. The order includes
about 5000 species.

Order Scorpiones: The Scorpions

Scorpions (order Scorpiones) are arachnids whose pedi-
palps are modified into pincers. Scorpions use these pincers
to handle and tear apart their food (figure 46.12). The ven-
omous stings of scorpions are used mainly to stun their
prey and less commonly in self-defense. The stinging appa-
ratus is located in the terminal segment of the abdomen. A
scorpion holds its abdomen folded forward over its body

 

FIGURE 46.11
A harvestman, or daddy longlegs.

 

FIGURE 46.12

The scorpion, Uroctonus mordax. This photograph shows the
characteristic pincers and segmented abdomen, ending in a
stinging apparatus, raised over the animal’s back. The white mass
is comprised of the scorpion’s young.

when it is moving about. The elongated, jointed abdomens
of scorpions are distinctive; in most chelicerates, the ab-
dominal segments are more or less fused together and ap-
pear as a single unit.

Scorpions are probably the most ancient group of terres-
trial arthropods; they are known from the Silurian Period,
some 425 million years ago. Adults of this order of arach-
nids range in size from | to 18 centimeters. There are some
1200 species of scorpions, all terrestrial, which occur
throughout the world. They are most common in tropical,
subtropical, and desert regions. The young are born alive,
with 1 to 95 in a given brood.

Chapter 46 Arthropods 921
