ie.

     

Spiracles

Tympanal
organ

FIGURE 46.9

    

Rectum
Malpighian

Gastric tubules

   

(b) Nerve ganglia

A grasshopper (order Orthoptera). This grasshopper illustrates the major structural features of the insects, the most numerous group of

arthropods. (a) External anatomy. (b) Internal anatomy.

and a light-sensitive central core, or rhabdom. Com-
pound eyes among insects are of two main types: apposi-
tion eyes and superposition eyes. Apposition eyes are
found in bees and butterflies and other insects that are ac-
tive during the day. Each ommatidium acts in isolation,
surrounded by a curtain of pigment cells that blocks the
passage of light from one to another. Superposition eyes,
such as those found in moths and other insects that are
active at night, are designed to maximize the amount of
light that enters each ommatidium. At night, the pigment
in the pigment cells is concentrated at the top of the cells
so that the low levels of light can be received by many dif-
ferent ommatidia. During daylight, the pigment in the
pigment cells is evenly dispersed throughout the cells, al-
lowing the eye to function much like an apposition eye.
The pigment in the pigment cells gives the arthropod eye
its color, but it is not the critical pigment needed for v
sion. The visual pigment is located in an area called the
rhabdom found in the center of the ommatidium. The in-
dividual images from each ommatidium are combined in
the arthropod’s brain to form its image of the external
world.

Simple eyes, or ocelli, with single lenses are found in
the other arthropod groups and sometimes occur together
with compound eyes, as is often the case in insects (figure
46.8b). Ocelli function in distinguishing light from dark-
ness. The ocelli of some flying insects, namely locusts and
dragonflies, function as horizon detectors and help the in-
sect visually stabilize its course in flight.

   

Circulatory System

In the course of arthropod evolution, the coelom has be-
come greatly reduced, consisting only of cavities that
house the reproductive organs and some glands. Arthro-
pods completely lack cilia, both on the external surfaces of

the body and on the internal organs. Like annelids,
arthropods have a tubular gut that extends from the
mouth to the anus. In the next paragraphs we will discuss
the circulatory, respiratory, excretory, and nervous sys-
tems of the arthropods (figure 46.9).

The circulatory system of arthropods is open; their
blood flows through cavities between the internal organs
and not through closed vessels. The principal component
of an insect’s circulatory system is a longitudinal vessel
called the heart. This vessel runs near the dorsal surface of
the thorax and abdomen. When it contracts, blood flows
into the head region of the insect.

When an insect’s heart relaxes, blood returns to it
through a series of valves. These valves are located in the
posterior region of the heart and allow the blood to flow
inward only. Thus, blood from the head and other anterior
portions of the insect gradually flows through the spaces
between the tissues toward the posterior end and then back
through the one-way valves into the heart. Blood flows
most rapidly when the insect is running, flying, or other-
wise active. At such times, the blood efficiently delivers nu-
trients to the tissues and removes wastes from them.

Nervous System

The central feature of the arthropod nervous system is a
double chain of segmented ganglia running along the ani-
mal's ventral surface. At the anterior end of the animal are
three fused pairs of dorsal ganglia, which constitute the
brain. However, much of the control of an arthropod’s ac-
. Therefore, the ani-
mal can carry out many functions, including eating, move-
ment, and copulation, even if the brain has been removed.

tivities is relegated to ventral gangli:

 

The brain of arthropods seems to be a control point, or in-
hibitor, for various actions, rather than a stimulator, as it is
in vertebrates.

Chapter 46 Arthropods 919
