Telson

 

FIGURE 46.15

. FIGURE 46.16
Limulus, Horseshoe crabs, emerging from

the sea to mate at the edge of Delaware
Bay, New Jersey, in early May.

Class Merostomata: Horseshoe
Crabs

A second class of chelicerates is the horseshoe crabs (class
Merostomata). There are three genera of horseshoe crabs.
One, Limulus (figure 46.15), is common along the East
Coast of North America. The other two genera live in the
Asian tropics. Horseshoe crabs are an ancient group, with
fossils virtually identical to Limulus dating back 220 million
years to the Triassic Period. Other members of the class,
the now-extinct eurypterans, are known from 400 million
years ago. Horseshoe crabs may have been derived from
trilobites, a relationship suggested by
the appearance of their larvae. Individ-
uals of Limulus grow up to 60 centime-
ters long. They mature in 9 to 12 years
and have a life span of 14 to 19 years.
Limulus individuals live in deep water,
but they migrate to shallow coastal wa-
ters every spring, emerging from the
sea to mate on moonlit nights when
the tide is high.

Horseshoe crabs feed at night, pri-
marily on mollusks and annelids. They
swim on their backs by moving their
abdominal plates. They can also walk
on their four pairs of legs, protected
along with chelicerae and pedipalps by
their shell (figure 46.16).

FIGURE 46.17

Horseshoe crabs are a very ancient
group.

Book gills

 

A marine pycnogonid. The sea spider,
Pycnogonum littorale (yellow animal),
crawling over a sea anemone.

Operculum

Walking legs

    

Cephalothorax

Diagram of a horseshoe crab, Limulus, from below. This diagram illustrates the
principal features of this archaic animal.

Class Pycnogonida: The Sea Spiders

The third class of chelicerates is the sea spiders (class Pyc-
nogonida). Sea spiders are common in coastal waters, with
more than 1000 species in the class. These animals are not
often observed because many are small, only about 1 to 3
centimeters long, and rather inconspicuous. They are
found in oceans throughout the world but are most abun-
dant in the far north and far south. Adult sea spiders are
mostly external parasites or predators of other animals like
sea anemones (figure 46.17).

Sea spiders have a sucking proboscis in a mouth located at
its end. Their abdomen is much reduced,
and their body appears to consist almost
entirely of the cephalothorax, with no
well-defined head. Sea spiders usually
have four, or less commonly five or six,
pairs of legs. Male sea spiders carry the
eggs on their legs until they hatch, thus
providing a measure of parental care. Sea
spiders completely lack excretory and
respiratory systems. They appear to carry
out these functions by direct diffusion,
with waste products flowing outward
through the cells and oxygen flowing in-
ward through them. Sea spiders are not
closely related to either of the other two
classes of chelicerates.

Sea spiders are very common in

marine habitats. They are not
closely related to terrestrial spiders.

Chapter 46 Arthropods 923
