Outer membrane

Inner membrane

   
 
   
 

Granum

FIGURE 5.22
Chloroplast structure. The inner membrane of a chloroplast is fused to form stacks of closed vesicles called thylakoids. Within these
thylakoids, photosynthesis takes place. Thylakoids are typically stacked one on top of the other in columns called grana.

Other DNA-containing organelles in plants are called
leucoplasts, which lack pigment and a complex internal
structure. In root cells and some other plant cells, leu-
coplasts may serve as starch storage sites. A leucoplast that
stores starch (amylose) is sometimes termed an amyloplast.
These organelles—chloroplasts, leucoplasts, and amylo-
plasts—are collectively called plastids. All plastids come
from the division of existing plastids.

Centrioles: Microtubule Assembly Centers

Centrioles are barrel-shaped organelles found in the cells
of animals and most protists. They occur in pairs, usually (a) 0.09 pm
located at right angles to each other near the nuclear
membranes (figure 5.23); the region surrounding the pair
in almost all animal cells is referred to as a centrosome.
Although the matter is in some dispute, at least some
centrioles seem to contain DNA, which apparently is in-
volved in producing their structural proteins. Centrioles
help to assemble microtubules, long, hollow cylinders of
the protein tubulin. Microtubules influence cell shape,
move the chromosomes in cell division, and provide the
functional internal structure of flagella and cilia, as we
will discuss later. Centrioles may be contained in areas
called microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs). The
cells of plants and fungi lack centrioles, and cell biolo-
gists are still in the process of characterizing their

MTOGs.

 

Microtubule triplet

(b)

FIGURE 5.23

Centrioles. (a) This electron micrograph shows a pair of
centrioles (75,000). The round shape is a centriole in cross-
section; the rectangular shape is a centriole in longitudinal section.
(d) Each centriole is composed of nine triplets of microtubules.

 

Both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain specific
genes related to some of their functions, but both
depend on nuclear genes for other functions. Some
centrioles also contain DNA, which apparently helps
control the synthesis of their structural proteins.

 

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 95
