Traditional Phylogeny

-—Trilobites (extinct)
(— Eurypterids (extinct)

 

Horseshoe crabs

 

 

Chelicerates| a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ancestral
arthropod
Mandibulates a
Insects ¢
Tracheata :
-Contpedes
|_Millipedes “)
FIGURE 46.6

Revised Phylogeny

-—Trilobites (extinct)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(— Eurypterids (extinct)
Chelicerates|
Ancestral
arthropod
Acrustacean?
Centipedes
Myriapoda
Millipedes
Insects
Crustaceans AA
=
Modern es
crustaceans

A proposed revision of arthropod phylogeny. Accumulating evidence supports the hypothesis that insects and modern crustaceans are
sister groups, having evolved from the same ancient crustacean ancestor in the Precambrian. This implies that insects may be viewed as
“flying crustaceans,” and that the traditional Tracheata taxon, which places centipedes, millipedes, and insects together, is in fact a

polyphyletic group.

pendages to be a fundamental one, conserved over the
course of evolution, and thus suitable for making taxo-
nomic distinctions.

However, modern molecular biology now tells us that
this is not a valid assumption. The branching of arthro-
pod legs, for example, turns out to be controlled by a sin-
gle gene. The pattern of appendages among arthropods is
orchestrated by a family of genes called homeotic (Hox)
genes, described in detail in chapter 17. A single one of
these Hox genes, called Distal-less, has recently been
shown to initiate development of unbranched limbs in in-
sects and branched limbs in crustaceans. The same
Distal-less gene is found in many animal phyla, including
vertebrates.

A Revolutionary New Phylogeny

In recent years a mass of accumulating morphological and
molecular data has led many taxonomists to suggest new
arthropod taxonomies. The most revolutionary of these,
championed by Richard Brusca of Columbia University,
considers crustaceans to be the basic arthropod group, and
insects a close sister group (figure 46.6).

Morphological Evidence. The most recent morphologi-
cal study of arthropod phylogeny, reported in 1998, was
based on 100 conserved anatomical features of the central
nervous system. It concluded insects were more closely re-
lated to crustaceans than to any other arthropod group.
They share a unique pattern of segmental neurons, and
many other features.

Molecular Evidence. Molecular phylogenies based on
18S rRNA sequences, the 18S rDNA gene, the elongation
factor EF-1a, and the RNA polymerase II gene, all place
insects as a sister group to crustaceans, not myriapods, and
arising from within the crustaceans. In conflict with 150
years of morphology-based thinking, these conclusions are
certain to engender lively discussion.

 

Arthropods have traditionally been classified into
arachnids and other chelicerates that lack jaws and have
fang mouthparts, and mandibulates (crustaceans and
tracheates) with biting jaws. A revised arthropod
taxonomy considers Tracheata to be the products
convergent evolution, with insects and crustaceans
sister groups.

 

Chapter 46 Arthropods 917
