   
    

Cephalothorax

 

Telson

Swimmerets

 

Walking legs

Antenna

FIGURE 46.19
Decapod crustacean. A lobster, Homarus americanus. The principal features are labeled.

Terrestrial and Freshwater Crustaceans

Although most crustaceans are marine, many occur in fresh
water and a few have become terrestrial. These include pill-
bugs and sowbugs, the terrestrial members of a large order
of crustaceans known as the isopods (order Isopoda). About
half of the estimated 4500 species of this order are terres-
trial and live primarily in places that are moist, at least sea-
sonally. Sand fleas or beach fleas (order Amphipoda) are
other familiar crustaceans, many of which are semiterres-
trial (intertidal) species.

Along with the larvae of larger species, minute crus-
taceans are abundant in the plankton. Especially significant
are the tiny copepods (order Copepoda; figure 46.20),
which are among the most abundant multicellular organ-
isms on earth. FIGURE 46.20

Freshwater crustacean. A copepod with attached eggs, a member
| ofan abundant group of marine and freshwater crustaceans (order
Sessile Crustaceans Copepoda), most of which are a few millimeters long. Copepods
are important components of the plankton.

 

Barnacles (order Cirripedia; figure 46.21) are a group of
crustaceans that are sessile as adults. Barnacles have free-
swimming larvae, which ultimately attach their heads to a
piling, rock, or other submerged object and then stir food
into their mouth with their feathery legs. Calcareous plates
protect the barnacle’s body, and these plates are usually at-
tached directly and solidly to the substrate. Although most
crustaceans have separate sexes, barnacles are hermaphro-
ditic, but they generally cross-fertilize.

 

Crustaceans include marine, freshwater, and terrestrial
forms. All possess a nauplius larval stage and branched
appendages.

 

FIGURE 46.21
Gooseneck barnacles, Lepas anatifera, feeding.
These are stalked barnacles; many others lack a stalk.

 

Chapter 46 Arthropods 925
