Tracheoles

  

(@)

FIGURE 46.10

Spiracle

 

 

(b)

Tracheae and tracheoles. Tracheae and tracheoles are connected to the exterior by specialized openings called spiracles and carry oxygen
to all parts of a terrestrial insect’s body. (a) The tracheal system of a grasshopper. (b) A portion of the tracheal system of a cockroach.

Respiratory System

Insects and other members of subphylum Uniramia, which
are fundamentally terrestrial, depend on their respiratory
rather than their circulatory system to carry oxygen to their
tissues. In vertebrates, blood moves within a closed circula-
tory system to all parts of the body, carrying the oxygen
with it. This isa much more efficient arrangement than ex-
ists in arthropods, in which all parts of the body need to be
near a respiratory passage to obtain oxygen. As a result, the
size of the arthropod body is much more limited than that
of the vertebrates. Along with the brittleness of their chitin
exoskeletons, this feature of arthropod design places severe
limitations on size.

Unlike most animals, the arthropods have no single
major respiratory organ. The respiratory system of most
terrestrial arthropods consists of small, branched, cuticle-
lined air ducts called tracheae (figure 46.10). These tra-
cheae, which ultimately branch into very small tracheoles,
are a series of tubes that transmit oxygen throughout the
body. Tracheoles are in direct contact with individual cells,
and oxygen diffuses directly across the cell membranes. Air
passes into the tracheae by way of specialized openings in
the exoskeleton called spiracles, which, in most insects,
can be opened and closed by valves. The ability to prevent
water loss by closing the spiracles was a key adaptation that
facilitated the invasion of the land by arthropods. In many
insects, especially larger ones, muscle contraction helps to
increase the flow of gases in and out of the tracheae. In
other terrestrial arthropods, the flow of gases is essentially
a passive process.

Many spiders and some other chelicerates have a unique
respiratory system that involves book lungs, a series of
leaflike plates within a chamber. Air is drawn in and ex-
pelled out of this chamber by muscular contraction. Book
lungs may exist alongside tracheae, or they may function

920 Part XII Animal Diversity

instead of tracheae. One small class of marine chelicerates,
the horseshoe crabs, have book gills, which are analogous
to book lungs but function in water. Tracheae, book lungs,
and book gills are all structures found only in arthropods
and in the phylum Onychophora, which have tracheae.
Crustaceans lack such structures and have gills.

Excretory System

Though there are various kinds of excretory systems in dif-
ferent groups of arthropods, we will focus here on the
unique excretory system consisting of Malpighian tubules
that evolved in terrestrial uniramians. Malpighian tubules are
slender projections from the digestive tract that are attached
at the junction of the midgut and hindgut (see figure 46.3).
Fluid passes through the walls of the Malpighian tubules to
and from the blood in which the tubules are bathed. As this
fluid passes through the tubules toward the hindgut, nitroge-
nous wastes are precipitated as concentrated uric acid or
guanine. These substances are then emptied into the hindgut
and eliminated. Most of the water and salts in the fluid are
reabsorbed by the hindgut and rectum and returned to the
arthropod’s body. Malpighian tubules are an efficient mech-
anism for water conservation and were another key adapta-
tion facilitating invasion of the land by arthropods.

 

 

All arthropods have a rigid chitin and protein
exoskeleton that provides places for muscle attachment,
protects the animal from predators and injury, and,

most important, impedes water loss. Many arthropods
have compound eyes. Arthropods have an open
circulatory system. Many arthropods eliminate
metabolic wastes by a unique system of Malpighian
tubules. Most terrestrial insects have a network of tubes
called tracheae that transmit oxygen from the outside to
the organs.

 
