46.4 Insects are the most diverse of all animal groups.

Millipedes, centipedes, and insects, three dis-
tinct classes, are uniramian mandibulates. They
respire by means of tracheae and excrete their
waste products through Malpighian tubules.
These groups were certainly derived from
annelids, probably ones similar to the
oligochaetes, which they resemble in their
embryology.

Classes Chilopoda
and Diplopoda: The
Centipedes and Millipedes

The centipedes (class Chilopoda) and millipedes

 

(class Diplopoda) both have bodies that consist FIGURE 46.22
of a head region followed by numerous seg- A centipede. Centipedes, like this member of the genus Scolopendra, are active
ments, all more or less similar and nearly all _ predators.

bearing paired appendages. Although the name

centipede would imply an animal with a hundred

legs and the name millipede one with a thousand, adult cen-
tipedes usually have 30 or more legs, adult millipedes 60 or
more. Centipedes have one pair of legs on each body seg-
ment (figure 46.22), millipedes two (figure 46.23). Each
segment of a millipede is a tagma that originated during
the group’s evolution when two ancestral segments fused.
This explains why millipedes have twice as many legs per
segment as centipedes.

In both centipedes and millipedes, fertilization is in-
ternal and takes place by direct transfer of sperm. The
sexes are separate, and all species lay eggs. Young milli-
pedes usually hatch with three pairs of legs; they experi-
ence a number of growth stages, adding segments and
legs as they mature, but do not change in general
appearance.

Centipedes, of which some 2500 species are known,
are all carnivorous and feed mainly on insects. The ap-
pendages of the first trunk segment are modi-
fied into a pair of poison fangs. The poison is
often quite toxic to human beings, and many
centipede bites are extremely painful, some-
times even dangerous.

In contrast, most millipedes are herbivores,
feeding mainly on decaying vegetation. A few
millipedes are carnivorous. Many millipedes can
roll their bodies into a flat coil or sphere be-
cause the dorsal area of each of their body seg-
ments is much longer than the ventral one.
More than 10,000 species of millipedes have
been named, but this is estimated to be no more
than one-sixth of the actual number of species
that exists. In each segment of their body, most
millipedes have a pair of complex glands that
produces a bad-smelling fluid. This fluid is ex-

926 Part XII Animal Diversity

uded for defensive purposes through openings along the
sides of the body. The chemistry of the secretions of dif-
ferent millipedes has become a subject of considerable in-
terest because of the diversity of the compounds involved
and their effectiveness in protecting millipedes from at-
tack. Some produce cyanide gas from segments near their
head end. Millipedes live primarily in damp, protected
places, such as under leaf litter, in rotting logs, under bark
or stones, or in the soil.

 

Centipedes are segmented hunters with one pair of legs
on each segment. Millipedes are segmented herbivores
with two pairs of legs on each segment.

 

 

FIGURE 46.23
A millipede. Millipedes, such as this Sigmoria individual, are herbivores.
