Chapter 46

Summary

=
Vey

www.mhhe.com/raven6e

Questions

46.1 The evolution of jointed appendages has made arthropods very successful.

SCO

 

www.biocourse.com

Media Resources

 

¢ Jointed appendages and an exoskeleton greatly
expanded locomotive and manipulative capabilities
for the arthropod phyla, the most successful of all
animals in terms of numbers of individuals, species,
and ecological diversification.

* Traditionally, arthropods have been grouped into

three subphyla based on morphological characters but

new research is calling this classification of the
arthropods into question.

* Like annelids, arthropods have segmented bodies, but
some of their segments have become fused into
tagmata during the course of evolution. All possess a
rigid external skeleton, or exoskeleton.

46.2 The chelicerates all have fangs or pincers.

1, What are the advantages of an
exoskeleton? What occurs
during ecdysis? What controls
this process?

2. What type of circulatory

system do arthropods have? ys
Describe the direction of blood
flow. What helps to maintain
this one-way flow?

3. What are Malpighian tubules?
How do they work? What other
system are they connected to?
How does this system process
wastes? How does it regulate
water loss?

* Arthropods

* Enhancement
Chapter: Arthropod
Taxonomy,
Sections | and 2

 

* Chelicerates consist of three classes: Arachnida
(spiders, ticks, mites, and scorpions); Merostomata
(horseshoe crabs); and Pycnogonida (sea spiders).

* Spiders, the best known arachnids, have a pair of
chelicerae, a pair of pedipalps, and four pairs of
walking legs. Spiders secrete digestive enzymes into
their prey, then suck the contents out.

46.3 Crustaceans have branched appendages.

4, Into what two groups are
arthropods traditionally divided?
Describe each group in terms of
its mouthparts and appendages,
and give several examples of
each.

 

* Crustaceans comprise some 35,000 species of crabs,

5. On which parts of the body

* Enhancement

 

shrimps, lobsters, barnacles, sowbugs, beach fleas, do crustaceans possess legs? Fy Chapter: Arthropod
° Taxonomy, Section 3

and many other groups. Their appendages are 6. How do biramous and 3
basically biramous, and their embryology is uniramous appendages differ?
distinctive.

46.4 Insects are the most diverse of all animal groups.

* Centipedes and millipedes are segmented uniramia. 7. How are millipedes and * Enhancement
Centipedes are hunters with one pair of legs per centipedes similar to each other? er—a) Chapter: Arthropod

segment, and millipedes are herbivores with two pairs
of legs per segment.

* Insects have three body segments, three pairs of legs,
and often one or two pairs of wings. Many have
complex eyes and other specialized sensory
structures.

¢ Insects exhibit cither simple metamorphosis, moving
through a succession of forms relatively similar to the
adult, or complete metamorphosis, in which an often
wormlike larva becomes a usually sedentary pupa, and
then an adult.

932 Part XII Animal Diversity

How do they differ?

8. What type of digestive system
do most insects possess? What
digestive adaptations occur in
insects that feed on juices low in
protein? Why?

9, What is an instar as it relates
to insect metamorphosis? What
are the two different kinds of
metamorphosis in insects? How
do they differ?

Taxonomy, Section 4
* Student Research:
Insect Behavior
