insects that have sucking mouthparts
and feed on juices rather than on
protein-rich solid foods because they
offer a greater opportunity to absorb
fluids and their dissolved nutrients.
The digestive enzymes of the insect
also are more dilute and thus less effec-
tive in a highly liquid medium than in a
more solid one. Longer digestive tracts
give these enzymes more time to work
while food is passing through.

The anterior and posterior regions
of an insect’s digestive tract are lined
with cuticle. Digestion takes place pri-
marily in the stomach, or midgut; and
excretion takes place through
Malpighian tubules. Digestive enzymes
are mainly secreted from the cells that
line the midgut, although some are
contributed by the salivary glands near
the mouth.

The tracheae of insects extend
throughout the body and permeate its
different tissues. In many winged in-
sects, the tracheae are dilated in vari-
ous parts of the body, forming air sacs.
These air sacs are surrounded by mus-
cles and form a kind of bellows system
to force air deep into the tracheal sys-

 

FIGURE 46.27

Scales on the wing of Parnassius
imperator, a butterfly from China. Scales
of this sort account for most of the colored
patterns on the wings of butterflies and

sensory hairs are linked to nerve cells
and are sensitive to mechanical and
chemical stimulation. They are partic-
ularly abundant on the antennae and
legs—the parts of the insect most
likely to come into contact with other
objects.

Sound, which is of vital importance
to insects, is detected by tympanal or-
gans in groups such as grasshoppers
and crickets, cicadas, and some
moths. These organs are paired struc-
tures composed of a thin membrane,
the tympanum, associated with the
tracheal air sacs. In many other
groups of insects, sound waves are de-
tected by sensory hairs. Male mosqui-
toes use thousands of sensory hairs on
their antennae to detect the sounds
made by the vibrating wings of female
mosquitoes.

Sound detection in insects is impor-
tant not only for protection but also
for communication. Many insects
communicate by making sounds, most
of which are quite soft, very high-
pitched, or both, and thus inaudible to
humans. Only a few groups of insects,
especially grasshoppers, crickets, and

tem. The spiracles, a maximum of 10 ™oths.

on each side of the insect, are paired

and located on or between the seg-

ments along the sides of the thorax

and abdomen. In most insects, the

spiracles can be opened by muscular action. Closing the
spiracles at times may be important in retarding water
loss. In some parasitic and aquatic groups of insects, the
spiracles are permanently closed. In these groups, the tra-
cheae run just below the surface of the insect, and gas ex-
change takes place by diffusion.

The fat body is a group of cells located in the insect
body cavity. This structure may be quite large in relation
to the size of the insect, and it serves as a food-storage
reservoir, also having some of the functions of a verte-
brate liver. It is often more prominent in immature in-
sects than in adults, and it may be completely depleted
when metamorphosis is finished. Insects that do not feed
as adults retain their fat bodies and live on the food stored
in them throughout their adult lives (which may be very
short).

Sense Receptors

In addition to their eyes, insects have several characteristic
kinds of sense receptors. These include sensory hairs,
which are usually widely distributed over their bodies. The

cicadas, make sounds that people can

hear. Male crickets and longhorned

grasshoppers produce sounds by rub-

bing their two front wings together.

Shorthorned grasshoppers do so by
rubbing their hind legs over specialized areas on their
wings. Male cicadas vibrate the membranes of air sacs lo-
cated on the lower side of the most anterior abdominal
segment.

In addition to using sound, nearly all insects communi-
cate by means of chemicals or mixtures of chemicals
known as pheromones. These compounds, extremely di-
verse in their chemical structure, are sent forth into the
environment, where they are active in very small amounts
and convey a variety of messages to other individuals.
These messages not only convey the attraction and recog-
nition of members of the same species for mating, but
they also mark trails for members of the same species, as
in the ants.

 

All insects possess three body segments (tagmata): the
head, the thorax, and the abdomen. The three pairs of
legs are attached to the thorax. Most insects have
compound eyes, and many have one or two pairs of
wings. Insects possess sophisticated means of sensing
their environment, including sensory hairs, tympanal
organs, and chemoreceptors.

 

Chapter 46 Arthropods 929
