47

Echinoderms

Concept Outline

47.1 The embryos of deuterostomes develop quite
differently from those of protostomes.

Protostomes and Deuterostomes. Deuterostomes—the
echinoderms, chordates, and a few other groups—share a
mode of development that is quite different from other
animals.

47.2 Echinoderms are deuterostomes with an
endoskeleton.

Deuterostomes. Echinoderms are bilaterally symmetrical
as larvae but metamorphose to radially symmetrical adults.
Echinoderm Body Plan. Echinoderms have an
endoskeleton and a unique water-vascular system seen in no
other phylum.

47.3 The six classes of echinoderms are all radially
symmetrical as adults.

Class Crinoidea: The Sea Lilies and Feather Stars.
Crinoids are the only echinoderms that are attached to the
sea bottom for much of their lives.

Class Asteroidea: The Sea Stars. Sea stars, also called
starfish, are five-armed mobile predators.

Class Ophiuroidea: The Brittle Stars. Brittle stars are
quite different from the sea stars for whom they are
sometimes mistaken.

Class Echinoidea: The Sea Urchins and Sand Dollars.
Sea urchins and sand dollars have five-part radial symmetry
but lack arms.

Classes Holothuroidea and Concentricycloidea: Sea
Cucumbers and Sea Daisies. Sea cucumbers are soft-
bodied echinoderms without arms. The most recently
discovered class of echinoderms, sea daisies are tiny,
primitive echinoderms that live at great depths.

 

FIGURE 47.1

An echinoderm. Brittle star, Ophiothrix, a member of the largest
group of echinoderms.

chinoderms, which include the familiar starfish, have

been described as a “noble group especially designed
to puzzle the zoologist.” They are bilaterally symmetrical
as larvae, but undergo a bizarre metamorphosis to a radially
symmetrical adult (figure 47.1). A compartment of the
coelom is transformed into a unique water-vascular system
that uses hydraulic power to operate a multitude of tiny
tube feet that are used in locomotion and food capture.
Some echinoderms have an endoskeleton of dermal plates
beneath the skin, fused together like body armor. Many
have miniature jawlike pincers scattered over their body
surface, often on stalks and sometimes bearing poison
glands. This collection of characteristics is unique in the
animal kingdom.

933
