and below one another; this process gives rise to a
loosely packed array of cells. This pattern is called ra-
dial cleavage because a line drawn through a se-
quence of dividing cells describes a radius outward
from the polar axis.

2. Protostomes exhibit determinate development. In
this type of development, each embryonic cell has a
predetermined fate in terms of what kind of tissue it
will form in the adult. Before cleavage begins, the
chemicals that act as developmental signals are local-
ized in different parts of the egg. Consequently, the
cell divisions that occur after fertilization separate dif-
ferent signals into different daughter cells. This
process specifies the fate of even the very earliest em-
bryonic cells. Deuterostomes, on the other hand, dis-
play indeterminate development. The first few cell
divisions of the egg produce identical daughter cells.
Any one of these cells, if separated from the others,
can develop into a complete organism. This is possible
because the chemicals that signal the embryonic cells
to develop differently are not localized until later in
the animal’s development.

3. In all coelomates, the coelom originates from meso-
derm. In protostomes, this occurs simply and directly:
the cells simply move away from one another as the
coelomic cavity expands within the mesoderm. How-

  
 
 
 
    

Blastula

Blastopore

FIGURE 47.2 (continued)

ever, in deuterostomes, whole groups of cells usually
move around to form new tissue associations. The
coelom is normally produced by an evagination of the
archenteron—the central tube within the gastrula,
also called the primitive gut. This tube, lined with en-
doderm, opens to the outside via the blastopore and
eventually becomes the gut cavity.

The first abundant and well-preserved animal fossils are
nearly 600 million years old; they occur in the Ediacara se-
ries of Australia and similar formations elsewhere. Among
these fossils, many represent groups of animals that no
longer exist. In addition, these ancient rocks bear evidence
of the coelomates, the most advanced evolutionary line of
animals, and it is remarkable that their two major subdivi-
sions were differentiated so early. In the coelomates, it
seems likely that all deuterostomes share a common proto-
stome ancestor—a theory that is supported by evidence
from comparison of rRNA and other molecular studies. The
event, however, occurred very long ago and presumably did
not involve groups of organisms that closely resemble any
that are living now.

 

In deuterostomes, the egg cleaves radially, and the
blastopore becomes the anus. In protostomes, the egg
cleaves spirally, and the blastopore becomes the mouth.

 

 

Mouth forms

Mesoderm splits from blastopore

Archenteron

 

Archenteron outpockets
to form coelom

Anus forms
from blastopore

In deuterostomes, embryonic cells cleave radially and form a loosely packed array. The blastopore becomes the animal’s anus, and the mouth
develops at the other end. The coelom originates from an evagination, or outpouching, of the archenteron in deuterostomes.

Chapter 47. Echinoderms 935
