Insect Life Histories

Most young insects hatch from fertilized eggs laid outside
their mother’s body. The zygote develops within the egg
into a young insect, which escapes by chewing through or
bursting the shell. Some immature insects have specialized
projections on the head that assist in this process. In a few
insects, eggs hatch within the mother’s body.

During the course of their development, young insects
undergo ecdysis a number of times before they become
adults. Most insects molt four to eight times during the
course of their development, but some may molt as many
as 30 times. The stages between the molts are called in-
stars. When an insect first emerges following ecdysis, it is
pale, soft, and especially susceptible to predators. Its ex-
oskeleton generally hardens in an hour or two. It must
grow to its new size, usually by taking in air or water, dur-
ing this brief period.

There are two principal kinds of metamorphosis in in-
sects: simple metamorphosis and complete metamor-
phosis (figure 46.28). In insects with simple metamorpho-
sis, immature stages are often called nymphs. Nymphs are
usually quite similar to adults, differing mainly in their
smaller size, less well-developed wings, and sometimes
color. In insect orders with simple metamorphosis, such as
mayflies and dragonflies, nymphs are aquatic and extract
oxygen from the water through gills. The adult stages are
terrestrial and look very different from the nymphs. In
other groups, such as grasshoppers and their relatives,
nymphs and adults live in the same habitat. Such insects
usually change gradually during their life cycles with re-
spect to wing development, body proportions, the appear-
ance of ocelli, and other features.

In complete metamorphosis, the wings develop inter-
nally during the juvenile stages and appear externally
only during the resting stage that immediately precedes
the final molt (figure 46.28b). During this stage, the in-
sect is called a pupa or chrysalis, depending on the
group to which it belongs. A pupa or chrysalis does not
normally move around much, although mosquito pupae
do move around freely. A large amount of internal body
reorganization takes place while the insect is a pupa or
chrysalis.

More than 90% of the insects, including the members of
all of the largest and most successful orders, display com-
plete metamorphosis. The juvenile stages and adults often
live in distinct habitats, have different habits, and are usu-
ally extremely different in form. In these insects, develop-
ment is indirect. The immature stages, called larvae, are
often wormlike, differing greatly in appearance from the
adults. Larvae do not have compound eyes. They may be
legless or have legs or leg-like appendages on the abdomen.
They usually have chewing mouthparts, even in those or-
ders in which the adults have sucking mouthparts; chewing
mouthparts are the primitive condition in these groups.
When larvae and adults play different ecological roles, they

930 Part XII Animal Diversity

  

Egg ~<— Nymphs ———
(a)
Egg Early ~—‘Full-sized Pupa Adult housefly
b larva larva
(b)
FIGURE 46.28

Metamorphosis. (2) Simple metamorphosis in a chinch bug
(order Hemiptera), and (4) complete metamorphosis in a housefly,
Musca domestica (order Diptera).

do not compete directly for the same resources, an advan-
tage to the species.

Pupae do not feed and are usually relatively inactive. As
pupae, insects are extremely vulnerable to predators and
parasites, but they are often covered by a cocoon or some
other protective structure. Groups of insects with complete
metamorphosis include moths and butterflies; beetles; bees,
wasps, and ants; flies; and fleas.

Some species of insects exhibit no dramatic change in
form from immature stages to adult. This type of develop-
ment is called ametabolus (meaning without change) and
is seen in the most primitive orders of insects such as the
silverfish and springtails.

Hormones control both ecdysis and metamorphosis.
Molting hormone, or ecdysone, is released from a gland
in the thorax when that gland has been stimulated by brain
hormone, which in turn is produced by neurosecretory
cells and released into the blood. The effects of the molting
induced by ecdysone are determined by juvenile hormone,
which is present during the immature stages but declines in
quantity as the insect passes through successive molts.
When the level of juvenile hormone is relatively high, the
molt produces another larva; when it is lower, it produces
the pupa and then the final development of the adult.

 

Insects undergo either simple or complete
metamorphosis.

 
