External Features

Insects are primarily a terrestrial group, and most, if not
all, of the aquatic insects probably had terrestrial ances-
tors. Most insects are relatively small, ranging in size from
0.1 millimeter to about 30 centimeters in length or
wingspan. Insects have three body sections, the head, tho-
rax, and abdomen; three pairs of legs, all attached to the
thorax; and one pair of antennae. In addition, they may
have one or two pairs of wings. Insect mouthparts all have
the same basic structure but are modified in different
groups in relation to their feeding habits (figure 46.25).
Most insects have compound eyes, and many have ocelli
as well.

The insect thorax consists of three segments, each with
a pair of legs. Legs are completely absent in the larvae of
certain groups, for example, in most members of the
order Diptera (flies) (figure 46.26). If two pairs of wings
are present, they attach to the middle and posterior seg-
ments of the thorax. If only one pair of wings is present, it
usually attaches to the middle segment. The thorax is al-
most entirely filled with muscles that operate the legs and
wings.

The wings of insects arise as saclike outgrowths of the
body wall. In adult insects, the wings are solid except for
the veins. Insect wings are not homologous to the other ap-
pendages. Basically, insects have two pairs of wings, but in
some groups, like flies, the second set has been reduced to a
pair of balancing knobs called halteres during the course of
evolution. Most insects can fold their wings over their ab-
domen when they are at rest; but a few, such as the dragon-
flies and damselflies (order Odonata), keep their wings
erect or outstretched at all times.

Insect forewings may be tough and hard, as in beetles.
Tf they are, they form a cover for the hindwings and usu-
ally open during flight. The tough forewings also serve a
protective function in the order Orthoptera, which in-
cludes grasshoppers and crickets. The wings of insects are
made of sheets of chitin and protein; their strengthening
veins are tubules of chitin and protein. Moths and butter-
flies have wings that are covered with detachable scales
that provide most of their bright colors (figure 46.27). In
some wingless insects, such as the springtails or silverfish,
wings never evolved. Other wingless groups, such as fleas
and lice, are derived from ancestral groups of insects that
had wings.

Internal Organization

The internal features of insects resemble those of the
other arthropods in many ways. The digestive tract is a
tube, usually somewhat coiled. It is often about the same
length as the body. However, in the order Hemiptera,
which consists of the leafhoppers, cicadas, and related
groups, and in many flies (order Diptera), the digestive
tube may be greatly coiled and several times longer than
the body. Such long digestive tracts are generally found in

928 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

(a) (b) ()

FIGURE 46.25
Modified mouthparts in three kinds of insects. Mouthparts are
modified for (a) piercing in the mosquito, Culex, (#) sucking nectar
from flowers in the alfalfa butterfly, Colias, and (0) sopping up
liquids in the housefly, Musca domestica.

 

FIGURE 46.26

Larvae of a mosquito, Culex pipiens. The aquatic larvae of
mosquitoes are quite active. They breathe through tubes from the
surface of the water, as shown here. Covering the water with a
thin film of oil causes them to drown.
