47.1
protostomes.

Protostomes and Deuterostomes

The coelomates we have met so far—the mollusks, annelids,
and arthropods—exhibit essentially the same kind of embry-
ological development, starting as a hollow ball of cells, a
blastula, which indents to form a two-layer-thick ball with a
blastopore opening to the outside. Also in this group, the
mouth (stoma) develops from or near the blastopore (figure
47.2). This same pattern of development, in a general sense,
is seen in all noncoelomate animals. An animal whose
mouth develops in this way is called a protostome (from
the Greek words protos, “first,” and stoma, “mouth”). If such
an animal has a distinct anus or anal pore, it develops later
in another region of the embryo. The fact that this kind of
developmental pattern is so widespread in diverse phyla sug-
gests that it is the original pattern for animals as a whole and
that it was characteristic of the common ancestor of all eu-
metazoan animals.

A second distinct pattern of embryological development
occurs in the echinoderms, the chordates, and a few other
smaller related phyla. The consistency of this pattern of de-
velopment, and its distinctiveness from that of the proto-
stomes suggests that it evolved once, in a common ancestor

Protostomes
|
=> —> } — —_—
j
1 cell 2 cells 4 cells 8cells
Deuterostomes
= —
=> => — —
7
e oF
1 cell 2 cells 4 cells 8 cells 16 cells
FIGURE 47.2

The embryos of deuterostomes develop quite differently from those of

to all of the phyla that exhibit it. In deuterostome (Greek,
deuteros, “second,” and stoma, “mouth”) development, the
blastopore gives rise to the organism’s anus, and the mouth
develops from a second pore that arises in the blastula later
in development.

Deuterostomes represent a revolution in embryonic de-
velopment. In addition to the pattern of blastopore forma-
tion, deuterostomes differ from protostomes in a number of
other fundamental embryological features:

1. The progressive division of cells during embryonic
growth is called cleavage. The cleavage pattern relative
to the embryo’s polar axis determines how the cells
will array. In nearly all protostomes, each new cell
buds off at an angle oblique to the polar axis. As a re-
sult, a new cell nestles into the space between the
older ones in a closely packed array. This pattern is
called spiral cleavage because a line drawn through a
sequence of dividing cells spirals outward from the
polar axis (figure 47.2).

In deuterostomes, the cells divide parallel to and at
right angles to the polar axis. As a result, the pairs of
cells from each division are positioned directly above

 

32 cells

Embryonic development in protostomes and deuterostomes. Cleavage of the egg produces a hollow ball of cells called the blastula.
Invagination of the blastula produces the blastopore and archenteron. In protostomes, embryonic cells cleave in a spiral pattern and
become tightly packed. The blastopore becomes the animal’s mouth, and the coelom originates from a mesodermal split.

934 Part XII Animal Diversity
