The Cytoskeleton: Interior
Framework of the Cell

The cytoplasm of all eukaryotic cells is crisscrossed by a
network of protein fibers that supports the shape of the
cell and anchors organelles to fixed locations. This net-
work, called the cytoskeleton (figure 5.24), is a dynamic
system, constantly forming and disassembling. Individual
fibers form by polymerization, as identical protein sub-
units attract one another chemically and spontaneously
assemble into long chains. Fibers disassemble in the same
way, as one subunit after another breaks away from one
end of the chain.

Eukaryotic cells may contain three types of cytoskeletal
fibers, each formed from a different kind of subunit:

1. Actin filaments. Actin filaments are long fibers
about 7 nanometers in diameter. Each filament is
composed of two protein chains loosely twined to-
gether like two strands of pearls (figure 5.25a). Each
“pearl,” or subunit, on the chains is the globular pro-
tein actin. Actin molecules spontaneously form these
filaments, even ina test tube; a cell regulates the rate of
their formation through other proteins that act as
switches, turning on polymerization when appropriate.
Actin filaments are responsible for cellular movements
such as contraction, crawling, “pinching” during divi-
sion, and formation of cellular extensions.

2. Microtubules. Microtubules are hollow tubes
about 25 nanometers in diameter, each composed of
a ring of 13 protein protofilaments (figure 5.250).
Globular proteins consisting of dimers of alpha and
beta tubulin subunits polymerize to form the 13
protofilaments. The protofilaments are arrayed side
by side around a central core, giving the microtubule
its characteristic tube shape. In many cells, micro-
tubules form from MTOC nucleation centers near
the center of the cell and radiate toward the periph-
ery. They are in a constant state of flux, continually
polymerizing and depolymerizing (the average half-
life of a microtubule ranges from 10 minutes in a
nondividing animal cell to as short as 20 seconds in a
dividing animal cell), unless stabilized by the binding
of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to the ends, which
inhibits depolymerization. The ends of the micro-
tubule are designated as “+” (away from the nucle-
ation center) or “~” (toward the nucleation center).
Along with allowing for cellular movement, micro-
tubules are responsible for moving materials within
the cell itself. Special motor proteins, discussed later
in this chapter, move cellular organelles around the
cell on microtubular “tracks.” Kinesin proteins move
organelles toward the “+” end (toward the cell pe-
riphery), and dyneins move them toward the “—” end.

96 = Part I Biology of the Cell

Smooth
endoplasmic

Nucleolus Cytoskeleton

reticulum

 

Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum

Ribosomes Mitochondrion

FIGURE 5.24

The cytoskeleton. In this diagrammatic cross-section of a
eukaryotic cell, the cytoskeleton, a network of fibers, supports
organelles such as mitochondria.
