47.2 Echinoderms are deuterostomes with an endoskeleton.

Deuterostomes

Mollusks, annelids, and arthropods are
protostomes. However, the echinoderms
are characterized by deuterostome develop-
ment, a key evolutionary advance. The
endoskeleton makes its first appearance in
the echinoderms also.

Sponges

Cnidarians
Flatworms
Nematodes

The Echinoderms

Deuterostomate marine animals called

echinoderms appeared nearly 600 mil-

lion years ago (figure 47.3). Echino-

derms (phylum Echinodermata) are an

ancient group of marine animals con-

sisting of about 6000 living species and

are also well represented in the fossil

record. The term echinoderm means

“spiny skin” and refers to an en-

doskeleton composed of hard calcium-

rich plates just beneath the delicate skin (figure 47.4).
When they first form, the plates are enclosed in living tis-
sue and so are truly an endoskeleton, although in adults
they frequently fuse, forming a hard shell. Another inno-
vation in echinoderms is the development of a hydraulic
system to aid in movement or feeding. Called a water-
vascular system, this fluid-filled system is composed of a
central ring canal from which five radial canals extend out
into the body and arms.

Many of the most familiar animals seen along the
seashore, sea stars (starfish), brittle stars, sea urchins, sand
dollars, and sea cucumbers, are echinoderms. All are radi-
ally symmetrical as adults. While some other kinds of ani-
mals are radially symmetrical, none have the complex
organ systems of adult echinoderms. Echinoderms are well

 

FIGURE 47.3

Mollusks

represented not only in the shallow
waters of the sea but also in its abyssal
depths. In the oceanic trenches, which
are the deepest regions of the oceans,
sea cucumbers account for more than
90% of the biomass! All of them are
bottom-dwellers except for a few
swimming sea cucumbers. The adults
range from a few millimeters to more
than a meter in diameter (for one
species of sea star) or in length (for a
species of sea cucumber).

There is an excellent fossil record
of the echinoderms, extending back
into the Cambrian. However, despite
this wealth of information, the origin
of echinoderms remains unclear.
They are thought to have evolved
from bilaterally symmetrical ances-
tors because echinoderm larvae are
bilateral. The radial symmetry that is
the hallmark of echinoderms develops later, in the adult
body. Many biologists believe that early echinoderms
were sessile and evolved radiality as an adaptation to the
sessile existence. Bilaterality is of adaptive value to an an-
imal that travels through its environment, while radiality
is of value to an animal whose environment meets it on
all sides. Echinoderms attached to the sea bottom by a
central stalk were once common, but only about 80 such
species survive today.

 

‘Annelids
‘Arthropods
Echinoderms
Chordates

 

 

 

 

Echinoderms are a unique, exclusively marine group of
organisms in which deuterostome development and an
endoskeleton are seen for the first time.

 

 

Diversity in echinoderms. (a) Sea star, Oreaster occidentalis (class Asteroidea), in the Gulf of California, Mexico. (b) Warty sea cucumber,
Parastichopus parvimensis (class Holothuroidea), Philippines. (¢) Sea urchin (class Echinoidea).

936 Part XII Animal Diversity
