Echinoderm Body Plan

The body plan of echinoderms undergoes a fundamental
shift during development. All echinoderms have secondary
radial symmetry, that is, they are bilaterally symmetrical
during larval development but become radially symmetrical
as adults. Because of their radially symmetrical bodies, the
usual terms used to describe an animal’s body are not ap-
plicable: dorsal, ventral, anterior, and posterior have no
meaning without a head or tail. Instead, the body structure
of echinoderms is discussed in reference to their mouths
which are located on the oral surface. Most echinoderms
crawl along on their oral surfaces, although in sea cucum-
bers and some other echinoderms, the animal’s axis lies hor-
izontally and they crawl with the oral surface in front.

Echinoderms have a five-part body plan corresponding to
the arms of a sea star or the design on the “shell” of a sand
dollar. These animals have no head or brain. Their nervous
systems consist of a central nerve ring from which branches
arise. The animals are capable of complex response patterns,
but there is no centralization of function.

Endoskeleton

Echinoderms have a delicate epidermis, containing thou-
sands of neurosensory cells, stretched over an endoskeleton
composed of either movable or fixed caleium-rich (calcite)
plates called ossicles. The animals grow more or less contin-

   
   
   
 

Ring canal
Radial canal

Lateral canal

‘Ampulla

FIGURE 47.5

uously, but their growth slows down with age. When the
plates first form, they are enclosed in living tissue. In some
echinoderms, such as asteroids and holothuroids, the ossi-
cles are widely scattered and the body wall is flexible. In
others, especially the echinoids, the ossicles become fused
and form a rigid shell. In many cases, these plates bear
spines. In nearly all species of echinoderms, the entire skele-
ton, even the long spines of sea urchins, is covered by a layer
of skin. Another important feature of this phylum is the
presence of mutable collagenous tissue which can range
from being tough and rubbery to weak and fluid. This
amazing tissue accounts for many of the special attributes of
echinoderms, such as the ability to rapidly autotomize body
parts. The plates in certain portions of the body of some
echinoderms are perforated by pores. Through these pores
extend tube feet, part of the water-vascular system that is a
unique feature of this phylum.

The Water-Vascular System

The water-vascular system of an echinoderm radiates from a
ring canal that encircles the animal’s esophagus. Five radial
canals, their positions determined early in the development
of the embryo, extend into each of the five parts of the body
and determine its basic symmetry (figure 47.5). Water en-
ters the water-vascular system through a madreporite, a
sievelike plate on the animal's surface, and flows to the ring
canal through a tube, or stone canal, so named because of

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

Papula (gill)

Skeletal plate

Digestive gland
Ampulla

Radial canal

Radial nerve

Tube foot

The water-vascular system of an echinoderm. Radial canals allow water to flow into the tube feet. As the ampulla in each tube foot
contracts, the tube extends and can attach to the substrate. Subsequently, muscles in the tube feet contract bending the tube foot and

pulling the animal forward.

938 Part XII Animal Diversity
