 

FIGURE 47.6
Tube feet. The nonsuckered tube feet of the sea star, Lidia
magnifica, are extended.

the surrounding rings of calcium carbonate. The five radial
canals in turn extend out through short side branches into
the hollow tube feet (figure 47.6). In some echinoderms,
each tube foot has a sucker at its end; in others, suckers are
absent. At the base of each tube foot is a muscular sac, the
ampulla, which contains fluid. When the ampulla contracts,
the fluid is prevented from entering the radial canal by a
one-way valve and is forced into the tube foot, thus extend-
ing it. When extended, the foot can attach itself to the sub-
strate. Longitudinal muscles in the tube foot wall then con-
tract causing the tube feet to bend. Relaxation of the
muscles in the ampulla allows the fluid to flow back into the
ampulla which moves the foot. By the concerted action of a
very large number of small individually weak tube feet, the
animal can move across the sea floor.

Sea cucumbers (see figure 47.3) usually have five rows of
tube feet on the body surface that are used in locomotion.
They also have modified tube feet around their mouth cav-
ity that are used in feeding. In sea lilies, the tube feet arise
from the branches of the arms, which extend from the mar-
gins of an upward-directed cup. With these tube feet, the
animals take food from the surrounding water. In brittle
stars (see figure 47.1), the tube feet are pointed and special-
ized for feeding.

Body Cavity

In echinoderms, the coelom, which is proportionately large,
connects with a complicated system of tubes and helps pro-
vide circulation and respiration. In many echinoderms, res-
piration and waste removal occurs across the skin through
small, fingerlike extensions of the coclom called papulae (see
figure 47.5). They are covered with a thin layer of skin and
protrude through the body wall to function as gills.

Peele atense oe
water vascular system

 

FIGURE 47.7

The free-swimming larva of an echinoderm. The bands of cilia
by which the larva moves are prominent in this drawing. Such
bilaterally symmetrical larvae suggest that the ancestors of the
echinoderms were not radially symmetrical, like the living
members of the phylum.

Reproduction

Many echinoderms are able to regenerate lost parts, and
some, especially sea stars and brittle stars, drop various parts
when under attack. In a few echinoderms, asexual reproduc-
tion takes place by splitting, and the broken parts of sea stars
can sometimes regenerate whole animals. Some of the
smaller brittle stars, especially tropical species, regularly re-
produce by breaking into two equal parts; each half then re-
generates a whole animal.

Despite the ability of many echinoderms to break into
parts and regenerate new animals from them, most repro-
duction in the phylum is sexual and external. The sexes in
most echinoderms are separate, although there are few ex-
ternal differences. Fertilized eggs of echinoderms usually
develop into free-swimming, bilaterally symmetrical larvae
(figure 47.7), which differ from the trochophore larvae of
mollusks and annelids. These larvae form a part of the
plankton until they metamorphose through a series of stages
into the more sedentary adults.

 

Echinoderms are characterized by a secondary radial
symmetry and a five-part body plan. They have
characteristic calcium-rich plates called ossicles and a
unique water-vascular system that includes hollow tube
feet.

 

Chapter 47. Echinoderms 939
