48.1 Attaching muscles to an internal framework greatly improves movement.

The Chordates

Chordates (phylum Chordata) are
deuterostome coelomates whose near-
est relations in the animal kingdom

a i @ 8
are the echinoderms, the only other & & & & 3
‘unlike 2 3 2 2 3
deuterostomes. However, unlike g 3 § 2 &
echinoderms, chordates are character- of g

ized by a notochord, jointed appendages,
and segmentation. There are some
43,000 species of chordates, a phylum
that includes birds, reptiles, amphib-
ians, fishes, and mammals.

Four features characterize the chor-
dates and have played an important
role in the evolution of the phylum

(figure 48.2):

1.A single, hollow nerve cord
runs just beneath the dorsal sur-
face of the animal. In verte-
brates, the dorsal nerve cord differentiates into the
brain and spinal cord.

2. A flexible rod, the notochord, forms on the dorsal
side of the primitive gut in the early embryo and is
present at some developmental stage in all chor-
dates. The notochord is located just below the
nerve cord. The notochord may persist throughout
the life cycle of some chordates or be displaced dur-
ing embryological development as in most verte-
brates by the vertebral column that forms around
the nerve cord.

3. Pharyngeal slits connect the pharynx, a muscular
tube that links the mouth cavity and the esophagus,
with the outside. In terrestrial vertebrates, the slits do
not actually connect to the outside and are better
termed pharyngeal pouches. Pharyngeal pouches are
present in the embryos of all vertebrates. They be-
come slits, open to the outside in animals with gills,
but disappear in those lacking gills. The presence of
these structures in all vertebrate embryos provides ev-
idence to their aquatic ancestry.

4. Chordates have a postanal tail that extends beyond
the anus, at least during their embryonic develop-
ment. Nearly all other animals have a terminal anus.

All chordates have all four of these characteristics at
some time in their lives. For example, humans have pha-
ryngeal slits, a dorsal nerve cord, and a notochord as em-
bryos. As adults, the nerve cord remains while the noto-
chord is replaced by the vertebral column and all but one
pair of pharyngeal slits are lost. This remaining pair
forms the Eustachian tubes that connect the throat to the
middle ear.

946 Part XII Animal Diversity

—e. Pharyngeal Hollow dorsal
2 pouches. nerve cord

  

 

Annelids
‘Arthropods

 

 

Echinoderms
Chordates

 

Postanal —J
tail

FIGURE 48.2
Some of the principal features of the
chordates, as shown in a generalized
embryo.

 

FIGURE 48.3

A mouse embryo. At 11.5 days of development, the mesoderm is
already divided into segments called somites (stained dark in this
photo), reflecting the fundamentally segmented nature of all
chordates.
