47.3 The six classes of echinoderms are all radially symmetrical as adults.

There are more than 20 extinct classes
of echinoderms and an additional 6 with
living members: (1) Crinoidea, sea lilies
and feather stars; (2) Asteroidea, sea
stars, or starfish; (3) Ophiuroidea, brittle
stars; (4) Echinoidea, sea urchins and
sand dollars; (5) Holothuroidea, sea cu-
cumbers, and (6) Concentricycloidea,
sea daisies. Sea daisies were recently dis-
covered living on submerged wood in
the deep sea.

Class Crinoidea: The
Sea Lilies and Feather
Stars

Sea lilies and feather stars, or crinoids
(class Crinoidea) differ from all other
living echinoderms in that the mouth
and anus are located on their upper
surface in an open disc. The two struc-
tures are connected by a simple gut.
These animals have simple excretory
and reproductive systems and an exten-
sive water-vascular system. The arms,
which are the food-gathering struc-
tures of crinoids, are located around
the margins of the disc. Different
species of crinoids may have from 5 to
more than 200 arms extending upward
from their bodies, with smaller struc-
tures called pinnules branching from
the arms. In all crinoids, the number of
arms is initially small. Species with
more than 10 arms add additional arms
progressively during growth. Crinoids
are filter feeders, capturing the micro-
scopic organisms on which they feed by
means of the mucus that coats their
tube feet, which are abundant on the
animals’ pinnules.

Scientists that study echinoderms
believe that the common ancestors of
this phylum were sessile, sedentary, ra-
dially symmetrical animals that resem-
bled crinoids. Crinoids were abundant
in ancient seas, and were present when
the Burgess Shale was deposited about
515 million years ago. More than 6000
fossil species of this class are known, in
comparison with the approximately 600
living species.

940 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 47.8

Sea lilies, Cenocrinus asterius. Two
specimens showing a typical parabola of
arms forming a “feeding net.” The water
current is flowing from right to left,
carrying small organisms to the stalked
crinoid’s arms. Prey, when captured, are
passed down the arms to the central mouth.
‘This photograph was taken at a depth of
about 400 meters in the Bahamas from the
Johnson-Sea-Link Submersible of the
Harbor Branch Foundation, Inc.

 

FIGURE 47.9
Feather star. This feather star is on the
Great Barrier Reef in Australia.

Sea Lilies

There are two basic crinoid body
plans. In sea lilies, the flower-shaped
body is attached to its substrate by a
stalk that is from 15 to 30 cm long, al-
though in some species the stalk may
be as much as a meter long (figure
47.8). Some fossil species had stalks up
to 20 meters long. If they are detached
from the substrate, some sea lilies can
move slowly by means of their feather-
like arms. All of the approximately 80
living species of sea lilies are found
below a depth of 100 meters in the
ocean. Sea lilies are the only living
echinoderms that are fully sessile.

Feather Stars

In the second group of crinoids, the
520 or so species of feather stars, the
disc detaches from the stalk at an
early stage of development (figure
47.9). Adult feather stars have long,
many-branched arms and usually an-
chor themselves to their substrate by
claw-like structures. However, some
feather stars are able to swim for
short distances, and many of them
can move along the substrate. Feather
stars range into shallower water than
do sea lilies, and only a few species of
cither group are found at depths
greater than 500 meters. Along with
sea cucumbers, crinoids are the most
abundant and conspicuous large in-
vertebrates in the warm waters and
among the coral reefs of the western
Pacific Ocean. They have separate
sexes, with the sex organs simple
masses of cells in special cavities of
the arms and pinnules. Fertilization is
usually external, with the male and fe-
male gametes shed into the water, but
brooding—in which the female shel-
ters the young—occurs occasionally.

Crinoids, the sea lilies and feather
stars, were once far more
numerous. Crinoids are the only
echinoderms attached for much of
their lives to the sea bottom.
