Vertebrates

Concept Outline

48.1 Attaching muscles to an internal framework
greatly improves movement.

The Chordates. Chordates have an internal flexible rod,
the first stage in the evolution of a truly internal skeleton.

48.2 Nonvertebrate chordates have a notochord but
no backbone.

The Nonvertebrate Chordates. Lancelets are thought
to resemble the ancestors of vertebrates.

48.3 The vertebrates have an interior framework of
bone.

Characteristics of Vertebrate. Vertebrates have a true,
usually bony endoskeleton, with a backbone encasing the
spinal column, and a skull-encased brain.

48.4 The evolution of vertebrates involves invasions of
sea, land, and air.

Fishes. Over half of all vertebrate species are fishes,
which include the group from which all other vertebrates
evolved.

History of the Fishes. Swim bladders have made bony
fishes a particularly successful group.

Amphibians. The key innovation that made life on land
possible for vertebrates was the pulmonary vein.

History of the Amphibians. In the past, amphibians

were far more diverse, and included many large, armored
terrestrial forms.

Reptiles. Reptiles were the first vertebrates to completely
master the challenge of living on dry land.

The Rise and Fall of Dominant Reptile Groups. Now-
extinct forms of reptiles dominated life on land for 250
million years. Four orders survive today.

Birds. Birds are much like reptiles, but with feathers.
History of the Birds. Birds are thought to have evolved
from dinosaurs with adaptations of feathers and flight.
Mammals. Mammals are the only vertebrates that possess
hair and milk glands.

History of the Mammals. Mammals evolved at the same
time as dinosaurs, but only became common when
dinosaurs disappeared.

 

FIGURE 48.1

Atypical vertebrate. Today mammals, like this snow leopard,
Panthera uncia, dominate vertebrate life on land, but for over 200
million years in the past they were a minor group ina world
dominated by reptiles.

Me of the phylum Chordata (figure 48.1) exhibit
great improvements in the endoskeleton over what is
seen in echinoderms. As we saw in the previous chapter,
the endoskeleton of echinoderms is functionally similar to
the exoskeleton of arthropods; it is a hard shell that encases
the body, with muscles attached to its inner surface. Chor-
dates employ a very different kind of endoskeleton, one
that is truly internal. Members of the phylum Chordata are
characterized by a flexible rod that develops along the back
of the embryo. Muscles attached to this rod allowed early
chordates to swing their backs from side to side, swimming
through the water. This key evolutionary advance, attach-
ing muscles to an internal element, started chordates along
an evolutionary path that led to the vertebrates—and, for
the first time, to truly large animals.

945
