| seas
Chapt er 47 www.mhhe.com/raven6e www.biocourse.com

 

Summary Questions Media Resources

47.1 The embryos of deuterostomes develop quite differently from those of protostomes.

 

© The two major evolutionary lines of coclomate 1, What patterns of embryonic
animals—the protostomes and the deuterostomes— development related to cleavage
are both represented among the oldest known fossils and’ the Dlastopore occur 1n

. - : rotostome coelomates? What
of multicellular animals, dating back some 650 Pp
million years. patterns occur in deuterostome

coelomates?

¢ In the protostomes, the mouth develops from or near 2. Which major coelomate phyla

the blastopore, and the early divisions of the embryo are protostomes and which are
are spiral. At carly stages of development, the fate of deuterostomes? How does the
the individual cells is already determined, and they early developmental fate of cells
cannot develop individually i into a whole animal. differ between the two groups?

How is the development of the
coelom from mesodermal tissue
different between them?

* In the deuterostomes, the anus develops from or near
the blastopore, and the mouth forms subsequently on
another part of the gastrula. The early divisions of
the embryo are radial. At early stages of development,
each cell of the embryo can differentiate into a whole
animal.

47.2 Echinoderms are deuterostomes with an endoskeleton.

 

* Echinoderms are exclusively marine deuterostomes 3. What type of symmetry and * Echinoderms

that are radially symmetrical as adults. body plan do adult echinoderms @

. . . exhibit?

¢ The epidermis of an echinoderm stretches over an

endoskeleton made of separate or fused calcium-rich 4. What is the composition and

1: location of the echinoderm
plates. S
skeleton?

¢ Echinoderms use a unique water-vascular system that

5. How do echinoderms respire?
includes tube feet for locomotion and feeding. P

How developed is their digestive
system?

47.3, The six classes of echinoderms are all radially symmetrical as adults.

 

* Crinoids are sessile for some or all of their lives and 6. In what two ways do members
have a mouth and anus located on the upper surface of the phylum Echinodermata
of the animal. reproduce? What type of larva

. do they possess?
* Sea stars are active predators that move about on YP

their tube feet. 7. How do sea cucumbers

. : . superficially differ from other
¢ Brittle stars use their tube feet for feeding and move echinoderms? How are some of

about using two arms at a time. their tube feet specially

modified? What is the extent of

their skeleton? What is the

function of their unique

respiratory tree? How is their

¢ The endoskeletons of sea cucumbers are drastically reproduction different from that
reduced and separated, making them soft-bodied. of other echinoderms?

* The endoskeletons of sea urchins and sand dollars
consist of fused calcareous plates that have been well
preserved in the fossil record.

* Sea daisies are a newly described class of echinoderms
with disc-shaped bodies.

944 Part XII Animal Diversity
