Classes Holothuroidea and
Concentricycloidea: Sea Cucumbers
and Sea Daisies

Sea Cucumbers

Sea cucumbers (class Holothuroidea) are shaped somewhat
like their plant namesakes. They differ from the preceding
classes in that they are soft, sluglike organisms, often with
a tough, leathery outside skin (figure 47.14). The class
consists of about 1500 species found worldwide. Except for
a few forms that swim, sea cucumbers lie on their sides at
the bottom of the ocean. Their mouth is located at one
end and is surrounded by eight to 30 modified tube feet
called tentacles; the anus is at the other end. The tentacles
around the mouth may secrete mucus, used to capture the
small planktonic organisms on which the animals feed.
Each tentacle is periodically wiped off within the esopha-
gus and then brought out again, covered with a new supply
of mucus.

Sea cucumbers are soft because their calcareous skele-
tons are reduced to widely separated microscopic plates.
These animals have extensive internal branching systems,
called respiratory trees, which arise from the cloaca, or
anal cavity. Water is pulled into and expelled from the
respiratory tree by contractions of the cloaca; gas ex-
change takes place as this process occurs. The sexes of
most cucumbers are separate, but some of them are
hermaphroditic.

Most kinds of sea cucumbers have tube feet on the body
in addition to tentacles. These additional tube feet, which
might be restricted to five radial grooves or scattered over
the surface of the body, may enable the animals to move
about slowly. On the other hand, sea cucumbers may sim-
ply wriggle along whether or not they have additional tube
feet. Most sea cucumbers are quite sluggish, but some, es-
pecially among the deep-sea forms, swim actively. Sea cu-
cumbers, when irritated, sometimes eject a portion of their
intestines by a strong muscular contraction that may send
the intestinal fragments through the anus or even rupture
the body wall.

Sea Daisies

The most recently described class of echinoderms (1986),
sea daisies are strange little disc-shaped animals, less than 1
cm in diameter, discovered in waters over 1000 m deep off
New Zealand (figure 47.15). Only two species are known so
far. They have five-part radial symmetry, but no arms.
Their tube feet are located around the periphery of the
disc, rather than along radial lines, as in other echinoderms.
One species has a shallow, saclike stomach but no intestine
or anus; the other species has no digestive tract at all—the
surface of its mouth is covered by a membrane through
which it apparently absorbs nutrients.

FIGURE 47.14

Class Holothuroidea. Sea cucumber.

FIGURE 47.15
Class Concentricycloidea. Sea daisy.

 

 

 

Sea cucumbers are soft-bodied, sluglike animals
without arms. The newly discovered sea daisies are the

most mysterious echinoderms. Tiny and simple in form,
they live at great depths, absorbing food from their

surroundings.

 

Chapter 47

Echinoderms

943
