Class Ophiuroidea:
The Brittle Stars

Brittle stars (class Ophiuroidea; figure
47.12) are the largest class of echino-
derms in numbers of species (about
2000) and they are probably the most
abundant also. Secretive, they avoid
light and are more active at night.

Brittle stars have slender, branched
arms. The most mobile of echino-
derms, brittle stars move by pulling
themselves along, “rowing” over the
substrate by moving their arms, often
in pairs or groups, from side to side.
Some brittle stars use their arms to
swim, a very unusual habit among
echinoderms.

Brittle stars feed by capturing sus-
pended microplankton and organic de-
tritus with their tube feet, climbing
over objects on the ocean floor. In ad-
dition, the tube feet are important sen-
sory organs and assist in directing food
into the mouth once the animal has
captured it. As implied by their com-
mon name, the arms of brittle stars de-
tach easily, a characteristic that helps to
protect the brittle stars from their
predators.

Like sea stars, brittle stars have five
arms. More closely related to the sea
stars than to the other classes of the
phylum, on closer inspection they are
surprisingly different. They have no
pedicellariae, as sea stars have, and the
groove running down the length of
each arm is closed over and covered
with ossicles. Their tube feet lack am-
pullae, have no suckers, and are used
for feeding, not locomotion.

Brittle stars usually have separate
sexes, with the male and female ga-
metes in most species being released
into the water and fusing there. De-
velopment takes place in the plankton
and the larvae swim and feed using
elaborate bands of cilia. Some species
brood their young in special cavities
and fully developed juvenile brittle
stars emerge at the end of
development.

Brittle stars, very secretive, pull
themselves along with their arms.

942 = Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 47.12
Class Ophiuroidea. Brittle stars crawl
actively across their marine substrates.

 

FIGURE 47.13

Class Echinoidea. (a) Sand dollar,
Echinarachnius parma. (b) Giant red sea
urchin, Strongylocentrotus franciscanus.

Class Echinoidea:
The Sea Urchins
and Sand Dollars

The members of the class Echinoidea,
sand dollars and sea urchins, lack dis-
tinct arms but have the same five-part
body plan as all other echinoderms
(figure 47.13). Five rows of tube feet
protrude through the plates of the
calcareous skeleton, and there are also
openings for the mouth and anus.
These different openings can be seen
in the globular skeletons of sea
urchins and in the flat skeletons of
sand dollars. Both types of endoskele-
ton, often common along the
seashore, consist of fused calcareous
plates. About 950 living species con-
stitute the class Echinoidea.

Echinoids walk by means of their
tube feet or their movable spines,
which are hinged to the skeleton by a
joint that makes free rotation possible.
Sea urchins and sand dollars move
along the sea bottom, feeding on algae
and small fragments of organic mater-
ial. They scrape these off the substrate
with the large, triangular teeth that
ring their mouths. The gonads of sea
urchins are considered a great delicacy
by people in different parts of the
world. Because of their calcareous
plates, sea urchins and sand dollars are
well preserved in the fossil record,
with more than 5000 additional species
described.

As with most other echinoderms,
the sexes of sea urchins and sand dol-
lars are separate. The eggs and sperm
are shed separately into the water,
where they fuse. Some brood their
young, and others have free-
swimming larvae, with bands of cilia
extending onto their long, graceful
arms.

Sand dollars and sea urchins lack
arms but have a five-part symmetry.
