 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   

Cell membrane

Rough endoplasmic
reticulum

Ribosome

(0) Intermediate filament
Intermediate filament

Mitochondrion’ Microtubule

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Actin filament
(a) Actin filament (b) Microtubule
FIGURE 5.25

Molecules that make up the cytoskeleton. (a) Actin filaments. Actin filaments are made of two strands of the fibrous protein actin
twisted together and usually occur in bundles. Actin filaments are ubiquitous, although they are concentrated below the plasma membrane
in bundles known as stress fibers, which may have a contractile function. (}) Microtubules. Microtubules are composed of 13 stacks of
tubulin protein subunits arranged side by side to form a tube. Microtubules are comparatively stiff cytoskeletal elements that serve to
organize metabolism and intracellular transport in the nondividing cell. (c) Intermediate filaments. Intermediate filaments are composed of

overlapping staggered tetramers of protein. This molecular arrangement allows for a ropelike structure that imparts tremendous
mechanical strength to the cell.

3. Intermediate filaments. The most durable ele- and fingernails. The intermediate filaments of nerve
ment of the cytoskeleton in animal cells is a system cells are called neurofilaments.
of tough, fibrous protein molecules twined together
in an overlapping arrangement (figure 5.252). These
fibers are characteristically 8 to 10 nanometers in di-
ameter, intermediate in size between actin filaments
and microtubules (which is why they are called in-
termediate filaments). Once formed, intermediate
filaments are stable and usually do not break down.
Intermediate filaments constitute a heterogencous
group of cytoskeletal fibers. The most common
type, composed of protein subunits called vimentin,

As we will discuss in the next section, the cytoskeleton
provides an interior framework that supports the shape of
the cell, stretching the plasma membrane much as the poles
of a circus tent. Changing the relative length of cytoskeleton
filaments allows cells to rapidly alter their shape, extending
projections out or folding inward. Within the cell, the
framework of filaments provides a molecular highway along
which molecules can be transported.

 

provides structural stability for many kinds of cells. Elements of the cytoskeleton crisscross the cytoplasm,
Keratin, another class of intermediate filament, is supporting the cell shape and anchoring organelles in
found in epithelial cells (cells that line organs and place. There are three principal types of fibers: actin

a : . filaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments.
body cavities) and associated structures such as hair

 

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 97
