Class Asteroidea: The Sea Stars

Sea stars, or starfish (class Asteroidea; figure 47.10), are
perhaps the most familiar echinoderms. Among the most
important predators in many marine ecosystems, they
range in size from a centimeter to a meter across. They are
abundant in the intertidal zone, but they also occur at
depths as great as 10,000 meters. Around 1500 species of
sea stars occur throughout the world.

The body of a sea star is composed of a central disc that
merges gradually with the arms. Although most sea stars
have five arms, the basic symmetry of the phylum, mem-
bers of some families have many more, typically in multi-
ples of five. The body is somewhat flattened, flexible, and
covered with a pigmented epidermis.

Endoskeleton

Beneath the epidermis is an endoskeleton of small caleium-
rich plates called ossicles, bound together with connective
tissue. From these ossicles project spines that make up the
spiny upper surface. Around the base of the spines are
minute, pincerlike pedicellariae, bearing tiny jaws manipu-
lated by muscles. These keep the body surface free of de-
bris and may aid in food capture.

The Water-Vascular System

A deep groove runs along the oral (bottom) surface of each
arm from the central mouth out to the tip of the arm. This
groove is bordered by rows of tube feet, which the animal
uses to move about. Within each arm, there is a radial canal
that connects the tube feet to a ring canal in the central
body. This system of piping is used by sea stars to power a
unique hydraulic system. Contraction of small chambers
called ampullae attached to the tube feet forces water into
the podium of the feet, extending them. Conversely, con-
traction of muscles in the tube foot retracts the podium,
forcing fluid back into the ampulla. Small muscles at the
end of each tube foot can raise the center of the disclike
end, creating suction when the foot is pressed against a
substrate. Hundreds of tube feet, moving in unison, pull
the arm along the surface.

Feeding

The mouth of a sea star is located in the center of its oral
surface. Some sea stars have an extraordinary way of feed-
ing on bivalve mollusks. They can open a small gape be-
tween the shells of bivalves by exerting a muscular pull on
the shells (figure 47.11). Eventually, muscular fatigue in the
bivalve results in a very narrow gape, sufficient enough for
the sea star to insert its stomach out through its mouth into
the bivalve. Within the mollusk, the sea star secretes its di-
gestive enzymes and digests the soft tissues of its prey, re-
tracting its stomach when the process is complete.

 

FIGURE 47.10
Class Asteroidea. This class includes the familiar starfish, or sea
stars.

 

FIGURE 47.11

A sea star attacking a clam. The tube feet, each of which ends in
a suction cup, are located along grooves on the underside of the
arms.

Reproduction

Most sea stars have separate sexes, with a pair of gonads
lying in the ventral region inside each arm. Eggs and sperm
are shed into the water so that fertilization is external. In
some species, fertilized eggs are brooded in special cavities
or simply under the animal. They mature into larvae that
swim by means of conspicuous bands of cilia.

 

Sea stars, also called starfish, are five-armed, mobile
predators.

 

Chapter 47. Echinoderms 941
