History of the Fishes x
The First Fishes

 

 

The first fishes were members of
the five Ostracoderm orders (the
word means “shell-skinned”). Only
their head-shields were made of

Bony fishes

Jawless fishes| \

Cartilaginous fishes

 

 

 

bone; their elaborate internal skele-
tons were constructed of cartilage.
Many ostracoderms were bottom
dwellers, with a jawless mouth un-
derneath a flat head, and eyes on
the upper surface. Ostracoderms
thrived in the Ordovician Period
and in the period which followed,
the Silurian Period (438 to 408
million years ago), only to become
almost completely extinct at the
close of the following Devonian
Period (408 to 360 million years
ago). One group, the jawless Ag-
natha, survive today as hagfish and
parasitic lampreys (figure 48.12).

A fundamentally important evolutionary advance oc-
curred in the late Silurian Period, 410 million years ago—
the development of jaws. Jaws evolved from the most ante-
rior of a series of arch-supports made of cartilage that were
used to reinforce the tissue between gill slits, holding the
slits open (figure 48.13). This transformation was not as
radical as it might at first appear. Each gill arch was formed
by a series of several cartilages (later to become bones)
arranged somewhat in the shape of a V turned on its side,
with the point directed outward. Imagine the fusion of the
front pair of arches at top and bottom, with hinges at the
points, and you have the primitive vertebrate jaw. The top
half of the jaw is not attached to the skull directly except at
the rear. Teeth developed on the jaws from modified scales
on the skin that lined the mouth.

Armored fishes called placoderms and spiny fishes called
acanthodians both had jaws. Spiny fishes were very com-
mon during the early Devonian,
largely replacing ostracoderms, but
became extinct themselves at the close
of the Permian. Like ostracoderms,
they had internal skeletons made of
cartilage, but their scales contained
small plates of bone, foreshadowing
the much larger role bone would play
in the future of vertebrates. Spiny
fishes were predators and far better
swimmers than ostracoderms, with as
many as seven fins to aid them swim-
ming. All of these fins were reinforced
with strong spines, giving these fishes
their name. No spiny fishes survive
today.

FIGURE 48.13

954 Part XII Animal Diversity

‘Amphibians

   

Birds

Reptiles
Mammals

 

FIGURE 48.12

Specialized mouth of a lamprey.
Lampreys use their suckerlike mouths to
attach themselves to the fishes on which
they prey. When they have done so, they
bore a hole in the fish with their teeth and
feed on its blood.

By the mid-Devonian, the heavily armored placoderms
became common. A very diverse and successful group,
seven orders of placoderms dominated the seas of the late
Devonian, only to become extinct at the end of that period.
The front of the placoderm body was more heavily ar-
mored than the rear. The placoderm jaw was much im-
proved from the primitive jaw of spiny fishes, with the
upper jaw fused to the skull and the skull hinged on the
shoulder. Many of the placoderms grew to enormous sizes,
some over 30 feet long, with two-foot skulls that had an
enormous bite.

Anterior gill arches
Gill slits

Evolution of the jaw. Jaws evolved from the anterior gill arches of ancient, jawless fishes.
