mals. In colonial tunicates, there may
be a common sac and a common
opening to the outside. There is a
group of Urochordates, the Larvacea,
which retains the tail and notochord
into adulthood. One theory of verte-
brate origins involves a larval form,
perhaps that of a tunicate, which ac-
quires the ability to reproduce.

Lancelets

Lancelets are scaleless, fishlike marine
chordates a few centimeters long that
occur widely in shallow water
throughout the oceans of the world.
Lancelets (subphylum Cephalochor-
data) were given their English name
because they resemble a lancet—a
small, two-edged surgical knife. There
are about 23 species of this subphy-
lum. Most of them belong to the
genus Branchiostoma, formerly called
Ampbioxus, a name still used widely. In
lancelets, the notochord runs the en-
tire length of the dorsal nerve cord
and persists throughout the animal’s
life.

Lancelets spend most of their time
partly buried in sandy or muddy substrates, with
only their anterior ends protruding (figure 48.6).
They can swim, although they rarely do so. Their
muscles can easily be seen as a series of discrete
blocks. Lancelets have many more pharyngeal gill
slits than fishes, which they resemble in overall
shape. They lack pigment in their skin, which has
only a single layer of cells, unlike the multilayered
skin of vertebrates. The lancelet body is pointed at
both ends. There is no distinguishable head or
sensory structures other than pigmented light re-
ceptors.

Lancelets feed on microscopic plankton, using a
current created by beating cilia that lines the oral
hood, pharynx, and gill slits (figure 48.7). The gill
slits provide an exit for the water and are an adaptation for
filter feeding. The oral hood projects beyond the mouth
and bears sensory tentacles, which also ring the mouth.
Males and females are separate, but no obvious external dif-
ferences exist between them.

Biologists are not sure whether lancelets are primitive or
are actually degenerate fishes whose structural features
have been reduced and simplified during the course of evo-
lution. The fact that lancelets feed by means of cilia and
have a single-layered skin, coupled with distinctive features
of their excretory systems, suggest that this is an ancient

FIGURE 48.6

Oral hood

      

with tentacles

Gill slits“ Gonad Atrium
in pharynx

 

Lancelets. Two lancelets, Branchiostoma lanceolatum (phylum Chordata, subphylum
Cephalochordata), partly buried in shell gravel, with their anterior ends protruding. The
muscle segments are clearly visible; the square objects along the side of the body are
gonads, indicating that these are male lancelets.

Notochord Dorsal

nerve cord Intestine

 

Atriopore

FIGURE 48.7
‘The structure of a lancelet. This diagram shows the path through which
the lancelet’s cilia pull water.

group of chordates. The recent discovery of fossil forms
similar to living lancelets in rocks 550 million years old—
well before the appearance of any fishes—also argues for
the antiquity of this group. Recent studies by molecular
systematists further support the hypothesis that lancelets
are vertebrates’ closest ancestors.

 

Nonvertebrate chordates, including tunicates and
lancelets, have notochords but not vertebrae. They are
the closest relatives of vertebrates.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 949
