 

PHYLUM CHORDATA: Notochord

 

Ina lancelet, the simplest chordate, the
flexible notochord persists throughout

life and aids swimming by giving muscles
something to pull against. In the lancelet

these muscles form a series of discrete

blocks that can easily be seen. More
advanced chordates have jointed appendages.

 

 

 

 

   
 
  
 
  

Lancelets lack pigment in their
Dorsal nerve | skins, and so are transparent.

 

 

 

Oral hood
with tentacles

 

Lancelets are filter-feeders
with highly reduced
sensory systems. The
animal has no head, eyes,
ears, or nose. Instead,
sensory cells that detect
chemicals line the oral

Atriopore

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

tentacles. Diese

Lancelets feed on microscopic
protists caught by filtering them
through cilia and gills on the
pharyngeal slits. As the cilia that Unlike that of vertebrates, the
line the front end of the skin of a lancelet has only a
gut passage beat, they draw water single layer of cells.
through the mouth, through the
pharynx, and out the slits.

FIGURE 48.4

Evolution of a notochord. Vertebrates, tunicates, and lancelets are chordates (phylum Chordata), coelomate animals with a flexible rod,
the notochord, that provides resistance to muscle contraction and permits rapid lateral body movements. Chordates also possess
pharyngeal slits (reflecting their aquatic ancestry and present habitat in some) and a hollow dorsal nerve cord. In vertebrates, the
notochord is replaced during embryonic development by the vertebral column.

 

A number of other characteristics also distinguish the powers of locomotion that characterize the members of
chordates fundamentally from other animals. Chordates’ this group.
muscles are arranged in segmented blocks that affect the
basic organization of the chordate body and can often be Chordates are characterized by a hollow dorsal nerve
clearly seen in embryos of this phylum (figure 48.3). cord, a notochord, pharyngeal gill slits, and a postanal

tail at some point in their development. The flexible
notochord anchors internal muscles and allows rapid,
versatile movement.

Most chordates have an internal skeleton against which
the muscles work. Either this internal skeleton or the no-
tochord (figure 48.4) makes possible the extraordinary

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 947
