48.3

Characteristics of Vertebrates

Vertebrates (subphylum Vertebrata) are chordates with a
spinal column. The name vertebrate comes from the indi-
vidual bony segments called vertebrae that make up the
spine. Vertebrates differ from the tunicates and lancelets in
two important respects:

1. Vertebral column. In vertebrates, the notochord is
replaced during the course of embryonic develop-
ment by a bony vertebral column. The column is a
series of bones that encloses and protects the dorsal
nerve cord like a sleeve (figure 48.8).

2. Head. In all vertebrates but the earliest fishes, there
is a distinct and well-differentiated head, with a skull
and brain. For this reason, the vertebrates are some-
times called the craniate chordates (Greek kranion,
“skull”).

In addition to these two key characteristics, vertebrates
differ from other chordates in other important respects:

1. Neural crest. A unique group of embryonic cells
called the neural crest contributes to the development
of many vertebrate structures. These cells develop on
the crest of the neural tube as it forms by an invagina-
tion and pinching together of the neural plate (see
chapter 60 for a detailed account). Neural crest cells
then migrate to various locations in the developing
embryo, where they participate in the development of
a variety of structures.

2. Internal organs. Among the internal organs of ver-
tebrates, livers, kidneys, and endocrine glands are
characteristic of the group. The ductless endocrine
glands secrete hormones that help regulate many of
the body’s functions. All vertebrates have a heart and
a closed circulatory system. In both their circulatory
and their excretory functions, vertebrates differ
markedly from other animals.

3. Endoskeleton.
brates is made of cartilage or bone. Cartilage and

The endoskeleton of most verte-

bone are specialized tissue containing fibers of the
protein collagen compacted together. Bone also
contains crystals of a calcium phosphate salt. Bone
forms in two stages. First, collagen is laid down in a
matrix of fibers along stress lines to provide flexibil-
ity, and then calcium minerals infiltrate the fibers,
providing rigidity. The great advantage of bone
over chitin as a structural material is that bone is
strong without being brittle. The vertebrate en-
doskeleton makes possible the great size and extra-
ordinary powers of movement that characterize this

group.

950 Part XII Animal Diversity

The vertebrates have an interior framework of bone.

Eetoderm
oo jo Neural tube
(3 Natochora
er i a tay
Vertebral - {) &
body developing os i
around notochord ———__— 4s all an

—— Blood vessels

Rb = Neural arch
—y Ye

ae

FIGURE 48.8

Embryonic development of a vertebra. During the course of
evolution of animal development, the flexible notochord is
surrounded and eventually replaced by a cartilaginous or bony
covering, the centrum. The neural tube is protected by an arch
above the centrum, and the vertebra may also have a hemal arch,
which protects major blood vessels below the centrum. The
vertebral column functions as a strong, flexible rod that the
muscles pull against when the animal swims or moves.

Overview of the Evolution of Vertebrates

The first vertebrates evolved in the oceans about 470 mil-
lion years ago. They were jawless fishes with a single caudal
fin. Many of them looked like a flat hot dog, with a hole at
one end and a fin at the other. The appearance of a hinged
jaw was a major advancement, opening up new food op-
tions, and jawed fishes became the dominant creatures in
the sea. Their descendants, the amphibians, invaded the
land. Salamander-like amphibians and other, much larger
now-extinct amphibians were the first vertebrates to live
successfully on land. Amphibians, in turn, gave rise to the
first reptiles about 300 million years ago. Within 50 million
years, reptiles, better suited than amphibians to living out
of water, replaced them as the dominant land vertebrates.
With the success of reptiles, vertebrates truly came to
dominate the surface of the earth. Many kinds of reptiles
evolved, ranging in size from smaller than a chicken to big-
