The Rise of Active Swimmers

 

At the end of the Devonian, essen-
tially all of these pioneer vertebrates
disappeared, replaced by sharks and
bony fishes. Sharks and bony fishes
first evolved in the early Devonian,
400 million years ago. In these
fishes, the jaw was improved even
further, with the first gill arch be-
hind the jaws being transformed
into a supporting strut or prop, join-
ing the rear of the lower jaw to the
rear of the skull. This allowed the
mouth to open very wide, into al-
most a full circle. In a great white
shark, this wide-open mouth can be
a very efficient weapon.

The major factor responsible for
the replacement of primitive fishes
by sharks and bony fishes was that
they had a superior design for swimming. The typical shark
and bony fish is streamlined. The head of the fish acts as a
wedge to cleave through the water, and the body tapers
back to the tail, allowing the fish to slip through the water
with a minimum amount of turbulence.

In addition, sharks and bony fishes have an array of mo-
bile fins that greatly aid swimming. First, there is a propul-
sion fin: a large and efficient tail (caudal) fin that helps
drive the fish through the water when it is swept side-to-
side, pushing against the water and thrusting the fish for-
ward. Second, there are stabilizing fins: one (or sometimes
two) dorsal fins on the back that act as a stabilizer to pre-
vent rolling as the fish swims through the water, while an-
other ventral fin acts as a keel to prevent side-slip. Third,
there are the paired fins at shoulder and hip (“A fin at each
corner”), consisting of a front (pectoral) pair and a rear
(pelvic) pair. These fins act like the elevator flaps of an air-
plane to assist the fish in going up or down through the
water, as rudders to help it turn sharply left or right, and as
brakes to help it stop quickly.

 

ginous fishes

2
2
3
g
z

 

 

 

 

 

Sharks Become Top Predators

In the period following the Devonian, the Carboniferous
Period (360 to 280 million years ago), sharks became the
dominant predator in the sea. Sharks (class Chon-
drichythes) have a skeleton made of cartilage, like primitive
fishes, but it is “calcified,” strengthened by granules of cal-
cium carbonate deposited in the outer layers of cartilage.
The result is a very light and strong skeleton. Streamlined,
with paired fins and a light, flexible skeleton, sharks are su-
perior swimmers (figure 48.14). Their pectoral fins are par-
ticularly large, jutting out stiffly like airplane wings—and
that is how they function, adding lift to compensate for the
downward thrust of the tail fin. Very aggressive predators,
some sharks reached enormous size.

‘Amphibians

Birds

Reptiles
Mammals

 

FIGURE 48.14

Chondrichthyes. Members of the class
Chondrichthyes, such as this bull shark, are
mainly predators or scavengers and spend
most of their time in graceful motion. As
they move, they create a flow of water past
their gills, extracting oxygen from the
water.

Sharks were among the first vertebrates to develop
teeth. These teeth evolved from rough scales on the skin
and are not set into the jaw, as yours are, but rather sit
atop it. The teeth are not firmly anchored and are easily
lost. In a shark’s mouth, the teeth are arrayed in up to 20
rows, the teeth in front doing the biting and cutting,
while behind them other teeth grow and await their turn.
When a tooth breaks or is worn down, a replacement
from the next row moves forward. One shark may even-
tually use more than 20,000 teeth. This programmed loss
of teeth offers a great advantage: the teeth in use are al-
ways new and sharp. The skin is covered with tiny teeth-
like scales, giving it a rough “sandpaper” texture. Like
the teeth, these scales are constantly replaced throughout
the shark’s life.

Reproduction among the Chondrichythes is the most
advanced of any fishes. Shark eggs are fertilized internally.
During mating, the male grasps the female with modified
fins called claspers. Sperm run from the male into the fe-
male through grooves in the claspers. Although a few
species lay fertilized eggs, the eggs of most species develop
within the female’s body, and the pups are born alive.

Many of the early evolutionary lines of sharks died out
during the great extinction at the end of the Permian Pe-
riod (280 to 248 million years ago). The survivors thrived
and underwent a burst of diversification during the Meso-
zoic era, when most of the modern groups of sharks ap-
peared. Skates and rays (flattened sharks that are bottom-
dwellers) evolved at this time, some 200 million years
after the sharks first appeared. Sharks competed success-
fully with the marine reptiles of that time and are still the
dominant predators of the sea. Today there are 275
species of sharks, more kinds than existed in the
Carboniferous.

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 955
