 

Jawless
fishes S

eS
(two classes) y

Quaternary
(2-Present) 0 4

Tertiary
(65-2)

)
|

(144-65) 100

Jurassic
(213-144)
_ 200 4
Triassic
(248-213)

 

 

Permian
(280-248)

300 4
Carboniferous
(360-280)

Time (millions of years ago)

Devonian

Silurian
(438-408)

Ordovician

(605-438) 500 4

 

Chordate ancestor

FIGURE 48.9

oT, (extinct)
S Placoderms

Birds

 

*

: Modern bony
Mate shes

Reptiles Mammals

Primitive reptiles 4
(extinct)

 

Primitive amphibians

Acanthodians (extinct)

(extinct)

Ostracoderms
(extinct)

 

Vertebrate family tree. Two classes of vertebrates comprise the Agnatha, or jawless fishes. Primitive amphibians arose from fish.
Primitive reptiles arose from amphibians and gave rise to mammals and to dinosaurs, which survive today as birds.

ger than a truck. Some flew, and others swam. Among
them evolved reptiles that gave rise to the two remaining
great lines of terrestrial vertebrates, birds (descendants of
the dinosaurs) and mammals. Dinosaurs and mammals ap-
pear at about the same time in the fossil record, 220 million
years ago. For over 150 million years, dinosaurs dominated
the face of the earth. Over all these centuries (think of it—
over a million centuries!) the largest mammal was no bigger
than a cat. Then, about 65 million years ago, the dinosaurs
abruptly disappeared, for reasons that are still hotly de-
bated. In their absence, mammals and birds quickly took
their place, becoming in turn abundant and diverse.

The history of vertebrates has been a series of evolution-
ary advances that have allowed vertebrates to first invade
the sea and then the land. In this chapter, we will examine
the key evolutionary advances that permitted vertebrates to
invade the land successfully. As you will see, this invasion
was a staggering evolutionary achievement, involving fun-
damental changes in many body systems.

Vertebrates are a diverse group, containing members
adapted to life in aquatic habitats, on land, and in the air.
There are eight principal classes of living vertebrates
(figure 48.9). Four of the classes are fishes that live in the
water, and four are land-dwelling tetrapods, animals
with four limbs. (The name tetrapod comes from two
Greek words meaning “four-footed.”) The extant classes
of fishes are the superclass Agnatha (the jawless fishes),
which includes the class Myxini, the hagfish, and the class
Cephalaspidomorphi, the lampreys; Chondrichthyes, the
cartilaginous fishes, sharks, skates, and rays; and Oste-
ichthyes, the bony fishes that are dominant today. The
four classes of tetrapods are Amphibia, the amphibians;
Reptilia, the reptiles; Aves, the birds; and Mammalia, the
mammals.

 

Vertebrates, the principal chordate group, are
characterized by a vertebral column and a distinct head.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 951
