Cell Movement

Essentially all cell motion is tied to the movement of actin
filaments, microtubules, or both. Intermediate filaments act
as intracellular tendons, preventing excessive stretching of
cells, and actin filaments play a major role in determining
the shape of cells. Because actin filaments can form and dis-
solve so readily, they enable some cells to change shape
quickly. If you look at the surfaces of such cells under a mi-
croscope, you will find them alive with motion, as projec-
tions, called microvilli in animal cells, shoot outward from
the surface and then retract, only to shoot out elsewhere
moments later (figure 5.26).

Some Cells Crawl

It is the arrangement of actin filaments within the cell cy-
toplasm that allows cells to “crawl,” /iterally! Crawling is a
significant cellular phenomenon, essential to inflamma-
tion, clotting, wound healing, and the spread of cancer.
White blood cells in particular exhibit this ability. Pro-
duced in the bone marrow, these cells are released into
the circulatory system and then eventually crawl out of
capillaries and into the tissues to destroy potential
pathogens.

Cells exist in a ge/-sol state; that is, at any given time,
some regions of the cell are rigid (ge/) and some are more
fluid (s0/). The cell is typically more sol-like in its interior,
and more gel-like at its perimeter. To crawl, the cell cre-
ates a weak area in the gel perimeter, and then forces the
fluid (sol) interior through the weak area, forming a
pseudopod (“false foot”). As a result a large section of
toplasm oozes off in a different direction, but still remains
within the plasma membrane. Once extended, the pseudo-
pod stabilizes into a gel state, assembling actin filaments.
Specific membrane proteins in the pseudopod stick to the
surface the cell is crawling on, and the rest of the cell is
dragged in that direction. The pressure required to force
out a developing pseudopod is created when actin filaments
in the trailing end of the cell contract, just as squeezing a
water balloon at one end forces the balloon to bulge out at

 

the other end.

Moving Material within the Cell

Actin filaments and microtubules often orchestrate their ac-
tivities to affect cellular processes. For example, during cell
reproduction (see chapter 11), newly replicated chromo-
somes move to opposite sides of a dividing cell because they
are attached to shortening microtubules. Then, in animal
cells, a belt of actin pinches the cell in two by contracting
like a purse string. Muscle cells also use actin filaments to
contract their cytoskeletons. The fluttering of an eyelash, the
flight of an eagle, and the awkward crawling of a baby all de-
pend on these cytoskeletal movements within muscle cells.

98 Part II Biology of the Cell

 

FIGURE 5.26

The surfaces of some cells are in constant motion. This
amoeba, a single-celled protist, is advancing toward you, its

advancing edges extending projections outward. The moving
edges have been said to resemble the ruffled edges of a skirt.

Not only is the cytoskeleton responsible for the cell’s
shape and movement, but it also provides a scaffold that
holds certain enzymes and other macromolecules in defined
areas of the cytoplasm. Many of the enzymes involved in
cell metabolism, for example, bind to actin filaments; so do
ribosomes. By moving and anchoring particular enzymes
near one another, the cytoskeleton, like the endoplasmic
reticulum, organizes the cell’s activities.

 

Intracellular Molecular Motors

Certain eukaryotic cells must move materials from one place
to another in the cytoplasm. Most cells use the endomem-
brane system as an intracellular highway; the Golgi appara-
tus packages materials into vesicles that move through the
channels of the endoplasmic reticulum to the far reaches of
the cell. However, this highway is only effective over short
distances. When a cell has to transport materials through
long extensions like the axon of a nerve cell, the ER high-
ways are too slow. For these situations, eukaryotic cells have
developed high-speed locomotives that run along micro-
tubular tracks.

Four components are required: (1) a vesicle or or-
ganelle that is to be transported, (2) a motor molecule
that provides the energy-driven motion, (3) a connector
molecule that connects the vesicle to the motor mole-
cule, and (4) microtubules on which the vesicle will ride
like a train on a rail. For example, embedded within the
membranes of endoplasmic reticulum is a protein called
kinectin that bind the ER vesicles to the motor protein ki-
nesin. As nature’s tiniest motors, these motor proteins lit-
erally pull the transport vesicles along the microtubular
tracks. Kinesin uses ATP to power its movement toward
