48.2 Nonvertebrate chordates have a notochord but no backbone.

The Nonvertebrate Chordates

Tunicates

The tunicates (subphylum Urochordata) are a group of
about 1250 species of marine animals. Most of them are
sessile as adults (figure 48.52,b), with only the larvae hav-
ing a notochord and nerve cord. As adults, they exhibit
neither a major body cavity nor visible signs of segmenta-
tion. Most species occur in shallow waters, but some are
found at great depths. In some tunicates, adults are colo-
nial, living in masses on the ocean floor. The pharynx is
lined with numerous cilia, and the animals obtain their
food by ciliary action. The cilia beat, drawing a stream of
water into the pharynx, where microscopic food particles
are trapped in a mucous sheet secreted from a structure

called an endostyle.

948 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

The tadpolelike larvae of tunicates plainly exhibit all of
the basic characteristics of chordates and mark the tuni-
cates as having the most primitive combination of features
found in any chordate (figure 48.5¢). The larvae do not
feed and have a poorly developed gut. They remain free-
swimming for only a few days before settling to the bot-
tom and attaching themselves to a suitable substrate by
means of a sucker.

Tunicates change so much as they mature and adjust
developmentally to a sessile, filter-feeding existence that
it would be difficult to discern their evolutionary rela-
tionships by examining an adult. Many adult tunicates se-
crete a tunic, a tough sac composed mainly of cellulose.
The tunic surrounds the animal and gives the subphylum
its name. Cellulose is a substance frequently found in the
cell walls of plants and algae but is rarely found in ani-

Hypophyseal duct

   
  

as Incurrent siphon

Nerve ganglion Pharyne

   
    

Exourrent
siphon
Endostyle
alll Il Gill sit
Intestine “AU AHI

Tunic

Genital duct
Stomach Gonad
Heart
(b)
Mouth Atriopore

(incurrent siphon) Va (excurrent siphon)

\ voles

Dorsal nerve cord

- Oe
2S Se
Pharynx yan \
with gill slits Stomach Notochord
) Heart
FIGURE 48.5

Tunicates (phylum Chordata, subphylum Urochordata).

(a) The sea peach, Halocynthia auranthium. (b) Diagram of the
structure of an adult tunicate. (c) Diagram of the structure of a
larval tunicate, showing the characteristic tadpolelike form. Larval
tunicates resemble the postulated common ancestor of the
chordates.
