Bony Fishes Dominate the
Water ee —e

Bony fishes (members of the class Os-
teichthyes, figure 48.15) evolved at the
same time as sharks, some 400 million
years ago, but took quite a different
evolutionary road. Instead of gaining
speed through lightness, as sharks did,
bony fishes adopted a heavy internal
skeleton made completely of bone.
Such an internal skeleton is very
strong, providing a base against which

 

Bony fishes
‘Amphibians

 

 

Jawless fishes

 

Cartilaginous fishes

very strong muscles could pull. The

process of ossification (the evolutionary

replacement of cartilage by bone) hap-

pened suddenly in evolutionary terms,

completing a process started by sharks,

who lay down a thin film of bone over

their cartilage. Not only is the internal

skeleton ossified, but also the external

skeleton, the outer covering of plates and scales. Many scien-
tists believe bony fishes evolved from spiny sharks, which
also had bony plates set in their skin. Bony fishes are the
most successful of all fishes, indeed of all vertebrates. There
are several dozen orders containing more than 20,000 living
species.

Unlike sharks, bony fishes evolved in fresh water. The
most ancient fossils of bony fishes are found in freshwater
lake beds from the middle Devonian. These first bony
fishes were small and possessed paired air sacs connected to
the back of the throat. These sacs could be inflated with air
to buoy the fish up or deflated to sink it down in the water.

Most bony fishes have highly mobile fins, very thin
scales, and completely symmetrical tails (which keep the
fish on a straight course as it swims through the water).
This is a very successful design for a fish. Two great groups
arose from these pioneers: the lobe-finned fishes, ancestors
of the first tetrapods, and the ray-finned fishes, which in-
clude the vast majority of today’s fishes.

The characteristic feature of all ray-finned fishes is an in-
ternal skeleton of parallel bony rays that support and stiffen
each fin. There are no muscles within the fins; they are
moved by muscles within the body. In ray-finned fishes, the
primitive air sacs are transformed into an air pouch, which
provides a remarkable degree of control over buoyancy.

Important Adaptations of Bony Fishes

The remarkable success of the bony fishes has resulted
from a series of significant adaptations that have enabled
them to dominate life in the water. These include the swim
bladder, lateral line system, and gill cover.

Swim Bladder. Although bones are heavier than carti-
laginous skeletons, bony fishes are still buoyant because

956 Part XII Animal Diversity

they possess a swim bladder, a gas-filled
sac that allows them to regulate their
buoyant density and so remain sus-
pended at any depth in the water effort-
lessly (figure 48.16). Sharks, by contrast,
must move through the water or sink, as
their bodies are denser than water. In
primitive bony fishes, the swim bladder
is a ventral outpocketing of the pharynx
behind the throat, and these species fill
the swim bladder by simply gulping air
at the surface of the water. In most of
today’s bony fishes, the swim bladder is
an independent organ that is filled and
drained of gases, mostly nitrogen and
oxygen, internally. How do bony fishes
manage this remarkable trick? It turns
out that the gases are released from their
blood. Gas exchange occurs across the
wall of the swim bladder and the blood
vessels located near the swim bladder. A variety of physio-
logical factors controls the exchange of gases between the
blood stream and the swim bladder.

Birds

Reptiles
Mammals

Lateral Line System. Although precursors are found in
sharks, bony fishes possess a fully developed lateral line sys-
tem. The lateral line system consists of a series of sensory
organs that project into a canal beneath the surface of the
skin. The canal runs the length of the fish’s body and is
open to the exterior through a series of sunken pits. Move-

 

FIGURE 48.15
Bony fishes. The bony fishes (class Osteichthyes) are extremely
diverse. This Korean angelfish in Fiji is one of the many striking
fishes that live around coral reefs in tropical seas.
