48.4 The evolution of vertebrates involves invasions of sea, land, and air.

Fishes

Over half of all vertebrates are fishes. The most diverse and
successful vertebrate group (figure 48.10), they provided
the evolutionary base for invasion of land by amphibians.
In many ways, amphibians, the first terrestrial vertebrates,
can be viewed as transitional—fish out of water. In fact,
fishes and amphibians share many similar features, among
the host of obvious differences. First, let us look at the
fishes (table 48.1).

The story of vertebrate evolution started in the ancient
seas of the Cambrian Period (570 to 505 million years ago),
when the first backboned animals appeared (figure 48.11).
Wriggling through the water, jawless and toothless, these
first fishes sucked up small food particles from the ocean
floor like miniature vacuum cleaners. Most were less than a
foot long, respired with gills, and had no paired fins—just a
primitive tail to push them through the water. For 50 mil-
lion years, during the Ordovician Period (505 to 438 mil-
lion years ago), these simple fishes were the only verte-
brates. By the end of this period, fish had developed
primitive fins to help them swim and massive shields of

 

FIGURE 48.10

Fish are diverse and include more species than all other kinds
of vertebrates combined.

bone for protection. Jawed fishes first appeared during the
Silurian Period (438 to 408 million years ago) and along
with them came a new mode of feeding. Later, both the
cartilaginous and bony fishes appeared.

Table 48.1 Major Classes of Fishes

 

Approximate
Typical Number of
Class Examples Key Characteristics Living Species
Placodermi Armored fishes Jawed fishes with heavily armored heads; Extinct
often quite large
Acanthodii Spiny fishes { ss Fishes with jaws; all now extinct; paired Extinct
fins supported by sharp spines
Osteichthyes Ray-finned fishes Most diverse group of vertebrates; swim 20,000
~~ . bladders and bony skeletons; paired fins
= supported by bony rays
Lobe-finned fishes Largely extinct group of bony fishes; 7
ancestral to amphibians; paired lobed fins
Chondrichthyes Sharks, skates, rays Streamlined hunters; cartilaginous 850
skeletons; no swim bladders; internal
fertilization
Myxini Hagfishes —— Jawless fishes with no paired appendages; 43
scavengers; mostly blind, but a well-
developed sense of smell
Cephalaspidomorphi_Lampreys : Largely extinct group of jawless fishes v7
with no paired appendages; parasitic and
— nonparasitic types; all breed in fresh water

952 Part XII Animal Diversity
