Primitive fish

Swim
bladder

 

Pharynx

Modem bony
fish

   

FIGURE 48.16

Diagram of a swim bladder. The bony fishes use this structure,
which evolved as a ventral outpocketing of the pharynx, to control
their buoyancy in water.

ment of water past the fish forces water through the canal.
The sensory organs consist of clusters of cells with hairlike
projections called cilia, embedded in a gelatinous cap. The
hairs are deflected by the slightest movement of water over
them. The pits are oriented so that some are stimulated no
matter what direction the water moves (see chapter 55).
Nerve impulses from these sensory organs permit the fish
to assess its rate of movement through water, sensing the
movement as pressure waves against its lateral line. This is
how a trout orients itself with its head upstream.

The lateral line system also enables a fish to detect mo-
tionless objects at a distance by the movement of water re-
flected off the object. In a very real sense, this is the fish
equivalent of hearing. The basic mechanism of cilia deflec-
tion by pressure waves is very similar to what happens in
human ears (see chapter 55).

Gill Cover. Most bony fishes have a hard plate called the
operculum that covers the gills on each side of the head.
Flexing the operculum permits bony fishes to pump water
over their gills. The gills are suspended in the pharyngeal
slits that form a passageway between the pharynx and the
outside of the fish’s body. When the operculum is closed, it
seals off the exit. When the mouth is open, closing the op-
erculum increases the volume of the mouth cavity, so that
water is drawn into the mouth. When the mouth is closed,
opening the operculum decreases the volume of the mouth

 

FIGURE 48.17

The living coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae. Discovered in the
western Indian Ocean in 1938, this coelacanth represents a group
of fishes that had been thought to be extinct for about 70 million
years. Scientists who studied living individuals in their natural
habitat at depths of 100 to 200 meters observed them drifting in
the current and hunting other fishes at night. Some individuals are
nearly 3 meters long; they have a slender, fat-filled swim bladder.
Latimeria is a strange animal, and its discovery was a complete
surprise.

cavity, forcing water past the gills to the outside. Using this
very efficient bellows, bony fishes can pass water over the
gills while stationary in the water. That is what a goldfish is
doing when it seems to be gulping in a fish tank.

The Path to Land

Lobe-finned fishes (figure 48.17) evolved 390 million years
ago, shortly after the first bony fishes appeared. Only seven
species survive today, a single species of coelacanth and six
species of lungfish. Lobe-finned fishes have paired fins that
consist of a long fleshy muscular lobe (hence their name),
supported by a central core of bones that form fully articu-
lated joints with one another. There are bony rays only at
the tips of each lobed fin. Muscles within each lobe can
move the fin rays independently of one another, a feat no
ray-finned fish could match. Although rare today, lobe-
finned fishes played an important part in the evolutionary
story of vertebrates. Amphibians almost certainly evolved
from the lobe-finned fishes.

 

Fishes are characterized by gills and a simple, single-
loop circulatory system. Cartilaginous fishes, such as
sharks, are fast swimmers, while the very successful
bony fishes have unique characteristics such as swim
bladders and lateral line systems.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 957
