Amphibians Today

All of today’s amphibians descended from the two families
of amphibians that survived the Age of the Dinosaurs. Dur-
ing the Tertiary Period (65 to 2 million years ago), these
moist-skinned amphibians underwent a highly successful
invasion of wet habitats all over the world, and today there
are over 4200 species of amphibians in 37 different families.

Anura. Frogs and toads, amphibians without tails, live in
a variety of environments from deserts and mountains to
ponds and puddles (figure 48.214). Frogs have smooth,
moist skin, a broad body, and long hind legs that make
them excellent jumpers. Most frogs live in or near water,
although some tropical species live in trees. Unlike frogs,
toads have a dry, bumpy skin, short legs, and are well
adapted to dry environments. All adult anurans are carni-
vores, eating a wide variety of invertebrates.

Most frogs and toads return to water to reproduce, lay-
ing their eggs directly in water. Their eggs lack water-tight
external membranes and would dry out quickly out of the
water. Eggs are fertilized externally and hatch into swim-
ming larval forms called tadpoles. Tadpoles live in the
water, where they generally feed on minute algae. After
considerable growth, the body of the tadpole gradually
changes into that of an adult frog. This process of abrupt
change in body form is called metamorphosis.

Urodela (Caudata). Salamanders have elongated bodies,
long tails, and smooth moist skin (figure 48.214). They typ-
ically range in length from a few inches to a foot, although
giant Asiatic salamanders of the genus Andrias are as much
as 1.5 meters long and weigh up to 33 kilograms. Most
salamanders live in moist places, such as under stones or
logs, or among the leaves of tropical plants. Some salaman-
ders live entirely in water.

Salamanders lay their eggs in water or in moist places.
Fertilization is usually external, although a few species
practice a type of internal fertilization in which the female
picks up sperm packets deposited by the male. Unlike anu-
rans, the young that hatch from salamander eggs do not
undergo profound metamorphosis, but are born looking
like small adults and are carnivorous.

Apoda (Gymnophiona). Caccilians, members of the
order Apoda (Gymnophiona), are a highly specialized
group of tropical burrowing amphibians (figure 48.210).
These legless, wormlike creatures average about 30 cen-
timeters long, but can be up to 1.3 meters long. They have
very small eyes and are often blind. They resemble worms
but have jaws with teeth. They eat worms and other soil in-
vertebrates. The caecilian male deposits sperm directly into
the female, and the female usually bears live young. Mud
eels, small amphibians with tiny forelimbs and no hind
limbs that live in the eastern United States, are not apo-
dans, but highly specialized urodelians.

 

(°)

FIGURE 48.21
Class Amphibia. (2) Red-eyed tree frog, Agalychnis callidr-yas
(order Anura). (b) An adult barred tiger salamander, Ambystoma
tigrinum (order Caudata). (c) A XXXXXXX caecilian,
XXNXNXXNXN aa: (order Gymnophiona).

 
 

 

 

Amphibians ventured onto land some 370 million years
ago. They are characterized by moist skin, legs
(secondarily lost in some species), lungs (usually), and a
more complex and divided circulatory system. They are
still tied to water for reproduction.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 961
