Outer microtubule pair

Plasma
membrane

Dynein arm

     

Central
microtubule
pair

Microtubules

@
FIGURE 5.27

 

@)

Flagella and cilia. (a) A eukaryotic flagellum originates directly from a basal body. (4) The flagellum has two microtubules in its core
connected by radial spokes to an outer ring of nine paired microtubules with dynein arms. (c) The basal body consists of nine microtubule
triplets connected by short protein segments. The structure of cilia is similar to that of flagella, but cilia are usually shorter. @) The surface

of this Paramecium is covered with a dense forest of cilia.

the cell periphery, dragging the vesicle with it as it travels
along the microtubule. Another vesicle protein (or per-
haps a slight modification of kinesin—further research is
needed to determine which) binds vesicles to the motor
protein dynein, which directs movement in the opposite
direction, inward toward the cell’s center. (Dynein is also
involved in the movement of eukaryotic flagella, as dis-
cussed below.) The destination of a particular transport
vesicle and its contents is thus determined by the nature
of the linking protein embedded within the vesicle’s
membrane.

Swimming with Flagella and Cilia

Earlier in this chapter, we described the structure of bacterial
flagella. Eukaryotic cells have a completely different kind of
flagellum, consisting of a circle of nine microtubule pairs
surrounding two central microtubules; this arrangement is
referred to as the 9 + 2 structure (figure 5.27). As pairs of
microtubules move past one another using arms composed
of the motor protein dynein, the eukaryotic flagellum undu-
lates rather than rotates. When examined carefully, each
flagellum proves to be an outward projection of the cell’s
interior, containing cytoplasm and enclosed by the plasma
membrane. The microtubules of the flagellum are derived

from a basal body, situated just below the point where the
flagellum protrudes from the surface of the cell.

The flagellum’s complex microtubular apparatus evolved
early in the history of eukaryotes. Although the cells of many
multicellular and some unicellular eukaryotes today no longer
possess flagella and are nonmotile, an organization similar to
the 9 +2 arrangement of microtubules can still be found within
them, in structures called cilia (singular, cilinm). Cilia are
short cellular projections that are often organized in rows (see
figure 5.1). They are more numerous than flagella on the cell
surface, but have the same internal structure. In many multi-
cellular organisms, cilia carry out tasks far removed from
their original function of propelling cells through water. In
several kinds of vertebrate tissues, for example, the beating of
rows of cilia moves water over the tissue surface. The sensory
cells of the vertebrate ear also contain cilia; sound waves bend
these cilia, the initial sensory input of hearing. Thus, the 9 +
2 structure of flagella and cilia appears to be a fundamental
component of eukaryotic cells.

 

Some eukaryotic cells use pseudopodia to crawl about
within multicellular organisms, while many protists
swim using flagella and cilia. Materials are transported
within cells by special motor proteins.

 

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 99
