History of the Amphibians

The word amphibia (a Greek word meaning “both lives”)
nicely describes the essential quality of modern day am-
phibians, referring to their ability to live in two worlds: the
aquatic world of their fish ancestors and in the terrestrial
world that they first invaded. In this section, we will review
the checkered history of this group, almost all of whose
members have been extinct for the last 200 million years.
Then, in the following section, we will examine in more
detail what the few kinds of surviving amphibians are like.

Origin of Amphibians

Paleontologists (scientists who study fossils) agree that am-
phibians must have evolved from the lobe-finned fishes, al-
though for some years there has been considerable dis-
agreement about whether the direct ancestors were
coelacanths, lungfish, or the extinct rhipidistian fishes.
Good arguments can be made for each. Many details of
amphibian internal anatomy resemble those of the coela-
canth. Lungfish and rhipidistians have openings in the tops
of their mouths similar to the internal nostrils of amphib-
ians. In addition, lungfish have paired lungs, like those of

amphibians. Recent DNA analysis indicates lungfish are in
fact far more closely related to amphibians than are coela-
canths. Most paleontologists consider that amphibians
evolved from rhipidistian fishes, rather than lungfish, be-
cause the pattern of bones in the early amphibian skull and
limbs bears a remarkable resemblance to the rhipidistians.
They also share a particular tooth structure.

They successful invasion of land by vertebrates involved
a number of major adaptations:

1. Legs were necessary to support the body’s weight as
well as to allow movement from place to place (figure
48.18).

2. Lungs were necessary to extract oxygen from air.
Even though there is far more oxygen available to
gills in air than in water, the delicate structure of fish
gills requires the buoyancy of water to support them
and they will not function in air.

3. The heart had to be redesigned to make full use of
new respiratory systems and to deliver the greater
amounts of oxygen required by walking muscles.

4. Reproduction had to be carried out in water until
methods evolved to prevent eggs from drying out.

5. Most importantly, a system had to be developed to
prevent the body itself from drying out.

   

FIGURE 48.18

(b) Early amphibian

A comparison between the limbs of a lobe-finned fish and those of a primitive amphibian. (a) A lobe-finned fish. Some of these
animals could probably move onto land. (b) A primitive amphibian. As illustrated by their skeletal structure, the legs of such an animal
could clearly function on land much better than the fins of the lobe-finned fish.

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 959
