The Rise and Fall of Dominant
Reptile Groups

During the 250 million years that reptiles were the domi-
nant large terrestrial vertebrates, four major forms of rep-
tiles took turns as the dominant type: pelycosaurs, therap-
sids, thecodonts, and dinosaurs.

Pelycosaurs: Becoming a Better Predator

Early reptiles like pelycosaurs were better adapted to life on
dry land than amphibians because they evolved watertight
eggs. They had powerful jaws because of an innovation in
skull design and muscle arrangement. Pelycosaurs were
synapsids, meaning that their skulls had a pair of temporal
holes behind the openings for the eyes. An important fea-
ture of reptile classification is the presence and number of
openings behind the cyes (see figure 48.27). Their jaw
muscles were anchored to these holes, which allowed them
to bite more powerfully. An individual pelycosaur weighed
about 200 kilograms. With long, sharp, “steak knife” teeth,
pelycosaurs were the first land vertebrates to kill beasts
their own size (figure 48.23). Dominant for 50 million
years, pelycosaurs once made up 70% of all land verte-
brates. They died out about 250 million years ago, replaced
by their direct descendants—the therapsids.

Therapsids: Speeding Up Metabolism

Therapsids (figure 48.24) ate ten times more frequently than
their pelycosaur ancestors (figure 48.24). There is evidence
that they may have been endotherms, able to regulate their
own body temperature. The extra food consumption would
have been necessary to produce body heat. This would
have permitted therapsids to be far more active than other
vertebrates of that time, when winters were cold and long.
For 20 million years, therapsids (also called “mammallike
reptiles”) were the dominant land vertebrate, until largely
replaced 230 million years ago by a cold-blooded, or ec-
tothermic, reptile line—the thecodonts. Therapsids be-
came extinct 170 million years ago, but not before giving
rise to their descendants—the mammals.

Thecodonts: Wasting Less Energy

Thecodonts were diapsids, their skulls having two pairs of
temporal holes, and like amphibians and early reptiles, they
were ectotherms (figure 48.25). Thecodonts largely re-
placed therapsids when the world’s climate warmed 230
million years ago. In the warm climate, the therapsid’s en-
dothermy no longer offered a competitive advantage, and
ectothermic thecodonts needed only a tenth as much food.
Thecodonts were the first land vertebrates to be bipedal—
to stand and walk on two feet. They were dominant
through the Triassic and survived for 15 million years, until
replaced by their direct descendants—the dinosaurs.

964 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 48.23

A pelycosaur. Dimetrodon, a carnivorous pelycosaur, had a dorsal
sail that is thought to have been used to dissipate body heat or
gain it by basking.

 

FIGURE 48.24

A therapsid. This small weaslelike cynodont therapsid,
Megazostrodon, may have had fur. From the late Triassic, it is so
similar to modern mammals that some paleontologists consider it
the first mammal.

 

FIGURE 48.25

A thecodont. Euparkeria, a thecodont, had rows of bony plates
along the sides of the backbone, as seen in modern crocodiles and
alligators.
