Dinosaurs: Learning to Run Upright

Dinosaurs evolved from thecodonts about 220 million years
ago. Unlike the thecodonts, their legs were positioned di-
rectly underneath their bodies, a significant improvement
in body design (figure 48.26). This design placed the
weight of the body directly over the legs, which allowed di-
nosaurs to run with great speed and agility. A dinosaur fos-
sil can be distinguished from a thecodont fossil by the pres-
ence of a hole in the side of the hip socket. Because the
dinosaur leg is positioned underneath the socket, the force
is directed upward, not inward, so there was no need for
bone on the side of the socket. Dinosaurs went on to be-
come the most successful of all land vertebrates, dominat-
ing for 150 million years. All dinosaurs became extinct
rather abruptly 65 million years ago, apparently as a result
of an asteroid’s impact.

Figures 48.27 and 48.28 summarize the evolutionary re-
lationships among the extinct and living reptiles.

FIGURE 48.26
‘The largest mounted dinosaur in the world. This
145-million-year-old Brachiosaurus, a plant-eating
sauropod over 80 feet long, lived in East Africa,

Lizards and
snakes Thecodont

 

Lateral Orbit

temporal

opening Orbit

‘Squamata: fusion of snout

 

     

— a bones, characteristics of
———_ palate, skull roof, vertebrae,
= Anapsid skull ribs, pectoral girdle, humerus
— Chelonia: solid-roofed anapsid skull,
Synapsid skull plastron, and carapace derived from

dermal bone and fused to part of axial
skeleton

Synapsids: skull with
single pair of lateral
‘temporal openings

 

Turtle-diapsid clade (Sauropsida)
characteristics of skull
and appendages

 

Amniotes: extraembryonic
membranes of amnion,
chorion, and allantois

 

Dinosaur

— Diapsids: diapsid skull

 

— “€

Crocodilians Birds

—— Archosaura: presence of opening
anterior to eye, orbit shaped like
Inverted triangle, teeth laterally
‘compressed

with 2 pairs of temporal openings q

 

 

Lateral
temporal | ===
opening see
Diapsid skull
FIGURE 48.27

Cladogram of amniotes.

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 965
