The First Amphibian.

Amphibians solved these problems only partially, but their
solutions worked well enough that amphibians have sur-
vived for 350 million years. Evolution does not insist on
perfect solutions, only workable ones.

Ichthyostega, the earliest amphibian fossil (figure 48.19)
was found in a 370-million-year-old rock in Greenland. At
that time, Greenland was part of the North American con-
tinent and lay near the equator. For the next 100 million
years, all amphibian fossils are found in North America.
Only when Asia and the southern continents all merged
with North America to form the supercontinent Pangaea
did amphibians spread throughout the world.

Ichthyostega was a strongly built animal, with four sturdy
legs well supported by hip and shoulder bones. The shoul-
der bones no longer attached to the skull as in fish. The
hipbones were braced against the backbone unlike in fish,
so the limbs could support the animal’s weight. To
strengthen the backbone further, long, broad ribs that
overlap each other formed a solid cage for the lungs and
heart. The rib cage was so solid that it probably couldn’t
expand and contract for breathing. Instead, Ichthyostega ob-
tained oxygen somewhat as a fish does, by lowering the
floor of the mouth to draw air in, then raising it to push air
down the windpipe into the lungs.

The Rise and Fall of Amphibians

Amphibians first became common during the Carbonifer-
ous Period (360 to 280 million years ago). Fourteen fami-
lies of amphibians are known from the early Carboniferous,
nearly all aquatic or semiaquatic, like Ichthyostega. By the
late Carboniferous, much of North America was covered
by low-lying tropical swamplands, and 34 families of am-
phibians thrived in this wet terrestrial environment, sharing
it with pelycosaurs and other early reptiles. In the early
Permian Period that followed (280 to 248 million years
ago), a remarkable change occurred among amphibians—
they began to leave the marshes for dry uplands. Many of
these terrestrial amphibians had bony plates and armor
covering their bodies and grew to be very large, some as
big as a pony (figure 48.20). Both their large size and the
complete covering of their bodies indicate that these am-
phibians did not use the skin respiratory system of present-
day amphibians, but rather had an impermeable leathery
skin to prevent water loss. By the mid-Permian, there were
40 families of amphibians. Only 25% of them were still
semiaquatic like Ichthyostega; 60% of the amphibians were
fully terrestrial, 15% were semiterrestrial.

This was the peak of amphibian success. By the end of
the Permian, a reptile called a therapsid had become com-
mon, ousting the amphibians from their newly acquired
niche on land. Following the mass extinction event at the
end of the Permian, therapsids were the dominant land ver-
tebrate and most amphibians were aquatic. This trend con-
tinued in the following Triassic Period (248 to 213 million

960 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

wei

FIGURE 48.19

Amphibians were the first vertebrates to walk on land.
Reconstruction of Ichthyostega, one of the first amphibians with
efficient limbs for crawling on land, an improved olfactory sense
associated with a lengthened snout, and a relatively advanced ear
structure for picking up airborne sounds. Despite these features,
Ichthyostega, which lived about 350 million years ago, was still
quite fishlike in overall appearance and represents a very early
amphibian.

 

FIGURE 48.20

A terrestrial amphibian of the Permian. Cacops, a large, extinct
amphibian, had extensive body armor.

years ago), which saw the virtual extinction of amphibians
from land. By the end of the Triassic, there were only 15
families of amphibians (including the first frog), and almost
without exception they were aquatic. Some of these grew to
great size; one was 3 meters long. Only two groups of am-
phibians are known from the following Jurassic Period (213
to 144 million years ago), the anurans (frogs and toads) and
the urodeles (salamanders and newts). The Age of Amphib-
ians was over.
