Reptiles

Tf one thinks of amphibians as a
first draft of a manuscript about
survival on land, then reptiles are
the finished book. For each of the
five key challenges of living on
land, reptiles improved on the in-
novations first seen in amphibians.
Legs were arranged to support the
body’s weight more effectively, al-
lowing reptile bodies to be bigger
and to run. Lungs and heart were
altered to make them more effi-

Jawless fishes
Bony fishes
‘Amphibians

Cartilaginous fishes

cient. The skin was covered with
dry plates or scales to minimize
water loss, and eggs were encased
in watertight covers (figure 48.22).
Reptiles were the first truly terres-
trial vertebrates.

Over 7000 species of reptiles
(class Reptilia) now live on earth (table 48.3). They are a
highly successful group in today’s world, more common
than mammals. There are three reptile species for every
two mammal species. While it is traditional to think of
reptiles as more primitive than mammals, the great major-
ity of reptiles that live today evolved from lines that ap-
peared after therapsids did (the line that leads directly to
mammals).

Key Characteristics of Reptiles

All living reptiles share certain fundamental characteristics,
features they retain from the time when they replaced am-
phibians as the dominant terrestrial vertebrates. Among the
most important are:

1. Amniotic egg. Amphibians never
succeeded in becoming fully ter-
restrial because amphibian eggs
must be laid in water to avoid dry-
ing out. Most reptiles lay water-
tight eggs that contain a food
source (the yolk) and a series of
four membranes—the yolk sac, the
amnion, the allantois, and the
chorion (figure 48.22). Each mem-
brane plays a role in making the
egg an independent life-support
system. The outermost membrane
of the egg is the chorion, which
lies just beneath the porous shell.
It allows respiratory gases to pass
through, but retains water within
the egg. Within, the amnion en-
cases the developing embryo
within a fluid-filled cavity. The

FIGURE 48.22

962 Part XII Animal Diversity

8

 

Reptiles

 

 

 

yolk sac provides food from the yolk
for the embryo via blood vessels con-
necting to the embryo’s gut. The al-
lantois surrounds a cavity into which
waste products from the embryo are
excreted. All modern reptiles (as well
as birds and mammals) show exactly
this same pattern of membranes
within the egg. These three classes are
called amniotes.

2. Dry skin. Living amphibians have
a moist skin and must remain in
moist places to avoid drying out.
Reptiles have dry, watertight skin. A
layer of scales or armor covers their
bodies, preventing water loss. These
scales develop as surface cells fill
with keratin, the same protein that
forms claws, fingernails, hair, and
bird feathers.

3. Thoracic breathing. Amphibians

breathe by squeezing their throat to pump air into

their lungs; this limits their breathing capacity to the
volume of their mouth. Reptiles developed pul-
monary breathing, expanding and contracting the rib
cage to suck air into the lungs and then force it out.

The capacity of this system is limited only by the vol-

ume of the lungs.

Birds
Mammals

 

Reptiles were the first vertebrates to completely master
the challenge of living on dry land.

 

 

The watertight egg. The amniotic egg is perhaps the most important feature that allows
reptiles to live in a wide variety of terrestrial habitats.
