Amphibians

Frogs, salamanders, and caecilians, the
damp-skinned vertebrates, are direct
descendants of fishes. They are the
sole survivors of a very successful
group, the amphibians, the first verte-

 

my

 

“Amphibians

 

Bony fishes

brates to walk on land. Most present-

 

Jawless fishes

day amphibians are small and live
largely unnoticed by humans. Am-
phibians are among the most numer-

Cartilaginous fishes

ous of terrestrial animals; there are
more species of amphibians than of
mammals. Throughout the world am-
phibians play key roles in terrestrial
food chains.

Characteristics of Living

Amphibians

Biologists have classified living

species of amphibians into three orders (table 48.2): 3680
species of frogs and toads in 22 families make up the order
Anura (“without a tail”); 369 species of salamanders and
newts in 9 families make up the order Urodela or Caudata
(“visible tail”); and 168 species (6 families) of wormlike,
nearly blind organisms called caccilians that live in the
tropics make up the order Apoda or Gymnophiona (“with-
out legs”). They have key characteristics in common:

1. Legs. Frogs and salamanders have four legs and can
move about on land quite well. Legs were one of the
key adaptations to life on land. Caecilians have lost
their legs during the course of adapting to a burrow-
ing existence.

2. Cutaneous respiration. Frogs, salamanders, and
caecilians all supplement the use of lungs by respiring
directly across their skin, which is kept moist and
provides an extensive surface area. This mode of res-
piration is only efficient for a high surface-to-volume
ratio in an animal.

3. Lungs. Most amphibians possess a
pair of lungs, although the internal sur-
faces are poorly developed, with much
less surface area than reptilian or mam-
malian lungs. Amphibians still breathe
by lowering the floor of the mouth to
suck air in, then raising it back to force
the air down into the lungs.

4. Pulmonary veins. After blood is
pumped through the lungs, two large
veins called pulmonary veins return the
aerated blood to the heart for repump-
ing. This allows the aerated blood to be
pumped to the tissues at a much higher
pressure than when it leaves the lungs.

5. Partially divided heart. The initial
chamber of the fish heart is absent in
amphibians, and the second and last
chambers are separated by a dividing
wall that helps prevent aerated blood
from the lungs from mixing with non-

aerated blood being returned to the heart from the

rest of the body. This separates the blood circulation
into two separate paths, pulmonary and systemic.

The separation is imperfect; the third chamber has

no dividing wall.

Reptiles
Birds
Mammals

Several other specialized characteristics are shared by all
present-day amphibians. In all three orders, there is a zone
of weakness between the base and the crown of the teeth.
They also have a peculiar type of sensory rod cell in the
retina of the eye called a “green rod.” The exact function of
this rod is unknown.

 

Amphibians, with legs and more efficient blood
circulation than fishes, were the first vertebrates to
walk on land.

 

Table 48.2 Orders of Amphibians

Typical
Order Examples
Anura Frogs, toads >
Caudata Salamanders, newts eee
a. -
Apoda Caecilians aad”
(Gymnophiona) 7

958 Part XII Animal Diversity

Approximate
Number of
Key Characteristics Living Species
Compact tailless body; large head fused 3680
to the trunk; rear limbs specialized for
jumping
Slender body; long tail and limbs set out at 369
right angles to the body
Tropical group with a snakelike body; no 168

limbs; little or no tail
