birds are assigned to a separate class.
This practical judgment should not
conceal the basic agreement among al-
most all biologists that birds are the
direct descendants of theropod di-
nosaurs, as closely related to
coelurosaurs as are other theropods
(see figure 48.35).

By the early Cretaceous, only a few
million years after Archaeopteryx, a di-
verse array of birds had evolved, with
many of the features of modern birds.
Fossils in Mongolia, Spain, and China
discovered within the last few years
reveal a diverse collection of toothed
birds with the hollow bones and
breastbones necessary for sustained
flight. Other fossils reveal highly spe-

 

FIGURE 48.36

Class Aves. This Western tanager, Piranga
Judoviciana, is a member of the largest order
of birds, the Passeriformes, with over 5000

area, not nearly enough to ab-
sorb all the oxygen needed.
Mammalian lungs have a greater
surface area, but as we will see in
chapter 53, bird lungs satisfy this
challenge with a radical re-
design. When a bird inhales, the
air goes past the lungs to a series
of air sacs located near and
within the hollow bones of the
back; from there the air travels
to the lungs and then to a set of
anterior air sacs before being ex-
haled. Because air always passes
through the lungs in the same
direction, and blood flows past
the lung at right angles to the
airflow, gas exchange is highly

cialized, flightless diving birds. The _ species.
diverse birds of the Cretaceous shared
the skies with pterosaurs for 70 mil-
lion years.

Because the impression of feathers
is rarely fossilized and modern birds have hollow, delicate
bones, the fossil record of birds is incomplete. Relation-
ships among the 166 families of modern birds are mostly
inferred from studies of the degree of DNA similarity
among living birds. These studies suggest that the most
ancient living birds are the flightless birds, like the os-
trich. Ducks, geese, and other waterfowl evolved next, in
the early Cretaceous, followed by a diverse group of
woodpeckers, parrots, swifts, and owls. The largest of the
bird orders, Passeriformes, or songbirds (60% of all
species of birds today), evolved in the mid-Cretaceous.
The more specialized orders of birds, such as shorebirds,
birds of prey, flamingos, and penguins, did not appear
until the late Cretaceous. All but a few of the modern or-
ders of toothless birds are thought to have arisen before
the disappearance of the pterosaurs and dinosaurs at the
end of the Cretaceous 65 million years ago.

Birds Today

You can tell a great deal about the habits and food of a bird
by examining its beak and feet. For instance, carnivorous
birds such as owls have curved talons for seizing prey and
sharp beaks for tearing apart their meal. The beaks of
ducks are flat for shoveling through mud, while the beaks
of finches are short, thick seed-crushers. There are 28 or-
ders of birds, the largest consisting of over 5000 species
(figure 48.36).

Many adaptations enabled birds to cope with the heavy
energy demands of flight:

1. Efficient respiration. Flight muscles consume an
enormous amount of oxygen during active flight.
The reptilian lung has a limited internal surface

efficient.

2. Efficient circulation. The
revved-up metabolism needed to
power active flight also requires
very efficient blood circulation, so

that the oxygen captured by the lungs can be deliv-
ered to the flight muscles quickly. In the heart of
most living reptiles, oxygen-rich blood coming from
the lungs mixes with oxygen-poor blood returning
from the body because the wall dividing the ventricle
into two chambers is not complete. In birds, the wall
dividing the ventricle is complete, and the two blood
circulations do not mix, so flight muscles receive fully
oxygenated blood.

In comparison with reptiles and most other verte-
brates, birds have a rapid heartbeat. A hummingbird’s
heart beats about 600 times a minute. An active
chickadee’s heart beats 1000 times a minute. In con-
trast, the heart of the large, flightless ostrich averages
70 beats per minute—the same rate as the human
heart.

3. Endothermy. Birds, like mammals, are endother-
mic. Many paleontologists believe the dinosaurs that
birds evolved from were endothermic as well. Birds
maintain body temperatures significantly higher than
most mammals, ranging from 40° to 42°C (your body
temperature is 37°C). Feathers provide excellent in-
sulation, helping to conserve body heat. The high
temperatures maintained by endothermy permit me-
tabolism in the bird’s flight muscles to proceed at a
rapid pace, to provide the ATP necessary to drive
rapid muscle contraction.

 

‘The class Aves probably debuted 150 million years ago
with Archaeopteryx. Modern birds are characterized by
feathers, scales, a thin, hollow skeleton, auxiliary air
sacs, and a four-chambered heart. Birds lay amniotic
eggs and are endothermic.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 973
