History of the Birds

A 150-million-year-old fossil of the first known bird, Ar-
chaeopteryx (figure 48.34)—pronounced “archie-op-ter-ichs”—
was found in 1862 in a limestone quarry in Bavaria, the
impression of its feathers stamped clearly into the rocks.

Birds Are Descended from Dinosaurs

The skeleton of Archaeopteryx shares many features with
small theropod dinosaurs. About the size of a crow, its skull
has teeth, and very few of its bones are fused to one an-
other—dinosaurian features, not avian. Its bones are solid,
not hollow like a bird’s. Also, it has a long reptilian tail, and
no enlarged breastbone such as modern birds use to anchor
flight muscles. Finally, it has the forelimbs of a dinosaur.
Because of its many dinosaur features, several Archaeopteryx
fossils were originally classified as the coclurosaur Compsog-
nathus, a small theropod dinosaur of similar size—until
feathers were discovered on the fossils. What makes Ar-
chaeopteryx distinctly avian is the presence of feathers on its
wings and tail. It also has other birdlike features, notably
the presence of a wishbone. Dinosaurs lack a wishbone, al-
though thecodonts had them.

The remarkable similarity of Archaeopteryx to Compsog-
nathus has led almost all paleontologists to conclude that
Archaeopteryx is the direct descendant of dinosaurs—in-
deed, that today’s birds are “feathered dinosaurs.” Some
even speak flippantly of “carving the dinosaur” at Thanks-
giving dinner. The recent discovery of feathered dinosaurs
in China lends strong support to this inference. The di-
nosaur Caudipteryx, for example, is clearly intermediate be-
tween Archaeopteryx and dinosaurs, having large feathers on
its tail and arms but also many features of velociraptor di-

FIGURE 48.35

 

FIGURE 48.34

Archaeopteryx. An artist’s reconstruction of Archaeopteryx, an early
bird about the size of a crow. Closely related to its ancestors

among the bipedal dinosaurs, Archaeopteryx lived in the forests of
central Europe 150 million years ago. The true feather colors of
Archaeopteryx are not known.

nosaurs (figure 48.35). Because the arms of Caudipteryx
were too short to use as wings, feathers probably didn’t
evolve for flight. Instead, they probably served as insula-
tion, much as fur does for animals. Flight is something that
certain kinds of dinosaurs achieved as they evolved longer
arms. We call these dinosaurs birds.

Despite their close affinity to dinosaurs, biologists con-
tinue to classify birds as Aves, a separate class, because of
the key evolutionary novelties of birds: feathers, hollow
bones, and physiological mechanisms such as supereffi-
cient lungs that permit sustained, powered flight. It is be-
cause of their unique adaptations and great diversity that

The evolutionary path to the birds. Almost all paleontologists now accept the theory that birds are the direct descendents of theropod

dinosaurs.

972 Part XII Animal Diversity
