History of the Mammals

Mammals have been around since the
time of the dinosaurs, although they
were never common until the dinosaurs
disappeared. We have learned a lot
about the evolutionary history of mam-
mals from their fossils.

Origin of Mammals

The first mammals arose from therap-
sids in the mid-Triassic about 220
million years ago, just as the first di-
nosaurs evolved from thecodonts.
Tiny, shrewlike creatures that lived in
trees eating insects, mammals were
only a minor element in a land that
quickly came to be dominated by di-
nosaurs. Fossils reveal that these early
mammals had large eye sockets, evi-
dence that they may have been active
at night. Early mammals had a single
lower jawbone. Therapsid fossils show
a change from the reptile lower jaw
with several bones to a jaw closer to
the mammalian-type jaw. Two of the
bones forming the therapsid jaw joint
retreated into the middle ear of mam-
mals, linking with a bone already
there producing a three-bone struc-
ture that amplifies sound better than
the reptilian ear.

Early Divergence in Mammals

Group

Cave bears

Trish elk

Mammoths

Giant ground
sloths

Sabertooth
cats

Table 48.6 Some Groups of Extinct Mammals
Description

Numerous in the ice ages; this enormous
vegetarian bear slept
through the winter in large groups.

Neither Irish nor an elk (it is a kind

of deer), Megaloceros was the largest

deer that ever lived, with horns spanning
12 feet. Seen in French

cave paintings, they became

extinct about 2500 years ago.

 

Although only two species of elephants
survive today, the elephant family

was far more diverse during the

late Tertiary. Many were cold-
adapted mammoths with fur.

Megatherium was a giant
20-foot ground sloth that
weighed three tons and was as
large as a modern elephant.

The jaws of these large,
lionlike cats opened

an incredible 120 degrees

to allow the animal to drive its
huge upper pair of saber teeth into prey.

 

For 155 million years, while the dinosaurs flourished,
mammals were a minor group of small insectivores and
herbivores. Only five orders of mammals arose in that
time, and their fossils are scarce, indicating that mammals
were not abundant. However, the two groups to which
present-day mammals belong did appear. The most prim-
itive mammals, direct descendents of therapsids, were
members of the subclass Prototheria. Most prototherians
were small and resembled modern shrews. All prototheri-
ans laid eggs, as did their therapsid ancestors. The only
prototherians surviving today are the monotremes—the
duckbill platypus and the echidnas, or spiny anteaters.
The other major mammalian group is the subclass Theria.
All of the mammals you are familiar with, including hu-
mans, are therians. Therians are viviparous (that is, their
young are born alive). The two major living therian
groups are marsupials, or pouched mammals, and placen-
tal mammals. Kangaroos, opossums, and koalas are mar-
supials. Dogs, cats, humans, horses, and most other mam-
mals are placentals.

976 Part XII Animal Diversity

The Age of Mammals

At the end of the Cretaceous Period 65 million years ago,
the dinosaurs and numerous other land and marine animals
became extinct, but mammals survived, possibly because of
the insulation their fur provided. In the Tertiary Period
(lasting from 65 million years to 2 million years ago), mam-
mals rapidly diversified, taking over many of the ecological
roles once dominated by dinosaurs (table 48.6). Mammals
reached their maximum diversity late in the Tertiary Pe-
riod, about 15 million years ago. At that time, tropical con-
ditions existed over much of the world. During the last 15
million years, world climates have deteriorated, and the
area covered by tropical habitats has decreased, causing a
decline in the total number of mammalian species. There
are now 19 orders of mammals.
