Mammals

There are about 4100 living species of
mammals (class Mammalia), the small-
est number of species in any of the five
classes of vertebrates. Most large,
land-dwelling vertebrates are mam-
mals (figure 48.37), and they tend to
dominate terrestrial communities, as
did the dinosaurs that they replaced.
When you look out over an African
plain, you see the big mammals, the
lions, zebras, gazelles, and antelope.
Your eye does not as readily pick out
the many birds, lizards, and frogs that
live in the grassland community with
them. But the typical mammal is not
all that large. Of the 4100 species of
mammals, 3200 are rodents, bats,
shrews, or moles (table 48.5).

Jawless fishes

Cartilaginous fishes

Bony fishes

Key Mammalian Characteristics

Mammals are distinguished from all other classes of verte-
brates by two fundamental characteristics that are unique
to mammals:

1. Hair. All mammals have hair. Even apparently
naked whales and dolphins grow sensitive bristles on
their snouts. Evolution of fur and the ability to regu-
late body temperature enabled mammals to invade
colder climates that ectothermic reptiles could not in-
habit, and the insulation fur provided may have en-
sured the survival of mammals when the dinosaurs
perished.

Unlike feathers, which evolved from modified
reptilian scales, mammalian hair is a completely dif-
ferent form of skin structure. An individual mam-
malian hair is a long, protein-rich filament that ex-
tends like a stiff thread from a bulblike foundation
beneath the skin known as a hair follicle. The fila-
ment is composed mainly of dead cells filled with the
fibrous protein keratin.

One of the most important functions of hair is in-
sulation against heat loss. Mammals are endothermic
animals, and typically maintain body temperatures
higher than the temperature of their surroundings.
The dense undercoat of many mammals reduces the
amount of body heat that escapes.

Another function of hair is camouflage. The col-
oration and pattern of a mammal’s coat usually matches
its background. A little brown mouse is practically in-
visible against the brown leaf litter of a forest floor,
while the orange and black stripes of a Bengal tiger dis-
appear against the orange-brown color of the tall grass
in which it hunts. Hairs also function as sensory struc-
tures. The whiskers of cats and dogs are stiff hairs that

974 Part XII Animal Diversity

‘Amphibians

Reptiles

are very sensitive to touch. Mam-
mals that are active at night or
live underground often rely on
their whiskers to locate prey or to
avoid colliding with objects. Hair
can also serve as a defense
weapon. Porcupines and hedge-
hogs protect themselves with
long, sharp, stiff hairs called
quills.

2. Mammary glands. All female
mammals possess mammary
glands that secrete milk. New-
born mammals, born without
teeth, suckle this milk. Even
baby whales are nursed by their
mother’s milk. Milk is a fluid
rich in fat, sugar, and protein. A
liter of human milk contains 11
grams of protein, 49 grams of
fat, 70 grams of carbohydrate

(chiefly the sugar lactose), and 2 grams of minerals

critical to early growth, such as calcium. About 95%

of the volume is water, critical to avoid dehydration.

Milk is a very high calorie food (human milk has 750

kcal per liter), important because of the high energy

needs of a rapidly growing newborn mammal. About

50% of the energy in the milk comes from fat.

 

Birds

 

Mammals}

 

 

 

Mammals first appeared 220 million years ago, evolving
to their present position of dominance in modern
terrestrial ecosystems. Mammals are the only
vertebrates that possess hair and milk glands.

 

 

FIGURE 48.37

Mammals. African elephants, Lovodonta africana, at a water hole
(order Proboscidea).
