Kinds of Living Reptiles

The four surviving orders of reptiles contain about 7000
species. Reptiles occur worldwide except in the coldest re-
gions, where it is impossible for ectotherms to survive.
Reptiles are among the most numerous and diverse of ter-
restrial vertebrates. The four living orders of the class Rep-
tilia are Chelonia, Rhynchocephalia, Squamata, and Croco-
dilia.

Order Chelonia: Turtles and Tortoises. The order
Chelonia consists of about 250 species of turtles (most of
which are aquatic; figure 48.30) and tortoises (which are
terrestrial). They differ from all other reptiles because their
bodies are encased within a protective shell. Many of them
can pull their head and legs into the shell as well, for total
protection from predators. Turtles and tortoises lack teeth
but have sharp beaks.

Today’s turtles and tortoises have changed very little
since the first turtles appeared 200 million years ago. Tur-
tles are anapsid—they lack the temporal openings in the
skull characteristic of other living reptiles, which are diap-
sid. This evolutionary stability of turtles may reflect the
continuous benefit of their basic design—a body covered
with a shell. In some species, the shell is made of hard
plates; in other species, it is a covering of tough, leathery
skin. In either case, the shell consists of two basic parts.
The carapace is the dorsal covering, while the plastron is
the ventral portion. In a fundamental commitment to this
shell architecture, the vertebrae and ribs of most turtle and
tortoise species are fused to the inside of the carapace. All
of the support for muscle attachment comes from the shell.

While most tortoises have a domed-shaped shell into
which they can retract their head and limbs, water-dwelling
turtles have a streamlined, disc-shaped shell that permits
rapid turning in water. Freshwater turtles have webbed
toes, and in marine turtles, the forelimbs have evolved into
flippers. Although marine turtles spend their lives at sea,
they must return to land to lay their eggs. Many species mi-
grate long distances to do this. Atlantic green turtles mi-
grate from their feeding grounds off the coast of Brazil to
Ascension Island in the middle of the South Atlantic—a
distance of more than 2000 kilometers—to lay their eggs
on the same beaches where they hatched.

Order Rhynchocephalia: Tuatara. The order Rhyn-
chocephalia contains only two species today, the tuataras,
large, lizardlike animals about half a meter long. The only
place in the world where these endangered species are
found is on a cluster of small islands off the coast of New
Zealand. The native Maoris of New Zealand named the tu-
atara for the conspicuous spiny crest running down its
back.

An unusual feature of the tuatara (and some lizards) is
the inconspicuous “third eye” on the top of its head, called
a parietal eye. Concealed under a thin layer of scales, the
eye has a lens and retina and is connected by nerves to the

968 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

FIGURE 48.30

Red-bellied turtles, Pseudemys rubriventris. This turtle is
common in the northeastern United States.

brain. Why have an eye, if it is covered up? The parietal
eye may function to alert the tuatara when it has been ex-
posed to too much sun, protecting it against overheating.
Unlike most reptiles, tuataras are most active at low tem-
peratures. They burrow during the day and feed at night on
insects, worms, and other small animals.

Order Squamata: Lizards and Snakes. The order Squa-
mata (figure 48.31) consists of three suborders: Sauria,
some 3800 species of lizards, Amphisbaenia, about 135
species of worm lizards, and Serpentes, about 3000 species
of snakes. The distinguishing characteristics of this order
are the presence of paired copulatory organs in the male
and a lower jaw that is not joined directly to the skull. A
movable hinge with five joints (your jaw has only one) al-
lows great flexibility in the movements of the jaw. In addi-
tion, the loss of the lower arch of bone below the lower
opening in the skull of lizards makes room for large mus-
cles to operate their jaws. Most lizards and snakes are car-
nivores, preying on insects and small animals, and these im-
provements in jaw design have made a major contribution
to their evolutionary success.

The chief difference between lizards and snakes is that
most lizards have limbs and snakes do not. Snakes also lack
movable eyelids and external ears. Lizards are a more an-
cient group than modern snakes, which evolved only 20
million years ago. Common lizards include iguanas,
chameleons, geckos, and anoles. Most are small, measuring
less than a foot in length. The largest lizards belong to the
monitor family. The largest of all monitors is the Komodo
dragon of Indonesia, which reaches 3 meters in length and
weighs up to 100 kilograms. Snakes also vary in size from
only a few inches long to those that reach nearly 10 meters
in length.

Lizards and snakes rely on agility and speed to catch
prey and elude predators. Only two species of lizard are
venomous, the Gila monster of the southwestern United
States and the beaded lizard of western Mexico. Similarly,
most species of snakes are nonvenomous. Of the 13 families
of snakes, only 4 are venomous: the elapids (cobras, kraits,
