FIGURE 48.29

A comparison of

reptile and fish
circulation. (a) In Lung
reptiles such as this

turtle, blood is

repumped after leaving

the lungs, and

circulation to the rest

of the body remains
vigorous. (b) The blood

in fishes flows from the

gills directly to the rest

of the body, resulting

in slower circulation. (8)

  
  

Systemic
capillaries

Today’s Reptiles

Most of the major reptile orders are now extinct. Of the 16
orders of reptiles that have existed, only 4 survive.

Turtles. The most ancient surviving lineage of rep-
tiles is that of turtles. Turtles have anapsid skulls much
like those of the first reptiles. Turtles have changed little
in the past 200 million years.

Lizards and snakes. Most reptiles living today belong
to the second lineage to evolve, the lizards and snakes.
Lizards and snakes are descended from an ancient lin-
eage of lizardlike reptiles that branched off the main line
of reptile evolution in the late Permian, 250 million
years ago, before the thecodonts appeared (figure 48.28).
Throughout the Mesozoic era, during the dominance of
the dinosaurs, these reptiles survived as minor elements
of the landscape, much as mammals did. Like mammals,
lizards and snakes became diverse and common only
after the dinosaurs disappeared.

Tuataras. The third lineage of surviving reptiles to
evolve were the Rhynchocephalonts, small diapsid rep-
tiles that appeared shortly before the dinosaurs. They
lived throughout the time of the dinosaurs and were
common in the Jurassic. They began to decline in the
Cretaceous, apparently unable to compete with lizards,
and were already rare by the time dinosaurs disappeared.
Today only two species of the order Rhynchocephalia
survive, both tuataras living on small islands near New
Zealand.

Crocodiles. The fourth lineage of living reptile, croc-
odiles, appeared on the evolutionary scene much later
than other living reptiles. Crocodiles are descended
from the same line of thecodonts that gave rise to the di-
nosaurs and resemble dinosaurs in many ways. They
have changed very little in over 200 million years. Croc-
odiles, pterosaurs, thecodonts, and dinosaurs together
make up a group called archosaurs (“ruling reptiles”).

 

Dorsal

orta.
5 , Gills
tS
Ventral Ry
aorta

   

 

Systemic
capillaries

Ventricle \S

[Body

 

  

(b) i —

Other Important Characteristics

As you might imagine from the structure of the amniotic
egg, reptiles and other amniotes do not practice external
fertilization as most amphibians do. There would be no
way for a sperm to penetrate the membrane barriers pro-
tecting the egg. Instead, the male places sperm inside the
female, where they fertilize the egg before the membranes
are formed. This is called internal fertilization.

The circulatory system of reptiles is improved over that
of fish and amphibians, providing oxygen to the body more
efficiently (figure 48.29). The improvement is achieved by
extending the septum within the heart from the atrium
partway across the ventricle. This septum creates a partial
wall that tends to lessen mixing of oxygen-poor blood with
oxygen-rich blood within the ventricle. In crocodiles, the
septum completely divides the ventricle, creating a four-
chambered heart, just as it does in birds and mammals (and
probably in dinosaurs).

All living reptiles are ectothermic, obtaining their
heat from external sources. In contrast, endothermic an-
imals are able to generate their heat internally. In addi-
tion, homeothermic animals have a constant body tem-
perature, and poikilothermic animals have a body
temperature that fluctuates with ambient temperature.
Thus, a deep-sea fish may be an ectothermic
homeotherm because its heat comes from an external
source, but its body temperature is constant. Reptiles are
largely ectothermic poikilotherms; their body tempera-
ture is largely determined by their surroundings. Reptiles
also regulate their temperature through behavior. They
may bask in the sun to warm up or seek shade to prevent
overheating. The thecodont ancestors of crocodiles were
ectothermic, as crocodiles are today. The later dinosaurs
from which birds evolved were endothermic. Crocodiles
and birds differ in this one important respect. Ec-
tothermy is a principal reason why crocodiles have been
grouped among the reptiles.

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 967
