Special Things about Plant Cells
Vacuoles: A Central Storage Compartment

The center of a plant cell usually contains a large, appar-
ently empty space, called the central vacuole (figure
5.28). This vacuole is not really empty; it contains large
amounts of water and other materials, such as sugars, ions,
and pigments. The central vacuole functions as a storage
center for these important substances and also helps to in-
crease the surface-to-volume ratio of the plant cell by ap-
plying pressure to the cell membrane. The cell membrane
expands outward under this pressure, thereby increasing
its surface area.

Cell Walls: Protection and Support

Plant cells share a characteristic with bacteria that is not
shared with animal cells—that is, plants have cell walls,
which protect and support the plant cell. Although bacteria

 

also have cell walls, plant cell walls are chemically and struc- 1.83 hm.
- FIGURE 5.28

The central vacuole. A plant’s central vacuole stores dissolved
substances and can increase in size to increase the surface area of a
plant cell.

turally different from bacterial cell walls. Cell walls are also
present in fungi and some protists. In plants, cell walls are
composed of fibers of the polysaccharide cellulose. Primary
walls are laid down when the cell is still growing, and be-
tween the walls of adjacent cells is a sticky substance called
the middle lamella, which glues the cells together (figure
5.29). Some plant cells produce strong secondary walls,
which are deposited inside the primary walls of fully ex-
panded cells.

 

Plant cells store substances in a large central vacuole,
and encase themselves within a strong cellulose cell wall.

 

  
 

Cell ig

Middle:
lamella
Middle lamella

Secondary wall

Primary wall Cell 2

 

(b)

FIGURE 5.29
Cell walls in plants. As shown in this drawing (2) and transmission electron micrograph (), plant cell walls are thicker, stronger, and more
rigid than those of bacteria. Primary cell walls are laid down when the cell is young. Thicker secondary cell walls may be added later when
the cell is fully grown.

100 Part II Biology of the Cell
