 

 

()

FIGURE 48.31

Representatives from the order Squamata. (a) An Australian
skink, Sphenomorophus. Some burrowing lizards lack legs, and the
snakes evolved from one line of legless lizards. (b) A smooth green
snake, Liochlorophis vernalis.

and coral snakes); the sea snakes; the vipers (adders, bush-
masters, rattlesnakes, water moccasins, and copperheads);
and some colubrids (African boomslang and twig snake).
Many lizards, including skinks and geckos, have the abil-
ity to lose their tails and then regenerate a new one. This
apparently allows these lizards to escape from predators.

Order Crocodilia: Crocodiles and Alligators. The
order Crocodilia is composed of 25 species of large, pri-
marily aquatic, primitive-looking reptiles (figure 48.32). In
addition to crocodiles and alligators, the order includes two
less familiar animals: the caimans and gavials. Crocodilians
have remained relatively unchanged since they first
evolved.

Crocodiles are largely nocturnal animals that live in or
near water in tropical or subtropical regions of Africa, Asia,
and South America. The American crocodile is found in
southern Florida and Cuba to Columbia and Ecuador. Nile
crocodiles and estuarine crocodiles can grow to enormous
size and are responsible for many human fatalities each

 

FIGURE 48.32

River crocodile, Crocodilus acutus. Most crocodiles resemble
birds and mammals in having four-chambered hearts; all other
living reptiles have three-chambered hearts. Crocodiles, like birds,
are more closely related to dinosaurs than to any of the other
living reptiles.

year. There are only two species of alligators: one living in
the southern United States and the other a rare endangered
species living in China. Caimans, which resemble alligators,
are native to Central America. Gavials are a group of fish-
eating crocodilians with long, slender snouts that live only
in India and Burma.

All crocodilians are carnivores. They generally hunt by
stealth, waiting in ambush for prey, then attacking fero-
ciously. Their bodies are well adapted for this form of
hunting: their eyes are on top of their heads and their
nostrils on top of their snouts, so they can see and breathe
while lying quietly submerged in water. They have enor-
mous mouths, studded with sharp teeth, and very strong
necks. A valve in the back of the mouth prevents water
from entering the air passage when a crocodilian feeds
underwater.

Crocodiles resemble birds far more than they do other
living reptiles. Alone among living reptiles, crocodiles
care for their young (a trait they share with at least some
dinosaurs) and have a four-chambered heart, as birds do.
There are also many other points of anatomy in which
crocodiles differ from all living reptiles and resemble
birds. Why are crocodiles more similar to birds than to
other living reptiles? Most biologists now believe that
birds are in fact the direct descendants of dinosaurs. Both
crocodiles and birds are more closely related to di-
nosaurs, and each other, than they are related to lizards
and snakes.

 

Many major reptile groups that dominated life on land
for 250 million years are now extinct. The four living
orders of reptiles include the turtles, lizards and snakes,
tuataras, and crocodiles.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 969
