Birds

Only four groups of animals have
evolved the ability to fly—insects,
pterosaurs, birds, and bats. Pterosaurs,
flying reptiles, evolved from gliding
reptiles and flew for 130 million years
before becoming extinct with the di-

Jawless fishes
Bony fishes

nosaurs. There are startling similarities

Cartilaginous fishes

in how these very different animals
meet the challenges of flight. Like
water running downhill through similar
gullies, evolution tends to seek out sim-
ilar adaptations. There are major dif-
ferences as well. The success of birds
lies in the development of a structure
unique in the animal world—the
feather. Developed from reptilian
scales, feathers are the ideal adaptation
for flight—lightweight airfoils that are
easily replaced if damaged (unlike the
vulnerable skin wings of pterosaurs and bats). Today, birds
(class Aves) are the most successful and diverse of all terres-
trial vertebrates, with 28 orders containing a total of 166
families and about 8800 species (table 48.4).

Key Characteristics of Birds

Modern birds lack teeth and have only vestigial tails, but
they still retain many reptilian characteristics. For instance,
birds lay amniotic eggs, although the shells of bird eggs are
hard rather than leathery. Also, reptilian scales are present
on the feet and lower legs of birds. What makes birds
unique? What distinguishes them from living reptiles?

 

970 Part XII Animal Diversity

‘Amphibians

Reptiles

1. Feathers. Feathers are modified
reptilian scales that serve two func-
tions: providing lift for flight and
conserving heat. The structure of

A

 

feathers combines maximum flexi-
bility and strength with minimum
weight (figure 48.33). Feathers de-
velop from tiny pits in the skin
called follicles. In a typical flight
feather, a shaft emerges from the
follicle, and pairs of vanes develop
from its opposite sides. At maturity,
each vane has many branches called
barbs. The barbs, in turn, have
many projections called barbules
that are equipped with microscopic
hooks. These hooks link the barbs to

one another, giving the feather a

continuous surface and a sturdy but

flexible shape. Like scales, feathers

can be replaced. Feathers are unique
to birds among living animals. Recent fossil finds sug-
gest that some dinosaurs may have had feathers.

2. Flight skeleton. The bones of birds are thin and
hollow. Many of the bones are fused, making the bird
skeleton more rigid than a reptilian skeleton. The
fused sections of backbone and of the shoulder and
hip girdles form a sturdy frame that anchors muscles
during flight. The power for active flight comes from
large breast muscles that can make up 30% of a bird’s
total body weight. They stretch down from the wing
and attach to the breastbone, which is greatly en-
larged and bears a prominent keel for muscle attach-
ment. They also attach to the fused collarbones that
form the so-called “wishbone.” No other living verte-

Birds'

 

 

 

Mammals

brates have a fused collarbone or a keeled breastbone.

Birds are the most diverse of all
terrestrial vertebrates. They are closely
related to reptiles, but unlike reptiles or
any other animals, birds have feathers.

FIGURE 48.33

A feather. This enlargement shows how the
vanes, secondary branches and barbs, are linked
together by microscopic barbules.
