Characteristics of Modern Mammals

Endothermy. Mammals are endothermic, a crucial adap-
tation that has allowed mammals to be active at any time of
the day or night and to colonize severe environments, from
deserts to ice fields. Many characteristics, such as hair that
provides insulation, played important roles in making en-
dothermy possible. Also, the more efficient blood circula-
tion provided by the four-chambered heart and the more
efficient respiration provided by the diaphragm (a special
sheet of muscles below the rib cage that aids breathing)
make possible the higher metabolic rate upon which en-
dothermy depends.

Placenta. In most mammal species, females carry their
young in a uterus during development, nourishing them
through a placenta, and give birth to live young. The pla-
centa is a specialized organ within the uterus of the preg-
nant mother that brings the bloodstream of the fetus into
close contact with the bloodstream of the mother (figure
48.38). Food, water, and oxygen can pass across from
mother to child, and wastes can pass over to the mother’s
blood and be carried away.

Teeth. Reptiles have homodont dentition: their teeth are
all the same. However, mammals have heterodont denti-
tion, with different types of teeth that are highly specialized
to match particular eating habits (figure 48.39). It is usually
possible to determine a mammal’s diet simply by examining
its teeth. Compare the skull of a dog (a carnivore) and a
deer (an herbivore). The dog’s long canine teeth are well
suited for biting and holding prey, and some of its premo-
lar and molar teeth are triangular and sharp for ripping off
chunks of flesh. In contrast, canine teeth are absent in deer;
instead the deer clips off mouthfuls of plants with flat,
chisel-like incisors on its lower jaw. The deer’s molars are
large and covered with ridges to effectively grind and break
up tough plant tissues. Rodents, such as beavers, are gnaw-
ers and have long incisors for chewing through branches or
stems. These incisors are ever-growing; that is, the ends
wear down, but new incisor growth maintains the length.

FIGURE 48.39
Mammals have different types of specialized teeth. While
reptiles have all the same kind of teeth, mammals have different
types of teeth specialized for different feeding habits. Carnivores
such as dogs, have aanine teeth that are able to rip food; some of the
premolars and molars in dogs are also ripping teeth. Herbivores, such
as deer, have incisors to chisel off vegetation and molars designed to
grind up the plant material. In the beaver, the chiseling incisors
dominate. In the elephant, the incisors have become specialized
weapons, and molars grind up vegetation. Humans are omnivores;
we have ripping, chiseling, and grinding teeth.

  

Umbilical cord

  

Placenta

Uterus / sac

Amnion

FIGURE 48.38

The placenta. The placenta is characteristic of the largest group
of mammals, the placental mammals. It evolved from membranes
in the amniotic egg. The umbilical cord evolved from the
allantois. The chorion, or outermost part of the amniotic egg,
forms most of the placenta itself. The placenta serves as the
provisional lungs, intestine, and kidneys of the embryo, without
ever mixing maternal and fetal blood.

[1 Grinding teeth

[J Ripping teeth

[1 chiseting teeth

 

Incisofs Canine Premolars and molars
Dog

Ke

  

Beaver

 

Elephant

Human

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 977
