 

   
 

 

 

 
  
 

  

 

 

 

 

T T
No axial constraint | 4000 | Gular pumping \
T | 7 allowed
Ea SS

I
a 800 +
2 Ss
2 =<
E = 600+
8 g f
A Axial constraint = |
& | <u 400 + i |
3 | > Gular pumping |
& | disabled |
& | 200 | |

| I

| |

0 1 \ \
0 1 2
(a) Speed (km/h) ——> Recovery (b) Speed (km/h) Recovery

 

 

Effects of gular pumping in lizards. (2) THEORY: The axial constraint hypothesis predicts that, above a threshold speed, ventilation,
measured by expired gas volume (Vp), will decrease with increasing speed, and only reach a maximum during the recovery period after lo-
comotion ceases. Without axial constraint, ventilation should reach its maximum during locomotion. (») EXPERIMENT: Monitor lizards
typically show no axial constraint while running. Axial constraint is evident, however, if gular pumping of air is disabled. So, it seems that
some species of monitor lizards are able to use gular pumping to overcome the axial constraint on ventilation.

The Experiment

Brainerd set out to test this gular pumping hypothesis. Gular
pumping occurs after the initial inhalation because the lizard
closes its mouth, sealing shut internal nares (nostril-like struc-
tures). Air is thus trapped in the gular cavity. By contracting
muscles that compress the gular cavity, this air is forced into
the lungs. This process can be disrupted by propping the
mouth open so that, when the gular cavity is compressed, its
air escapes back out of the mouth. The lizards were trained
to run on a treadmill. A plastic mask was placed over the ani-
mal’s mouth and nostrils and air was drawn through the mask.
The mask permitted the measurement of oxygen and CO)
levels as a means of monitoring gas consumption. The ex-
pired gas volume (Vp) was measured in the last minutes of lo-
comotion and the first minute of recovery at each speed. The
speeds ranged from 0 km/hr to 2 km/hr. The maximum run-
ning speed of these lizards on a treadmill is 6.6 km/hr.

To disable gular pumping, the animal’s mouth was
propped open with a retainer made of plastic tubing. In
parallel experiments that allow gular pumping, the same
animals wore the masks, but no retainer was used to disrupt
the oral seal necessary for gular pumping.

 

The Results

Parallel experiments were conducted on monitor lizards
with and without gular pumping:

1. Gular pumping allowed. When the gular pumping
mechanism was not obstructed, the Vg increased to a maxi-
mum ata speed of 2 km/hr and decreased during the recov-
ery period (see blue line in graph } above). This result is
predicted under conditions where there is no axial con-
straint on the animal (see graph a above).

2. Gular pumping disabled. When the gular pumping
mechanism is obstructed, Vp increased above the resting

value up to a speed of 1 km/hr. The value began to decrease
between | and 2 km/hr indicating that there was constraint
on ventilation. During the recovery period, Vp increased as
predicted by the axial constraint hypothesis, because there
was no longer constraint on the intercostal muscles. Vp in-
creased to pay back an oxygen debt that occurred during the
period of time when anaerobic metabolism took over.

Comparing the Vg measurements under control and ex-
perimental conditions, the researchers concluded that moni-
tor lizards are indeed subject to speed-dependent axial con-
straint, just as theory had predicted, but can circumvent this
constraint when running by using an accessory gular pump
to enhance ventilation. When the gular pump was experi-
mentally disrupted, the speed-dependent axial constraint
condition became apparent.

Although the researchers have not conducted a more
complete comparative analysis using the methods shown
here, they have found correlations between gular pumping
and increased locomotor activity. Six highly active species
exhibited gular pumping while six less active species did not
exhibit gular pumping in lung ventilation. It is interesting
to speculate that gular pumping evolved in lizards as a
means of enhancing breathing to allow greater locomotor
endurance. The gular pumping seen in lizards is similar to
the breathing mechanism found in amphibians and air-
breathing fish. In these animals, the air first enters a cavity
in the mouth called the buccal cavity. The mouth and nares
close and the buccal cavity collapses, forcing air into the
lungs. The similarities in these two mechanisms suggest
that one might have arisen from the other.

Ey

To explore this experiment further, go to the Vir-
tual Lab at www.mhhe.com/raven6/vlab13.mhtml
