Part

AIT

Animal Form and
Function

Why Some Lizards Take
a Deep Breath

Sometimes, what is intended as a straightforward observa-
tional study about an animal turns out instead to uncover an
odd fact, something that doesn’t at first seem to make sense.
Teasing your understanding with the unexpected, this kind
of tantalizing finding can be fun and illuminating to investi-
gate. Just such an unexpected puzzle comes to light when
you look very carefully at how lizards run.

A lizard runs a bit like a football fullback, swinging his
shoulder forward to take a step as the opposite foot pushes
off the ground. This produces a lateral undulating gait, the
body flexing from side to side with each step. This sort of
gait uses the body to aid the legs in power running. By con-
tracting the chest (intercostal) muscles on the side of the
body opposite the swinging shoulder, the lizard literally
thrusts itself forward with each flex of its body.

The odd fact, the thing that at first doesn’t seem to make
sense, is that running lizards should be using these same in-
tercostal chest muscles for something else.

At rest, lizards breathe by expanding their chest, much as
you do. The greater volume of the expanded thorax lowers
the interior air pressure, causing fresh air to be pushed into
the lungs from outside. You expand your chest by contract-
ing a diaphragm at the bottom of the chest. Lizards do not
have a diaphragm. Instead, they expand their chest by con-
tracting the intercostal chest muscles on both sides of the
chest simultaneously. This contraction rotates the ribs,
causing the chest to expand.

Do you see the problem? A running lizard cannot contract
its chest muscles on both sides simultaneously for effective
breathing at the same time that it is contracting the same
chest muscles alternatively for running. This apparent conflict
has led to a controversial hypothesis about how running
lizards breathe. Called the axial constraint hypothesis, it states
that lizards are subject to a speed-dependent axial constraint
that prevents effective lung ventilation while they are running.

This constraint, if true, would be rather puzzling from
an evolutionary perspective, because it suggests that when a
lizard needs more oxygen because it is running, it breathes
less effectively.

Dr. Elizabeth Brainerd of the University of Massachu-
setts, Amherst, is one of a growing cadre of young re-

 

Some species of
lizard breathe
better than oth-
ers. The savannah
monitor lizard
Varanus exanthe-
maticus breathes
more efficiently
than some of its
relatives by pump-
ing air into its
lungs from the
gular folds over its
throat.

searchers around the country that study the biology of
lizards. She set out to investigate this puzzle several years
ago, first by examining oxygen consumption.

Looking at oxygen consumption seemed a very straight-
forward approach. If the axial constraint hypothesis is cor-
rect, then running lizards should exhibit a lower oxygen
consumption because of lowered breathing efficiency. This
is just what her research team found with green iguanas
(Iguana iguana). Studying fast-running iguanas on tread-
mills, oxygen consumption went down as running pro-
ceeded, as the axial constraint hypothesis predicted.

Unexpectedly, however, another large lizard gave a com-
pletely different result. The savannah monitor lizard
(Varanus exanthematicus) exhibited elevated oxygen con-
sumption with increasing speeds of locomotion! This result
suggests that something else is going on in monitor lizards.
Somehow, they seem to have found a way to beat the axial
constraint.

How do they do it? Taking a more detailed look at run-
ning monitor lizards, Dr. Brainerd’s research team ran a se-
ries of experiments to sort this out. First, they used videora-
diography to directly observe lung ventilation in monitor
lizards while the lizards were running on a treadmill. The
X-ray negative video images revealed the monitor’s trick:
the breathing cycle began with an inhalation that did not
completely fill the lungs, just as the axial constraint hypoth-
esis predicts. But then something else kicks in. The gular
cavity located in the throat area also fills with air, and as in-
halation proceeds the gular cavity compresses, forcing this
air into the lungs. Like an afterburner on a jet, this added air
increases the efficiency of breathing, making up for the lost
contribution of the intercostal chest muscles.

981

cence —_—

g Real S

Cc

111

Real People Do
