Organization of the
Animal Body

Concept Outline

49.1 The bodies of vertebrates are organized into
functional systems.

Organization of the Body. Cells are organized into
tissues, and tissues are organized into organs. Several
organs can cooperate to form organ systems.

49.2 Epithelial tissue forms membranes and glands.

Characteristics of Epithelial Tissue. Epithelial
membranes cover all body surfaces, and thus can serve for
protection or for transport of materials. Glands are also
epithelial tissue. Epithelial membranes may be composed of
one layer or many.

49.3 Connective tissues contain abundant extracellular
material.

Connective Tissue Proper. Connective tissues have
abundant extracellular material. In connective tissue proper,
this material consists of protein fibers within an amorphous
ground substance.

Special Connective Tissues. These tissues include
cartilage, bone, and blood, each with their own unique form
of extracellular material.

49.4 Muscle tissue provides for movement, and nerve
tissue provides for control.

Muscle Tissue. Muscle tissue contains the filaments
actin and myosin, which enable the muscles to contract.
There are three types of muscle: smooth, cardiac, and
skeletal.

Nerve Tissue. Nerve cells, or neurons, have specialized
regions that produce and conduct electrical impulses.
Neuroglia cells support neurons but do not conduct
electrical impulses.

  

FIGURE 49.1
Bone. Like most of the tissues in the vertebrate body, bone is a
dynamic structure, constantly renewing itself.

Ww most people think of animals, they think of their
pet dogs and cats and the animals that they’ve seen
in a z00, on a farm, in an aquarium, or out in the wild.
When they think about the diversity of animals, they may
think of the differences between the predatory lions and
tigers and the herbivorous deer and antelope, between a fe-
rocious-looking shark and a playful dolphin. Despite the
differences among these animals, they are all vertebrates.
All vertebrates share the same basic body plan, with the
same sorts of organs operating in much the same way. In
this chapter, we will begin a detailed consideration of the
biology of vertebrates and of the fascinating structure and
function of their bodies (figure 49.1).

983
