49.1

Organization of the Body

The bodies of all mammals have the same general archi-
tecture (figure 49.2), and are very similar to the general
body plan of other vertebrate groups. This body plan is
basically a tube suspended within a tube. Starting from
the inside, it is composed of the digestive tract, a long
tube that travels from one end of the body to the other
(mouth to anus). This tube is suspended within an inter-
nal body cavity, the coe/om. In fishes, amphibians, and
most reptiles, the coclom is subdivided into two cavities,
one housing the heart and the other the liver stomach,
and intestines. In mammals and some reptiles, a sheet of
muscle, the diaphragm, separates the peritoneal cavity,
which contains the stomach, intestines, and liver, from
the thoracic cavity; the thoracic cavity is further subdi-
vided into the pericardial cavity, which contains the heart,
and pleural cavities, which contain the lungs. All verte-
brate bodies are supported by an internal skeleton made
of jointed bones or cartilage blocks
that grow as the body grows. A bony
skull surrounds the brain, and a col-
umn of bones, the vertebrae, sur-
rounds the dorsal nerve cord, or spinal
cord.

There are four levels of organization
in the vertebrate body: (1) cells, (2) tis-
sues, (3) organs, and (4) organ systems.

Epithelial
Tissues

 

The bodies of vertebrates are organized into functional systems.

Brain

  
    
        
 
 
       
   

Spinal cord

Vertebrae
Peritoneal
Cranial cavity
cavity

Right
pleural cavtiy
Thoracic Diaphragm
cavity
Pericardial cavity
FIGURE 49.2

Architecture of the vertebrate body. All vertebrates have a
dorsal central nervous system. In mammals and some reptiles, a
muscular diaphragm divides the coelom into the thoracic cavity
and the peritoneal cavity.

    

Like those of all animals, the bodies of
vertebrates are composed of different
cell types. In adult vertebrates, there
are between 50 and several hundred

different kinds of cells.

Tissues

Groups of cells similar in structure and
function are organized into tissues.
Early in development, the cells of the
growing embryo differentiate (special-
ize) into three fundamental embryonic
tissues, called germ /ayers. From inner-
most to outermost layers, these are the
endoderm, mesoderm, and ecto-
derm. These germ layers, in turn, dif-
ferentiate into the scores of different
cell types and tissues that are character-
istic of the vertebrate body. In adult
vertebrates, there are four principal
kinds of tissues, or primary tissues: ep-
ithelial, connective, muscle, and nerve
(figure 49.3), cach discussed in separate
sections of this chapter.

Stratified epithelium
in epidermis

  
 
  
 
  
   
    

 

Columnar epithelium
lining stomach

Cuboidal epithelium
in kidney tubules

Muscle Tissues

Loose connective
tissue

Cardiac muscle in

heart

Skeletal muscle in
voluntary muscles

Smooth muscle in
intestinal wall

FIGURE 49.3
Vertebrate tissue types. Epithelial tissues are indicated by blue arrows, connective tissues
by green arrows, muscle tissues by red arrows, and nerve tissue by a yellow arrow.

984 Part XIII Animal Form and Function
