Digesting Plants. Most mammals
are herbivores, eating mostly or only
plants. Cellulose, the major component
of plant cell walls, forms the bulk of a
plant’s body and is a major source of
food for mammalian herbivores. The
cellulose molecule has the structure of
a pearl necklace, with each pearl a glu-
cose sugar molecule. Mammals do not
have enzymes that can break the links
between the pearls to release the glu-
cose elements for use as food. Herbivo-
rous mammals rely on a mutualistic
partnership with bacteria that have the
necessary cellulose-splitting enzymes
to digest cellulose into sugar for them.
Mammals such as cows, buffalo,
antelopes, goats, deer, and giraffes
have huge, four-chambered stomachs
that function as storage and fermenta-
tion vats. The first chamber is the
largest and holds a dense population
of cellulose-digesting bacteria.
Chewed plant material passes into
this chamber, where the bacteria at-

FIGURE 48.40
Greater horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus ferrumequinum. The bat is the only mammal
capable of true flight.

tack the cellulose. The material is then digested further
in the rest of the stomach.

Rodents, horses, rabbits, and elephants are herbivores
that employ mutualistic bacteria to digest cellulose in a dif-
ferent way. They have relatively small stomachs, and in-
stead digest plant material in their large intestine, like a
termite. The bacteria that actually carry out the digestion
of the cellulose live in a pouch called the cecum that
branches from the end of the small intestine.

Even with these complex adaptations for digesting cellu-
lose, a mouthful of plant is less nutritious than a mouthful
of flesh. Herbivores must consume large amounts of plant
material to gain sufficient nutrition. An elephant eats 135
to 150 kg (300 to 400 pounds) each day.

Horns and Hooves. Keratin, the protein of hair, is also
the structural building material in claws, fingernails, and
hooves. Hooves are specialized keratin pads on the toes of
horses, cows, sheep, antelopes, and other running mam-
mals. The pads are hard and horny, protecting the toe and
cushioning it from impact.

The horns of cattle and sheep are composed of a core of
bone surrounded by a sheath of keratin. The bony core is
attached to the skull, and the horn is not shed. The horn
that you see is the outer sheath, made of hairlike fibers of
keratin compacted into a very hard structure. Deer antlers
are made not of keratin but of bone. Male deer grow and
shed a set of antlers each year. While growing during the
summer, antlers are covered by a thin layer of skin known
as velvet. A third type of horn, the rhinoceros horn, is com-
posed only of keratinized fibers with no bony core.

978 Part XII Animal Diversity

 

Flying Mammals. Bats are the only mammals capable of
powered flight (figure 48.40). Like the wings of birds, bat
wings are modified forelimbs. The bat wing is a leathery
membrane of skin and muscle stretched over the bones of
four fingers. The edges of the membrane attach to the side
of the body and to the hind leg. When resting, most bats
prefer to hang upside down by their toe claws. Bats are the
second largest order of mammals, after rodents. They have
been a particularly successful group because many species
have been able to utilize a food resource that most birds do
not have access to—night-flying insects.

How do bats navigate in the dark? Late in the eigh-
teenth century, the Italian biologist Lazzaro Spallanzani
showed that a blinded bat could fly without crashing into
things and still capture insects. Clearly another sense other
than vision was being used by bats to navigate in the dark.
When Spallanzani plugged the ears of a bat, it was unable
to navigate and collided with objects. Spallanzani con-
cluded that bats “hear” their way through the night world.

We now know that bats have evolved a sonar system
that functions much like the sonar devices used by ships
and submarines to locate underwater objects. As a bat
flies, it emits a very rapid series of extremely high-
pitched “clicking” sounds well above our range of human
hearing. The high-frequency pulses are emitted either
through the mouth or, in some cases, through the nose.
The soundwaves bounce off obstacles or flying insects,
and the bat hears the echo. Through sophisticated pro-
cessing of this echo within its brain, a bat can determine
not only the direction of an object but also the distance
to the object.
