| 5.4 Symbiosis played a key role in the origin of some eukaryotic organelles.

Endosymbiosis

Symbiosis is a close relationship between organisms of differ-
ent species that live together. The theory of endosymbiosis
proposes that some of today’s eukaryotic organelles evolved
by a symbiosis in which one species of prokaryote was en-
gulfed by and lived inside another species of prokaryote that
was a precursor to eukaryotes (figure 5.30). According to the
endosymbiont theory, the engulfed prokaryotes provided
their hosts with certain advantages associated with their spe-
cial metabolic abilities. Two key eukaryotic organelles are
believed to be the descendants of these endosymbiotic
prokaryotes: mitochondria, which are thought to have origi-
nated as bacteria capable of carrying out oxidative metabo-
lism; and chloroplasts, which apparently arose from photo-
synthetic bacteria.

The endosymbiont theory is supported by a wealth of
evidence. Both mitochondria and chloroplasts are sur-
rounded by two membranes; the inner membrane proba-
bly evolved from the plasma membrane of the engulfed
bacterium, while the outer membrane is probably derived
from the plasma membrane or endoplasmic reticulum of
the host cell. Mitochondria are about the same size as most
bacteria, and the cristae formed by their inner membranes
resemble the folded membranes in various groups of bac-
teria. Mitochondrial ribosomes are also similar to bacterial
ribosomes in size and structure. Both mitochondria and

 

FIGURE 5.30

Endosymbiosis. This figure shows how a double membrane may
have been created during the symbiotic origin of mitochondria or
chloroplasts.

chloroplasts contain circular molecules of DNA similar to
those in bacteria. Finally, mitochondria divide by simple
fission, splitting in two just as bacterial cells do, and they
apparently replicate and partition their DNA in much the
same way as bacteria. Table 5.2 compares and reviews the
features of three types of cells.

 

Some eukaryotic organelles are thought to have arisen
by endosymbiosis.

 

Table 5.2 A Comparison of Bacterial, Animal, and Plant Cells

 

Bacterium Animal Plant
EXTERIOR STRUCTURES
Cell wall Present (protein-polysaccharide) Absent Present (cellulose)
Cell membrane Present Present Present
Flagella May be present (single strand) May be present Absent except in sperm of a few species
INTERIOR STRUCTURES
ER Absent Usually present Usually present
Ribosomes Present Present Present
Microtubules Absent Present Present
Centrioles Absent Present Absent
Golgi apparatus Absent Present Present
Nucleus Absent Present Present
Mitochondria Absent Present Present
Chloroplasts Absent Absent Present
Chromosomes Asingle circle of DNA ‘Multiple; DNA-protein complex Multiple; DNA-protein complex
Lysosomes Absent Usually present Present
Vacuoles Absent Absent or small Usually a large single vacuole

Chapter 5 Cell Structure 101
