The Orders of Mammals

There are 19 orders of mammals. Seventeen of them (con-
taining 94% of the species) are placental. The other two
are the primitive monotremes and the marsupials.

Monotremes: Egg-laying Mammals. The duck-billed
platypus and two species of echidna, or spiny anteater, are
the only living monotremes (figure 48.412). Among living
mammals, only monotremes lay shelled eggs. The structure
of their shoulder and pelvis is more similar to that of the
early reptiles than to any other living mammal. Also like
reptiles, monotremes have a cloaca, a single opening
through which feces, urine, and reproductive products
leave the body. Monotremes are more closely related to
early mammals than are any other living mammal.

In addition to many reptilian features, monotremes
have both defining mammalian features: fur and function-
ing mammary glands. Young monotremes drink their
mother’s milk after they hatch from eggs. Females lack
well-developed nipples so the babies cannot suckle. In-
stead, the milk oozes onto the mother’s fur, and the babies
lap it off with their tongues.

The platypus, found only in Australia, lives much of its
life in the water and is a good swimmer. It uses its bill
much as a duck does, rooting in the mud for worms and
other soft-bodied animals. Echidnas of Australia and
New Guinea have very strong, sharp claws, which they
use for burrowing and digging. The echidna probes with
its long, beaklike snout for insects, especially ants and
termites.

Marsupials: Pouched Mammals. The major difference
between marsupials (figure 48.410) and other mammals is
their pattern of embryonic development. In marsupials, a
fertilized egg is surrounded by chorion and amniotic mem-
branes, but no shell forms around the egg as it does in
monotremes. During most of its early development, the
marsupial embryo is nourished by an abundant yolk within
the egg. Shortly before birth, a short-lived placenta forms
from the chorion membrane. Soon after, sometimes within
eight days of fertilization, the embryonic marsupial is born.
It emerges tiny and hairless, and crawls into the marsupial
pouch, where it latches onto a nipple and continues its de-
velopment.

Marsupials evolved shortly before placental mammals,
about 100 million years ago. Today, most species of marsu-
pials live in Australia and South America, areas that have
been historically isolated. Marsupials in Australia and New
Guinea have diversified to fill ecological positions occupied
by placental mammals elsewhere in the world. For example,
kangaroos are the Australian grazers, playing the role ante-
lope, horses, and buffalo perform elsewhere. The placental
mammals in Australia and New Guinea today arrived rela-
tively recently and include some introduced by humans.
The only marsupial found in North America is the Virginia
opossum.

 

(°)

FIGURE 48.41
‘Three types of mammals. (a) This echidna, Tachyglossus
aculeatus, is a monotreme. (b) Marsupials include kangaroos, like
this adult with young in its pouch. (¢) This female African lion,
Panthera leo (order Carnivora), is a placental mammal.

Placental Mammals. Mammals that produce a true pla-
centa that nourishes the embryo throughout its entire de-
velopment are called placental mammals (figure 48.41¢).
Most species of mammals living today, including humans,
are in this group. Of the 19 orders of living mammals, 17
are placental mammals. They are a very diverse group,
ranging in size from 1.5 g pygmy shrews to 100,000 kg
whales.

Early in the course of embryonic development, the pla-
centa forms. Both fetal and maternal blood vessels are
abundant in the placenta, and substances can be exchanged
efficiently between the bloodstreams of mother and off-
spring. The fetal placenta is formed from the membranes
of the chorion and allantois. The maternal side of the pla-
centa is part of the wall of the uterus, the organ in which
the young develop. In placental mammals, unlike marsupi-
als, the young undergo a considerable period of develop-
ment before they are born.

 

Mammals were not a major group until the dinosaurs
disappeared. Mammal specializations include the
placenta, a tooth design suited to diet, and specialized
sensory systems.

 

Chapter 48 Vertebrates 979
