49.4 Muscle tissue provides for movement, and nerve tissue provides for

control.

Muscle Tissue

Muscle cells are the motors of the vertebrate body. The
characteristic that makes them unique is the relative abun-
dance and organization of actin and myosin filaments
within them. Although these filaments form a fine network
in all eukaryotic cells, where they contribute to cellular
movements, they are far more common in muscle cells,
which are specialized for contraction. Vertebrates possess
three kinds of muscle: smooth, skeletal, and cardiac (table
49.4). Skeletal and cardiac muscles are also known as stri-
ated muscles because their cells have transverse stripes
when viewed in longitudinal section under the microscope.
The contraction of each skeletal muscle is under voluntary
control, whereas the contraction of cardiac and smooth
muscles is generally involuntary. Muscles are described in
more detail in chapter 50.

Smooth Muscle

Smooth muscle was the earliest form of muscle to evolve,
and it is found throughout the animal kingdom. In verte-
brates, smooth muscle is found in the organs of the internal
environment, or viscera, and is sometimes known as visceral
muscle. Smooth muscle tissue is organized into sheets of
long, spindle-shaped cells, each cell containing a single nu-
cleus. In some tissues, the cells contract only when they are

     
   
   

Striations

Nucleus

Mitochondria

FIGURE 49.11

Sarcoplasmic reticulum

stimulated by a nerve, and then all of the cells in the sheet
contract as a unit. In vertebrates, muscles of this type line
the walls of many blood vessels and make up the iris of the
eye. In other smooth muscle tissues, such as those in the
wall of the gut, the muscle cells themselves may sponta-
neously initiate electric impulses and contract, leading to a
slow, steady contraction of the tissue. Nerves regulate,
rather than cause, this activity.

Skeletal Muscle

Skeletal muscles are usually attached by tendons to bones,
so that, when the muscles contract, they cause the bones to
move at their joints. A skeletal muscle is made up of numer-
ous, very long muscle cells, called muscle fibers, which lie
parallel to each other within the muscle and insert into the
tendons on the ends of the muscle. Each skeletal muscle
fiber is stimulated to contract by a nerve fiber; therefore, a
stronger muscle contraction will result when more of the
muscle fibers are stimulated by nerve fibers to contract. In
this way, the nervous system can vary the strength of skele-
tal muscle contraction. Each muscle fiber contracts by
means of substructures called myofibrils (figure 49.11) that
contain highly ordered arrays of actin and myosin myofil-
aments, that, when aligned, give the muscle fiber its striated
appearance. Skeletal muscle fibers are produced during de-
velopment by the fusion of several cells, end to end. This

Myofibrils

Myofilaments of
actin and myosin

 

A muscle fiber, or muscle cell. Each muscle fiber is composed of numerous myofibrils, which, in turn, are composed of actin and myosin
filaments. Each muscle fiber is multinucleate as a result of its embryological development from the fusion of smaller cells. Muscle cells
have a modified endoplasmic reticulum called the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

994 = Part XIII Animal Form and Function
