Nerve Tissue

The fourth major class of vertebrate tissue is nerve tissue
(table 49.5). Its cells include neurons and neuroglia, or sup-
porting cells. Neurons are specialized to produce and con-
duct electrochemical events, or “impulses.” Each neuron
consists of three parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon (fig-
ure 49.12). The cell body of a neuron contains the nucleus.
Dendrites are thin, highly branched extensions that receive
incoming stimulation and conduct electric events to the cell
body. As a result of this stimulation and the electric events
produced in the cell body, outgoing impulses may be pro-
duced at the origin of the axon. The axon is a single exten-
sion of cytoplasm that conducts impulses away from the
cell body. Some axons can be quite long. The cell bodies of
neurons that control the muscles in your feet, for example,
lic in the spinal cord, and their axons may extend over a
meter to your feet.

Neuroglia do not conduct electrical impulses but instead
support and insulate neurons and eliminate foreign materi-
als in and around neurons. In many neurons, neuroglia cells
associate with the axons and form an insulating covering, a
myelin sheath, produced by successive wrapping of the
membrane around the axon (figure 49.13). Adjacent neu-
roglia cells are separated by interruptions known as nodes of
Ranvier, which serve as sites for accelerating an impulse
(see chapter 54).

The nervous system is divided into the central nervous
system (CNS), which includes the brain and spinal cord,
and the peripheral nervous system (PNS), which includes
nerves and ganglia. Nerves consist of axons in the PNS that
are bundled together in much the same way as wires are
bundled together in a cable. Ganglia are collections of neu-
ron cell bodies.

 

There are different types of neurons, but all are
specialized to receive, produce, and conduct electrical
signals. Neuroglia do not conduct electrical impulses

but have various functions, including insulating axons
to accelerate an electrical impulse. Both neurons and

neuroglia are present in the CNS and the PNS.

 

FIGURE 49.12

A neuron has a very long projection called an axon. (a) A
nerve impulse is received by the dendrites and then passed to the
cell body and out through the axon. (J) Axons can be very long;
single axons extend from the skull down several meters through a
giraffe’s neck to its pelvis.

996 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

Dendrites

    

+ Cell body

}
Nucleus
\
