| 49 3 Connective tissues contain abundant extracellular material.

Connective Tissue Proper

Connective tissues are derived from embryonic meso-
derm and occur in many different forms (table 49.3).
These various forms are divided into two major classes:
connective tissue proper, which is further divided into
loose and dense connective tissues; and special connec-
tive tissues that include cartilage, bone, and blood. At
first glance, it may seem odd that such diverse tissues are
placed in the same category. Yet all connective tissues do
share a common structural feature: they all have abun-
dant extracellular material because their cells are spaced
widely apart. This extracellular material is generically
known as the matrix of the tissue. In bone, the extracel-
lular matrix contains crystals that make the bones hard;
in blood, the extracellular matrix is plasma, the fluid por-
tion of the blood.

Loose connective tissue consists of cells scattered
within an amorphous mass of proteins that form a ground
substance. This gelatinous material is strengthened by a
loose scattering of protein fibers such as collagen (figure
49.6), elastin, which makes the tissue elastic, and reticulin,
which supports the tissue by forming a collagenous mesh-
work. The flavored gelatin we eat for dessert consists of the
extracellular material from loose connective tissues. The
cells that secrete collagen and other fibrous proteins are
known as fibroblasts.

Loose connective tissue contains other cells as well, in-
cluding mast cells that produce histamine (a blood vessel
dilator) and heparin (an anticoagulant) and macrophages, the
immune system’s first defense against invading organisms,
as will be described in detail in chapter 57.

Adipose cells are found in loose connective tissue,
usually in large groups that form what is referred to as
adipose tissue (figure 49.7). Each adipose cell contains a
droplet of fat (triglycerides) within a storage vesicle.
When that fat is needed for energy, the adipose cell hy-
drolyzes its stored triglyceride and secretes fatty acids
into the blood for oxidation by the cells of the muscles,
liver, and other organs. The number of adipose cells in
an adult is generally fixed. When a person gains weight,
the cells become larger, and when weight is lost, the cells
shrink.

Dense connective tissue contains tightly packed colla-
gen fibers, making it stronger than loose connective tis-
sue. It consists of two types: regular and irregular. The
collagen fibers of dense regular connective tissue are
lined up in parallel, like the strands of a rope. This is the
structure of tendons, which bind muscle to bone, and /iga-
ments, which bind bone to bone. In contrast, the collagen
fibers of dense irregular connective tissue have many
different orientations. This type of connective tissue pro-
duces the tough coverings that package organs, such as

990 = Part XIII. Animal Form and Function

 

FIGURE 49.6
Collagen fibers. Each fiber is composed of many individual
collagen strands and can be very strong under tension.

 

FIGURE 49.7

Adipose tissue. Fat is stored in globules of adipose tissue, a type
of loose connective tissue. As a person gains or loses weight, the
size of the fat globules increases or decreases. A person cannot
decrease the number of fat cells by losing weight.

the capsules of the kidneys and adrenal glands. It also cov-
ers muscle as epimysium, nerves as perineurium, and bones
as periosteum.

 

Connective tissues are characterized by abundant
extracellular materials in the matrix between cells.
Connective tissue proper may be either loose or dense.

 
