Special Connective
Tissues

The special connective tissues—carti-
lage, bone, and blood—each have unique
cells and extracellular matrices that allow as
them to perform their specialized func-
tions.

Cartilage

Cartilage (figure 49.8) is a specialized Larynx 4
connective tissue in which the ground

substance is formed from a characteristic

type of glycoprotein, and the collagen

fibers are laid down along the lines of

stress in long, parallel arrays. The result Paes
is a firm and flexible tissue that does not
stretch, is far tougher than loose or
dense connective tissue, and has great
tensile strength. Cartilage makes up the
entire skeletal system of the modern ag-
nathans and cartilaginous fishes (see
chapter 48), replacing the bony skeletons
that were characteristic of the ancestors
of these vertebrate groups. In most adult
vertebrates, however, cartilage is re-
stricted to the articular (joint) surfaces of
bones that form freely movable joints
and to other specific locations. In hu-
mans, for example, the tip of the nose,
the pinna (outer ear flap), the interverte-
bral discs of the backbone, the larynx
(voice box) and a few other structures are composed of car-
tilage.

Chondrocytes, the cells of the cartilage, live within
spaces called /acunae within the cartilage ground substance.
These cells remain alive, even though there are no blood
vessels within the cartilage matrix, because they receive
oxygen and nutrients by diffusion through the cartilage
ground substance from surrounding blood vessels. This dif-
fusion can only occur because the cartilage matrix is not
calcified, as is bone.

 

Trachea

 

 

FIGURE 49.8

Bone

In the course of fetal development, the bones of vertebrate
fins, arms, and legs, among others, are first “modeled” in
cartilage. The cartilage matrix then calcifies at particular
locations, so that the chondrocytes are no longer able to
obtain oxygen and nutrients by diffusion through the ma-
trix. The dying and degenerating cartilage is then replaced
by living bone. Bone cells, or osteocytes, can remain alive
even though the extracellular matrix becomes hardened
with crystals of calcium phosphate. This is because blood
vessels travel through central canals into the bone. Osteo-

992 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

 

J = = . .
ee
Sara Perichondrium

ve _ > lacunae
wo VG, @
oo gay? Chondrocytes
5 ‘a
ss le -
* *
o %

Cartilage is a strong, flexible tissue that makes up the larynx (voice box) and
several other structures in the human body. The larynx () is seen under the light
microscope in (}), where the cartilage cells, or chondrocytes, are visible within cavities, or
lacunae, in the matrix (extracellular material) of the cartilage. This is diagrammed in (<).

cytes extend cytoplasmic processes toward neighboring os-
teocytes through tiny canals, or canaliculi (figure 49.9). Os-
teocytes communicate with the blood vessels in the central
canal through this cytoplasmic network.

It should be noted here that some bones, such as those
of the cranium, are not formed first as cartilage models.
These bones instead develop within a membrane of dense,
irregular connective tissue. The structure and formation of
bone are discussed in chapter 50.

Blood

Blood is classified as a connective tissue because it contains
abundant extracellular material, the fluid plasma. The cells
of blood are erythrocytes, or red blood cells, and leuko-
cytes, or white blood cells (figure 49.10). Blood also con-
tains platelets, or thrombocytes, which are fragments of a
type of bone marrow cell.

Erythrocytes are the most common blood cells; there are
about 5 billion in every milliliter of blood. During their mat-
uration in mammals, they lose their nucleus, mitochondria,
and endoplasmic reticulum. As a result, mammalian erythro-
cytes are relatively inactive metabolically. Each erythrocyte
