Table 49.4 Muscle Tissue

a ee

 

Nuclei

  
 

Intercalated
discs

embryological development explains why a mature muscle
fiber contains many nuclei. The structure and function of
skeletal muscle is explained in more detail in chapter 50.

Cardiac Muscle

The hearts of vertebrates are composed of striated muscle
cells arranged very differently from the fibers of skeletal
muscle. Instead of having very long, multinucleate cells
running the length of the muscle, cardiac muscle is com-
posed of smaller, interconnected cells, each with a single
nucleus. The interconnections between adjacent cells ap-
pear under the microscope as dark lines called intercalated
discs. In reality, these lines are regions where adjacent cells
are linked by gap junctions. As we noted in chapter 7, gap

 

SMOOTH MUSCLE

Typical Location
Walls of blood vessels, stomach, and intestines
Function

Powers rhythmic, involuntary contractions commanded by the
central nervous system

Characteristic Cell Types
Smooth muscle cells

SKELETAL MUSCLE

Typical Location

Voluntary muscles

Function

Powers walking, lifting, talking, and all other voluntary
movement

Characteristic Cell Types

Skeletal muscle cells

CARDIAC

Typical Location
Walls of heart

Function

Highly interconnected cells; promotes rapid spread of signal
initiating contraction

Characteristic Cell Types

Cardiac muscle cells

junctions have openings that permit the movement of small
substances and electric charges from one cell to another.
These interconnections enable the cardiac muscle cells to
form a single, functioning unit known as a myocardium.
Certain cardiac muscle cells generate electric impulses
spontaneously, and these impulses spread across the gap
junctions from cell to cell, causing all of the cells in the
myocardium to contract. We will describe this process more

fully in chapter 52.

 

Skeletal muscles enable the vertebrate body to move.
Cardiac muscle powers the heartbeat, while smooth
muscles provide a variety of visceral functions.

 

Chapter 49 Organization of the Animal Body 995
