49.2 Epithelial tissue forms membranes and glands.

Characteristics of Epithelial Tissue

An epithelial membrane, or epithelium, covers every sur-
face of the vertebrate body. Epithelial membranes are de-
rived from all three germ layers. The epidermis, derived
from ectoderm, constitutes the outer portion of the skin.
The inner surface of the digestive tract is lined by an ep-
ithelium derived from endoderm, and the inner surfaces of
the body cavities are lined with an epithelium derived from
mesoderm.

Because all body surfaces are covered by epithelial mem-
branes, a substance must pass through an epithelium in
order to enter or leave the body. Epithelial membranes
thus provide a barrier that can impede the passage of some
substances while facilitating the passage of others. For
land-dwelling vertebrates, the relative impermeability of
the surface epithelium (the epidermis) to water offers es-
sential protection from dehydration and from airborne
pathogens (disease-causing organisms). On the other hand,
the epithelial lining of the digestive tract must allow selec-
tive entry of the products of digestion while providing a
barrier to toxic substances, and the epithelium of the lungs
must allow for the rapid diffusion of gases.

Some epithelia become modified in the course of em-
bryonic development into glands, which are specialized for
secretion. A characteristic of all epithelia is that the cells
are tightly bound together, with very little space between
them. As a consequence, blood vessels cannot be interposed
between adjacent epithelial cells. Therefore, nutrients and
oxygen must diffuse to the epithelial cells from blood ves-
sels in nearby tissues. This places a limit on the thickness of
epithelial membranes; most are only one or a few cell layers
thick.

Epithelium possesses remarkable regenerative powers,
constantly replacing its cells throughout the life of the ani-
mal. For example, the liver, a gland formed from epithelial
tissue, can readily regenerate after substantial portions of it
have been surgically removed. The epidermis is renewed
every two weeks, and the epithelium inside the stomach is
replaced every two to three days.

There are two general classes of epithelial membranes:
simple and stratified. These classes are further subdivided
into squamous, cuboidal, and columnar, based upon the
shape of the cells (table 49.2). Squamous cells are flat,
cuboidal cells are about as thick as they are tall, and colum-
nar cells are taller than they are wide.

Types of Epithelial Tissues

Simple epithelial membranes are one cell layer thick. A
simple, squamous epithelium is composed of squamous ep-
ithelial cells that have an irregular, flattened shape with ta-
pered edges. Such membranes line the lungs and blood

988 Part XIII Animal Form and Function

capillaries, for example, where the thin, delicate nature of
these membranes permits the rapid movement of molecules
(such as the diffusion of gases). A simple cuboidal epithelium
lines the small ducts of some glands, and a simple columnar
epithelium is found in the airways of the respiratory tract
and in the gastrointestinal tract, among other locations. In-
terspersed among the columnar epithelial cells are numer-
ous goblet cells, specialized to secrete mucus. The columnar
epithelial cells of the respiratory airways contain cilia on
their apical surface (the surface facing the lumen, or cavity),
which move mucus toward the throat. In the small intes-
tine, the apical surface of the columnar epithelial cells form
fingerlike projections called microvilli, that increase the sur-
face area for the absorption of food.

Stratified epithelial membranes are several cell layers
thick and are named according to the features of their up-
permost layers. For example, the epidermis is a stratified
squamous epithelium. In terrestrial vertebrates it is further
characterized as a keratinized epithelium, because its upper
layer consists of dead squamous cells and filled with a
water-resistant protein called keratin. The deposition of
keratin in the skin can be increased in response to abrasion,
producing calluses. The water-resistant property of keratin
is evident when the skin is compared with the red portion
of the lips, which can easily become dried and chapped be-
cause it is covered by a nonkeratinized, stratified squamous
epithelium.

The glands of vertebrates are derived from invaginated
epithelium. In exocrine glands, the connection between
the gland and the epithelial membrane is maintained as a
duct. The duct channels the product of the gland to the
surface of the epithelial membrane and thus to the external
environment (or to an interior compartment that opens to
the exterior, such as the digestive tract). Examples of ex-
ocrine glands include sweat and sebaceous (oil) glands,
which secrete to the external surface of the skin, and acces-
sory digestive glands such as the salivary glands, liver, and
pancreas, which secrete to the surface of the epithelium lin-
ing the digestive tract.

Endocrine glands are ductless glands; their connections
with the epithelium from which they were derived are lost
during development. Therefore, their secretions, called
hormones, are not channeled onto an epithelial membrane.
Instead, hormones enter blood capillaries and thus stay
within the body. Endocrine glands are discussed in more
detail in chapter 56.

 

Epithelial tissues include membranes that cover all
body surfaces and glands. The epidermis of the skin is
an epithelial membrane specialized for protection,
whereas membranes that cover the surfaces of hollow
organs are often specialized for transport.

 
