Darwin’s Evidence

One of the obstacles that had blocked the acceptance of
any theory of evolution in Darwin’s day was the incorrect
notion, widely believed at that time, that the earth was
only a few thousand years old. Evidence discovered during
Darwin’s time made this assertion seem less and less likely.
The great geologist Charles Lyell (1797-1875), whose
Principles of Geology (1830) Darwin read eagerly as he
sailed on the Beagle, outlined for the first time the story of
an ancient world of plants and animals in flux. In this
world, species were constantly becoming extinct while oth-
ers were emerging. It was this world that Darwin sought to
explain.

What Darwin Saw

When the Beagle set sail, Darwin was fully convinced that
species were immutable. Indeed, it was not until two or
three years after his return that he began to consider seri-
ously the possibility that they could change. Nevertheless,
during his five years on the ship, Darwin observed a number
of phenomena that were of central importance to him in
reaching his ultimate conclusion (table 1.1). For example, in
the rich fossil beds of southern South America, he observed
fossils of extinct armadillos similar to the armadillos that
still lived in the same area (figure 1.8). Why would similar
living and fossil organisms be in the same area unless the
earlier form had given rise to the other?

Repeatedly, Darwin saw that the characteristics of simi-
lar species varied somewhat from place to place. These
geographical patterns suggested to him that organismal lin-
eages change gradually as species migrate from one area to
another. On the Galapagos Islands, off the coast of Ecua-
dor, Darwin encountered giant land tortoises. Surprisingly,
these tortoises were not all identical. In fact, local residents
and the sailors who captured the tortoises for food could
tell which island a particular tortoise had come from just by
looking at its shell. This distribution of physical variation
suggested that all of the tortoises were related, but that
they had changed slightly in appearance after becoming
isolated on different islands.

In a more general sense, Darwin was struck by the fact
that the plants and animals on these relatively young vol-
canic islands resembled those on the nearby coast of
South America. If each one of these plants and animals
had been created independently and simply placed on the
Galapagos Islands, why didn’t they resemble the plants
and animals of islands with similar climates, such as those
off the coast of Africa, for example? Why did they resem-
ble those of the adjacent South American coast instead?

 

The fossils and patterns of life that Darwin observed on
the voyage of the Beagle eventually convinced him that
evolution had taken place.

 

12 Part The Origin of Living Things

Table 1.1 Darwin’s Evidence
that Evolution Occurs

FOSSILS

1. Extinct species, such as the fossil armadillo in figure 1.8,
most closely resemble living ones in the same area,
suggesting that one had given rise to the other.

2. In rock strata (layers), progressive changes in characteristics
can be seen in fossils from earlier and earlier layers.

GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION

3. Lands with similar climates, such as Australia, South Africa,
California, and Chile, have unrelated plants and animals,
indicating that diversity is not entirely influenced by climate
and environment.

4. The plants and animals of each continent are distinctive;
all South American rodents belong to a single group,
structurally similar to the guinea pigs, for example, while
most of the rodents found elsewhere belong to other
groups.

OCEANIC ISLANDS

5. Although oceanic islands have few species, those they do
have are often unique (endemic) and show relatedness to
one another, such as the Gal4pagos tortoises. This suggests
that the tortoises and other groups of endemic species
developed after their mainland ancestors reached the islands
and are, therefore, more closely related to one another.

6. Species on oceanic islands show strong affinities to those on
the nearest mainland. Thus, the finches of the Galépagos
Islands closely resemble a finch seen on the western coast of
South America. The Galipagos finches do not resemble the
birds on the Cape Verde Islands, islands in the Atlantic
Ocean off the coast of Africa that are similar to the
Galépagos. Darwin visited the Cape Verde Islands and
many other island groups personally and was able to make
such comparisons on the basis of his own observations.

   

(a) Glyptodont (b) Armadillo

FIGURE 1.8

Fossil evidence of evolution. The now-extinct glyptodont (@)
was a 2000-kilogram South American armadillo, much larger than
the modern armadillo (}), which weighs an average of about 4.5
kilograms. (Drawings are not to scale.)
